Does the cabinet secretary concede that the UK Government was totally opposed to any coupled support and negotiated that position only because of the influence of the Scottish input?

This is a debate in which I wish it were possible for Parliament to speak with one voice. We have often managed to do so on this topic in the past, but I regret that it seems unlikely that that will be the case at decision time this evening. That is not just a great shame, but a missed opportunity on the part of the Government, because there is a lot in the debate around which I genuinely believe we could all have agreed. Surely even this Government would agree that a unanimous vote from this Parliament would carry a much stronger message to both the UK Government and the EU than will the fragmented result that I fear we are likely to see this afternoon. Those are pretty much the exact words with which I began the most recent CAP debate, on 3 October 2013. I am sorry to say that there seems to be little, if any, reason to change them, given that the Scottish Government’s approach since then—certainly in the public domain—appears to have been simply to try to whip up more and more enmity towards the UK Government through the somewhat vitriolic language that it has deployed.

That is not, in my book, a reason to discontinue the unanimity of the Parliament. End of story. I think that all members agree—I absolutely know that farmers agree—that we would have preferred an increased budget with which the Scottish Government could implement the reformed CAP support system. Of course we would have preferred that; it should go without saying. However, we have not had that—end of story—so it is time to put the lid on the divisive rhetoric that diverts attention from the issues. It is time to concentrate on the very real concerns that are increasingly troubling Scotland’s farmers as they face the uncertainties over the impact of reforms that are beginning to haunt them. I met a group of influential farmers in my constituency on Monday—I say “influential” because they all play major parts in the activities of the NFUS at local and national levels. They made it quite clear that they are fed up with the political argy-bargy that has been dominating the debate and simply want to be able to start planning their futures. It is impossible not to sympathise with them. We sit or stand here, arguing the toss about the political and, too often, constitutional aspects. Their feelings are vividly summed up in an emotive email that a constituent of mine sent to the cabinet secretary last week and copied to me. It reads: “I farm 28 ha of permanent grass and 375 ha of rough grazing, with a stocking rate of 0.3 livestock units/ha. Under the present proposals for Pillar 1 my SFP will drop by £21,000”. Last year’s payment was £34,000. My constituent went on to say: “If that amount of money is taken out of my business, I will obviously not have a viable business. How is this fair?” The question, “How is this fair?” lies at the heart of the dilemma that the cabinet secretary faces in delivering a CAP that is tailor made for Scotland—I note that his ability to do so was negotiated for him by the UK Government. The question also lies at the heart of NFUS president Nigel Miller’s letter to the cabinet secretary on Monday. Nigel Miller promotes a four-pronged package, which he thinks would result in a fairer transition to area-based payments. I do not agree with everything in the letter, but I have considerable sympathy with much of it. Principally, as my amendment suggests, I am concerned by rumours that the Scottish Government is edging towards a system of two payment regions for Scotland. All the evidence points towards having more regions rather than fewer; it is fairly obvious that the more regions there are, the better targeted payments can be. However, I accept that the number of regions has to be limited by the practicalities of implementation, as the cabinet secretary said, so I am drawn to the NFUS argument that there must be an alternative to the single-payment approach across the rough-grazing region: that is what is causing much of the problem, that is what is so diluting the pot of CAP funding, and that is where the lack of fairness is most obvious. It is good news that the so-called Scottish clause might not be as toothless as we first thought it would be, but we still do not know what level of activity will trigger access to CAP support. I fear that the level might not be high enough, so other measures will have to be pursued. The NFUS has suggested possible solutions that are surely worthy of further consideration, but it cannot be beyond the capabilities of the army of civil servants who are at the Government’s disposal to devise a system that does not reward—

I do not think that I have time—unless the Presiding Officer is willing to make allowances.

I would be content with three areas—with the important proviso that it cannot be impossible to devise a system that does not reward 100 hectares of rock in the north-west of Scotland, and which produces little other than—admittedly—stunning scenery, with the same level of financial support as 100 hectares of hill in the south of Scotland that might well support a flock of 100 ewes, preferably blackfaces. I hope that the cabinet secretary was correct to stress that that will not be the case, because if that problem can be solved, many of the other concerns can be addressed, at least in part. A possible solution lies in increasing the percentage of the budget that we could use for coupled payments, as the cabinet secretary mentioned, above and beyond the agreed 8 per cent. I am not aware of any moves by the cabinet secretary to take up the UK Government’s offer of talks to utilise unused UK coupling capacity to increase the percentage at his disposal, but were he to do so, he would certainly have our active support. Perhaps he could address that matter when summing up. I am also disappointed—Claire Baker touched on this—that the cabinet secretary continues to glibly dismiss the secretary of state’s proposed review of allocations, which is to report by 2017. I repeat that that is an opportunity that we should grasp. Indeed, we could implement its recommendation mid-term rather than wait until 2020. In view of the time, I will close by saying that the two consultations that were somewhat belatedly launched are in midstream, which slightly begs the question why we are having the debate now. I have no doubt that there will be a further debate post-consultation when we can, I hope, concentrate less on the rhetoric and more on a meaningful and fair CAP support system for Scottish farmers. That is the cabinet secretary’s challenge. I do not envy him for the decisions that he has to take, but take them he must. The future of Scottish agriculture rests on his shoulders. We cannot support Labour’s amendment because the cabinet secretary was right to hold the amount of transfer from pillar 1 to 2 at 9.5 per cent. I move amendment S4M-08857, to leave out from “agrees” to end and insert: “encourages the Scottish Government to focus on implementing a common agricultural policy (CAP) support system that is tailored to Scotland’s needs, avoiding any solution that is based solely on simplicity of implementation, and urges the Scottish Government to announce the final shape of CAP support as soon as possible after the conclusion of the consultations to allow Scotland’s farmers to plan for the future.”

Will Dr Murray take an intervention?

Will Stewart Stevenson acknowledge, for those who do not know, that Private Eye is essentially a satirical magazine?

I accept the member’s remarks. I hope that he accepts that I was not trying not to denigrate those acres, but was simply—perhaps in overflowery language—referring to the unacceptable situation of rewarding ground that produces absolutely nothing at all, such as we find with slipper farming and non-active farming.

As I asked in my speech, can the cabinet secretary say whether he has taken up offers to discuss an increase in such payments and, if so, does he expect a successful outcome?

I understand that the staff who are affected by this abysmal proposal, members of the public, unions and politicians have the right to submit a counterproposal in which they can argue the case for an alternative outcome. Can the cabinet secretary tell me how that can possibly be done within the two-week window of opportunity that exists for them to do so?

An increasing number of people in the sector are warning that unless planting of commercial timber is increased, the critical mass that the sector requires to maintain investment in the industry may be lost. Is the Scottish Government taking those warnings seriously? If so, what can it do to address that situation?

4. To ask the Scottish Government when it last met NFU Scotland to discuss the implementation of reform of the common agricultural policy. (S4O-02820)

I am sure that that meeting brought out many of the uncertainties that currently exist around the implementation of the reforms. One of the certainties that exist is that substantial amounts of support funding will be transferred from the comparatively productive livestock units in the south and the east of the country to less productive units in the north and the west. What is being done to ensure that the levels of farming activity that will enable farmers to access, post reform, the single farm policy are as meaningful as possible and therefore to minimise the amount of support that is available to, essentially, unproductive units?

I thank Joan McAlpine for bringing the debate to the chamber. It is welcome and I am delighted to take part in it. Having lived and worked in either Ayrshire or Dumfries and Galloway for all but four years of my life, I have probably attended more than my fair share of Burns suppers over the years. Almost without exception, I have genuinely and thoroughly enjoyed them, despite the fact that—other members will know this feeling—I usually have to sing for the supper. However, there is something about the traditional annual get-together in memory of the bard that engenders a real sense of camaraderie and warmth. Whether it is attended by 30 people or 300, a Burns supper has a unique atmosphere that cannot be imitated and has remained unrivalled since the idea’s inception. That said, I would very much like to have been given £1 for every time somebody has said to me at a Burns supper that their club’s biggest problem is getting the young folk interested. The fact that probably more Burns suppers are being held now than at any other time in history might suggest that that problem can be, and has been, overcome. However, it should not hide the fact that the traditional view of how Burns’s life and works could be celebrated was ripe for challenge and had probably remained unchallenged for too long. Step forward Graham Main, the director of the festival, and the Big Burns Supper—an initiative that grew with the year of creative Scotland in 2012—and we have that challenge to tradition in a nutshell. From the outset, its impact has been immense, and I cannot better the description of its aims and vision that appears on the Big Burns Supper’s website, which states: “rather than the idea that to be at a Burns Supper you had to have a degree in Scots Literature, our festival is about coming together to celebrate with your friends, pals and visitors around Burns Night.” The Big Burns Supper is, as Joan McAlpine described, an arts festival with a big community ethos and drive behind it that now involves hundreds of participants and thousands of attendees at more than 100 different shows in more than 50 different venues. In just three short years, it has become the world’s biggest Burns night celebration and has achieved that by, in its own words, embracing “the fresh, the different and diverse” and incorporating those qualities into everything that it does. It does so quite brilliantly. In doing so, it has captured and captivated a new audience, as well as the traditional Burns fraternity, in a refreshing and invigorating manner. One has only to meet Graham Main and any of his team once to be overcome and overwhelmed by their enthusiasm for what the event can offer—not only over the three days of the Big Burns Supper itself, but through the related community projects that continue and build throughout the year right up to the festival’s three-day finale. I wish the Big Burns Supper nothing but continued success in 2014 and beyond as part of the wonderful arts and cultural mix that is Dumfries and Galloway. However, I do so with a slight degree of personal trepidation this year. When Graham Main invited me by email to attend the launch event in the spiegeltent in Dumfries tomorrow evening, he asked me whether he was correct in thinking that I used to play the guitar. Stupidly, I replied that I did indeed, although not very well, and he replied, “Oh good. I have an idea.” I have heard no more, so I am looking forward to tomorrow night’s event with distinctly mixed feelings, because Graham tends to bring such things home to roost. That apart, I have no doubt that the Big Burns Supper 2014 will be a resounding success.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with NHS Dumfries and Galloway to ensure that strong and effective governance remains in place until new board members are appointed. (S4O-02797)

Further to the answer that the cabinet secretary gave me some weeks ago, I spoke to a number of elected board members, none of whom expected the pilot scheme to be extended. However, they expected to be able to see out the full terms of the offices to which they had been elected. The statutory evaluation of the experimental board was published a year ago but did not recommend early abandonment of the pilot scheme. Why, then, did the cabinet secretary choose to terminate so abruptly the elected board members’ employment—in effect, by sacking them—when he could have given them six months’ notice by simply announcing that the pilot would not be extended beyond its agreed date?

I am delighted to conclude the debate on behalf of my party and, as the convener of the cross-party group on armed forces veterans, declare something of an interest. In both those capacities, I welcome the debate, just as I welcome the interest that the Parliament has, since its earliest days, shown in veterans and the issues that they face. That interest has been continued in a largely exemplary fashion by this Scottish Government. As Dennis Robertson highlighted, that has been welcomed by the armed forces and the veterans community. I sincerely trust that that level of Government support and interest will continue long into the future, no matter what party or combination of parties form our future Governments. The debt of gratitude that we owe to our serving and former servicemen and women, be they in their later years or their teens, demands no less. The motion before us is right to highlight that debt at the outset. The motion is also right to highlight the truly phenomenal role played by veterans organisations and local authorities veterans champions in helping to focus attention on the many and varied issues and challenges that our veterans face. A quick glance at the agendas of the past few meetings of the cross-party group quite easily highlights those challenges. We have looked at and discussed the armed forces charter and the Scottish Government’s “Our Commitments” paper. We have looked at the impact of the welfare reform programme on Scotland’s veterans; health and wellbeing issues; housing; and the all-important transition from military to civilian life. We have looked at issues relating to veterans in custody and, in the rest of our programme this year, we will revisit housing, mental health and wellbeing, and the “Our Commitments” paper. The cross-party group is well attended and greatly valued by veterans organisations, but I would dearly love to see more colleagues at the quarterly meetings. For those in the chamber who have a diary with them, I give notice that the next meeting is on 5 February. I look forward to seeing them there. The one sector that seems to have been slightly omitted from the motion, though certainly not in many members’ contributions, is the voluntary and charitable sector, whose efforts to help and support veterans is quite immense and, in monetary terms, invaluable. The charities range in size from well-known national organisations such as Poppyscotland, to small charities run by individuals, such as Southwest Scotland RnR in my constituency, which organises courses of what I would call competitive recreation for young physically and often mentally damaged soldiers returning from war zones. That charity simply aims at—and nearly always succeeds in—putting a smile back on the faces of those young people after the traumatic experiences that they have faced on tour—experiences that were vividly highlighted by Mark Griffin in his opening speech. I share some of the reservations about the commissioner’s role that were expressed by Alex Johnstone and Liam McArthur. If I have one particular reservation it is that he or she may be tempted to tinker with and overformalise the work of the voluntary sector and the smaller charities. I hope that that will not be the case but I suspect that there will be a temptation to do so, which should be firmly resisted. I am sorry to conclude on a slightly negative note. I very much welcome the Presiding Officer’s opening statement and register my own disappointment that the announcement of the commissioner was leaked to the media before today’s debate. That blatant bypassing of parliamentary procedure is something of a slap in the face for those who worked to ensure that we had a consensual motion before us this afternoon. I do not believe that it reflects on the personal efforts of the minister and I do not hold him responsible. However, it somewhat diminishes the respect with which his Government is viewed by the rest of the chamber and has cast something of a cloud over an otherwise worthwhile and consensual debate, which has included excellent contributions from all sides of the chamber.

I am not a great fan of the phrase “adopting a holistic approach”, but one thing is for sure: if climate change adaptation is to be successfully mainstreamed across not just Government departments but also organisations, businesses, the public sector, communities and individuals, a holistic approach is exactly what must be adopted. During the past year, each and every one of us has experienced the stark impact of our changing climate, whether it be through the damaging snows of last spring, the delights of a searingly hot summer, or the sodden aftermath of the excessive rainfall of the past few weeks. If ever there was a year that highlighted the fact that climate change impacts on us all individually and collectively, surely 2013 was it. We therefore very much welcome the Government’s preparation of a climate change adaptation programme, and its recognition that a much wider approach is necessary if it is to be successful. To that end, it is difficult not to sympathise with those stakeholders who drew the committee’s attention to their disappointment that the programme looks at only a five-year timescale when most believe that a much longer-term approach is necessary. I fully understand and sympathise with the point that this is not an easy thing to achieve, but I whole-heartedly endorse the committee’s recommendation that the final programme should take a longer-term view and, when possible, assist stakeholders to develop longer-term approaches. I also endorse the committee’s recommendation, as agreed by stakeholders, that the final programme should include a stronger focus on targets and set out a robust monitoring and evaluation system. That has already been referred to several times. Such a system is important if the programme is to be successful. Again, I understand the difficulties of setting targets in this policy area, but without them, evaluation and effective monitoring will be all but impossible. We would all agree that effective monitoring and evaluation are essential if the programme is to have a meaningful outcome, and I look forward to hearing what the minister will say about that in his closing comments. I was pleased that the committee heard specifically from the Scottish Fire and Rescue Service on how it is already adapting to climate change. Such change was evidenced vividly during new year in my own constituency, where there was extensive flooding in the river valleys and an intense battering of the coastal defences from the sea, all of which required the emergency services to step up to the mark. They were certainly not found wanting in that regard. It is also right that the importance of partnership working with local voluntary services, often individuals, is duly recognised. For example, farmers are increasingly playing a major part in post-snowstorm relief activities, and those partnerships are to be greatly welcomed and encouraged. As the committee heard, extreme weather is everyone’s problem, and a collective approach is required if, as we all suspect, today’s challenges are to continue, possibly to an even greater degree in future. I for one would like to see the final programme be somewhat more explicit on the support that will be available to help to develop partnerships between emergency and voluntary services. Time does not allow me to cover every aspect of the committee’s response to the consultation, so I will conclude with a brief comment on the impact of climate change on agriculture and forestry. As Rob Gibson mentioned during his opening comments, the committee heard that farmers, who I think are among the most adaptable individuals on earth, are struggling to keep pace with the need to adapt to climate change. In itself, that should be a pretty stark warning to us all. The fact is that agriculture has a major and positive role to play in tackling climate change, but it will need financial and practical support if it is to carry out that role effectively. Similarly, we are all aware of the role that forestry has to play in combating climate change. Although I welcome the research that is being done on agroforestry, the fact is that the Government’s target of planting 100,000 hectares of new forest by 2020 is looking to be increasingly in question. Although this is not a recommendation from the committee, if it does not sound too high-handed, I recommend that the minister takes a long, hard look at the Government’s forestry policy to ensure that the sector does play its full part in combating climate change, while maintaining the critical mass of commercial timber production that the milling industry needs if it is to continue investing in the sector. I welcome the debate and look forward to hearing further contributions. If I may, I will comment on the Government’s response when I wind up.

The debate has seen a fair amount of consensus throughout the chamber, which is very much as it should be in a debate of this nature. Climate change presents a very real challenge—possibly even a very real threat—to us all. While we might differ occasionally on the minutiae of how best to tackle it, the need for every sector of our society to adapt to meet that challenge is one on which we can all agree. I welcome the consensus that has been shown this afternoon. The debate has also shown the value of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee’s scrutiny of the Government’s draft programme. There is no doubt that the committee sessions with stakeholders have served to highlight a number of concerns about the programme while emphasising the compelling need for it. We all support the aim of increasing the resilience of Scotland’s people, environment and economy to the impacts of a changing climate, and I think that we all share the minister’s vision as stated in his response to the committee: “My vision is that the overarching framework set out in the Programme provides the basis for everyone in Scotland to contribute towards the delivery of the objectives within their own organisation, business or community.” I could not possibly disagree with that vision. An aspect that has not had much of an airing in the debate is the impact of climate change on the marine environment, which nowadays includes the aquaculture sector. That sector faces a number of challenges—some from invasive alien sources but others as well, such as sea lice, amoebic gill disease and algal blooms. All those are influenced by climate change, and I acknowledge and welcome the fact that the ministerial group on sustainable aquaculture will keep those issues under consideration. I hope that the minister will update the Parliament regularly as those issues are progressed. On sea fisheries, we have seen the example of mackerel and herring stocks moving north, following their food sources, which has resulted in international problems with Iceland and the Faroes overfishing in an unacceptable and irresponsible manner. Regulatory and trade agreements must be kept flexible in order to support our fishermen as they seek to cope with changes in the stocks of existing species or the potential movement of new species into our waters. It came as quite a shock to me when taking evidence in committee to learn that almost 20 per cent of Scotland’s coastline is highly susceptible to erosion. I have no doubt that much of it was further eroded on 30 and 31 December. We therefore welcome the fact that the Government will make further assessments of the risks of coastal erosion, so that some of our most vulnerable communities can be properly protected. Some of those were very close to not being protected at all in the recent storms. No one can doubt that we live in precarious times as far as the impact of climate change is concerned. However, there is only so much that any Government can do and, at the end of the day, it will fall to each and every one of us as individuals to ensure that any climate change adaptation programme is successful. The Government has made a good start in its draft programme; it will be up to all of us to help to deliver it.

Do targets have a role to play in monitoring and evaluation?

7. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with NHS Dumfries and Galloway regarding the decision to end the pilot health board elections. (S4O-02693)

I do indeed recognise that. I have been contacted by elected members of the health board in my constituency who were greatly displeased—I put that gently—at the tone of the letter that they were sent effectively terminating their posts six months before the pilot scheme is scheduled to come to an end. Why has the pilot been terminated at what seems to be an early stage, and how can the minister ensure that the considerable expertise that elected board members have accumulated after three and a half years of hard work will not be lost with their dismissal?

Presiding Officer, I sometimes think that we ought to recall Parliament on Christmas day to hold this debate, such is the degree of good will that emanates from all sides of the chamber towards the minister as he sets about these difficult negotiations. I hope that you will not take that advice too seriously. I have listened carefully to the debate, which as always has been a good one, but it is difficult not to remain deeply concerned about the international situation and the recent international negotiations, because those are the negotiations that really set the quota for stocks of mutual interest. As has been highlighted vividly, not least by Tavish Scott, we now appear to have reached a stalemate with Norway, Iceland and the Faroes in relation to the north-east Atlantic mackerel. That will mean that total allowable catches for jointly managed stocks will not be set until well into the new year, as the cabinet secretary said in his opening remarks, leaving our fishermen facing yet more uncertainty about their livelihood. It cannot be right, surely, that countries increase their allocations unilaterally year on year and simply refuse to co-operate when it is time to get round the negotiating table. The stalemate has to end, and soon. On the common fisheries policy itself, the key issue, as other members have said, is surely how the new CFP will actually be implemented. Like everybody else, I am obviously pleased that we have reached an agreement on discards and that the ban is to be phased in gradually, but I am sure that we would all agree that there has to be a commonsense approach to the way in which discards are managed. A total elimination of discards is simply not practical in the very short term. As we have said before on this side of the chamber, simply banning discards is effectively banning the symptom rather than tackling the cause of the problem. If the discards question is to be solved, a key element must be an increase in TAC, and in that regard we should not underestimate the importance of recognising changing scientific advice. As the North Atlantic Fisheries College Marine Centre in Shetland has recently reported, over the past decade cod stocks in the North Sea have doubled, plaice stocks have trebled and hake stocks have quadrupled, while fishing mortality rates have fallen dramatically year on year. Although the North Sea is, in some ways, full of fish, the quotas for cod and haddock are now so low that fishermen are sometimes catching their quota within eight weeks and then having to turn to other catches to make a living. The conservation measures put in place by the CFP are therefore in some ways now creating an imbalance in the North Sea. For example, the number of sand eels, to which I think Angus MacDonald referred, has been greatly reduced. There is also displaced effort, which is resulting in too many boats fishing for prawns, for example, while other stocks protected by the cod recovery plan remain plentiful. The recovery is good news, however, and our fishermen deserve enormous commendation for taking the hard decisions and making the necessary changes to ensure the industry’s viability. Make no mistake: fishermen want nothing more than to make fishing sustainable not just now but for generations to come. They have given up a great deal over the years to bring that about. We share the cabinet secretary’s concern over ICES’s advice recommending a 9 per cent cut in the North Sea cod quota, particularly when the same advice shows that a 20 per cent increase in the quota would still keep the recovery of the stock on track. I agree that a further cut in quota could lead only to more discarding, given the abundance of cod in our seas. We therefore support the call from the Scottish Fishermen’s Federation to secure an increase in the cod quota for 2014, for the simple reason that it can ensure the continuation of sustainable fishing while reducing discards—I think that that is called a win-win situation. Fishermen also face a 15 per cent cut in North Sea haddock, which is a mainstay of the Scottish fleet, so it still appears that our fishermen are being penalised even though they are the ones taking the necessary steps to help the industry survive. Time does not allow me to discuss many other issues that the debate has thrown up, so I will finish by merely quoting the Scottish Fishermen’s Federation: “The reform of the CFP has been a political process and we are stuck with it... ministers ... now have to deliver workable plans that will protect our industry and ensure a sustainable future for fishing.” Like other members, we on the Conservative side of the chamber wish the cabinet secretary every success as he seeks to do just that.

Like other members, I warmly congratulate Elaine Murray on lodging the motion. I also thank her for pointing out the typo in it. I hope that I will be forgiven for taking the opportunity to ask those who award the grants: what was wrong with £590,475 or £590,500? I have never understood why a figure such as £590,474 would be appropriate. Perhaps that will feed through somewhere. The amount of money is significant, and it has been given to a very worthy organisation. I commend Elaine Murray for her speech, and particularly for explaining just why, in this day and age, Food Train is still needed and is so necessary. There is a bit of an irony in the fact that, despite the huge improvements in communication via the information technology that we have all now learned to love, people are still very lonely and isolated in the world that we live in. As has already been explained, Food Train began in Dumfries in 1995. It has gradually spread across the region—where it has six branches; three are in Elaine Murray’s constituency and three are in mine—and across the country. As we have heard, it now operates in six local authority areas. Ever since I became an MSP, I have tried to use volunteers week as an opportunity to join the Food Train operation and experience it for myself, but I was never accepted for some reason. Therefore, I took matters into my own hands in the summer. I rang it up and said, “Can I come and join you?” and it was very willing to offer me a day out. I found the day absolutely fascinating. I went with the Newton Stewart Food Train. We started by collecting the deliveries from the shop, visited a couple of houses in Newton Stewart, and then headed into the country. I thought that I knew my constituency quite well, and still believe that I do, but we headed up a road that I did not know even existed—by the state of it, the local authority does not know that, either. When we got to the end of the road, we headed up a track into the middle of a forest, opening two gates on the way. In the end, we came to what one might refer to as a but and ben—a little cottage—in the middle of nowhere. It was in a little glade in the middle of the forest, where lived one of life’s great characters. The lady did not drive, and she had no real way of communicating with the outside world. She was in her own little bit of paradise in the middle of the forest. I do not know how she would have survived without the weekly visit from the Food Train. Something that really came through to me was the very warm relationship that had grown up between the woman, who was very shy and retiring, and the Food Train volunteers. It was a very warm, friendly relationship, and I suspect that that kind of thing goes some way to explain the very high satisfaction rating that Bruce Crawford referred to in his speech. There is a clear and very friendly relationship between the service user and the service provider. Just as the service has expanded across the region, so has the suite of services that Food Train offers, as others have said. As Elaine Murray said, Esther Rantzen got the glory for the Silver Line, but Food Train has been providing its services for ages. Something that specifically interests and impresses me is the development of Food Train friends. Here in the Scottish Parliament earlier this year, Food Train friends received a service to older people award from Age Scotland, principally for the development of the befriending options that it now offers service users. I was quite moved to read the news item on the Dumfries and Galloway Food Train website relating to that award, which states: “our aim is to reduce loneliness and social isolation for older people across Dumfries and Galloway.” How can one possibly aim higher than that?

4. To ask the Scottish Government when it last met Police Scotland’s divisional commander for Dumfries and Galloway and what matters were discussed. (S4O-02670)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that response, but I am disappointed not to hear of any discussions taking place on an event that occurred last week, which was the closure—after 558 years of delivering local justice—of the sheriff and justice of the peace court in Kirkcudbright. The town has also just lost its front-desk facility at the police station, which means that those who are asked to act as witnesses and those who want to report a crime in person will have to do so either at Dumfries, which is some 30 miles away, or at Stranraer, which is some 50 miles away. Can the cabinet secretary tell me how that change is meant to encourage my constituents to play their part voluntarily in bringing criminals to justice? Does he agree that those changes are likely to make them a little more reluctant to do so?

As other members have done, I congratulate Claire Baker on securing the debate. As a member of the Rural Affairs Committee from 1999, I was involved in Parliament’s earliest consideration of national parks and can say without any doubt that the title of Claire Baker’s motion—and the report on which it is based—is absolutely correct. “National Parks, Unfinished Business” precisely and directly sums up the current position. Having been a member of the committee that scrutinised the bill that paved the way for national parks and which was eventually passed, I then had the very considerable honour and great pleasure of convening the committee during the creation of Scotland’s two national parks. As I think Claire Baker pointed out, at no time during scrutiny of the legislation or the consequent creation of the Cairngorms and Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national parks was it ever suggested or recommended that they be Scotland’s only national parks. As I have said, what we have at the moment is unfinished business. The enthusiasm and commitment that I witnessed during the passage of the legislation, during which the committee travelled to both proposed parks to take evidence, was, to be frank, awe inspiring. Indeed, so impressed was I at what I saw and heard that I went into the 2003 election pledging that if I won the constituency vote I would campaign for Scotland’s third national park to be in Galloway. It is on that topic that I want to focus brief remarks in the remainder of the time that is left to me. As it happened, I won the election and set about drawing together various potentially interested stakeholders to discuss the prospects for the creation of a Galloway national park. I take no pleasure at all in reporting that the only support that I received was from the Federation of Small Businesses in Dumfries and Galloway. Dumfries and Galloway Council, the Forestry Commission, VisitScotland, Scottish Enterprise Dumfries and Galloway as it was then, Scottish Natural Heritage and others were all at best lukewarm, so it became pretty clear pretty quickly that the prospect was more or less dead in the water. Hope reared its optimistic head once again when, as has been mentioned, the then Administration took a look at the possibility of creating a marine national park. I believe that there were seven proposed sites for that park, and the Solway Firth proposal—which is in Dumfries and Galloway—was the only one that did not give rise to significant local objections. Again, I flagged up the potential of the possibility of the creation of a land and marine-based national park, which the Scottish Campaign for National Parks very much supported at the time; indeed, I think that it still does. As has been mentioned, the incoming Administration following the 2007 election ditched the idea of marine national parks and, until now—other than the process that has already been mentioned—not a lot more has been said about national parks of any description. Members might well ask why on earth I would wish to return to the subject of a possible Galloway national park after two pretty robust rejections. That is because, other than the fact that I am a born optimist, it is extraordinary how attitudes have changed in a decade. Some of the agencies that previously rejected the possibility have very much changed their opinions. It is significant that Dumfries and Galloway Council has, and it has been joined by the increasingly influential Dumfries and Galloway Chamber of Commerce. The idea is still strongly supported by the Federation of Small Businesses as well as many local business associations, community associations and other community bodies to which I have spoken. Ever since the M74 was built—indeed, I suspect long before that—the people of Dumfries and Galloway have desperately sought something that will get people who are travelling north on the motorway network to turn left at Gretna. I have never changed my original view that a Galloway national park would bring that about. Such a national park is recommended in the excellent report on which this debate is based. I commend both organisations for the report. I whole-heartedly support it, the Galloway national park suggestion and the motion.

I, too, am grateful to the cabinet secretary for the advance copy of his statement. I very much share the disappointment of everyone in the chamber that the UK Government was unable to deliver the convergence uplift to Scotland; I would not have signed the cross-party letter to which the cabinet secretary referred had that not been the case. However, I would venture to suggest that if Richard Lochhead had been secretary of state at DEFRA, he would probably have made a very similar decision. I have to say that I disagree with the cabinet secretary’s opinion of the review that the UK has promised and to which Ms Baker referred. First, in an effort to be positive, I wonder whether the cabinet secretary would agree to work again with other parties in the chamber to explore the possibilities for improving Scotland’s position on area-based CAP funding that I believe the promised review of funding allocation undoubtedly offers. Secondly, whether we like the decision or not, the fact is that the cabinet secretary now knows exactly what resources he has to play with and must now get on and deliver a Scottish CAP, as he has the flexibility to do. In delivering that CAP, will he acknowledge that the 7.8 per cent uplift in pillar 2 support should reduce the need to modulate funding from pillar 1, which is designed and should be used for direct support of Scotland’s farmers?

Although the figures that the cabinet secretary has quoted are welcome, does he accept that reported crime is on the increase?

I ask the cabinet secretary once again whether, despite the splendid figures he gives, he will accept that reported crime is on the increase.

The topic is no trivial matter, as most members’ speeches have shown. However, it has nothing to do with the effectiveness of the police, as some members have tried to imply. We are talking about the closure to the public of a third of our police stations and significant reductions in opening hours for many more. Unlike some members, I have had a lot of emails about it. The Scottish Government may want to wash its hands of the proposal and say that it is an operational matter for the police, but it will affect communities throughout Scotland and the SNP Government cannot and should not continue to ignore it. As a Scottish Conservative, I believe that justice is best and most effectively delivered locally and that the Government is failing to support local policing. The Government should at the very least make it clear to Police Scotland that the closures should be reconsidered. Instead, all that we have had is characteristic bluster from the cabinet secretary and rather limp figures from the First Minister. Police Scotland is a creation of the Government that my party did not support. We expressed concerns that the single police force would encourage centralisation and that the Government’s legislation would neither enhance nor protect local policing. I believe that those concerns have been fully justified. The Scottish Government told the Parliament that the single police force would not result in centralisation, yet we now face the closure of front desks across the country and of regional control rooms. The Scottish Government told the Parliament that, by reducing duplication, the single police force would protect front-line services. I must ask: what could be more front line than the front desk of a police station? As has been highlighted, there were clear flaws in Police Scotland’s consultation process. Some of the footfall analysis was carried out in 2009, since when a number of stations have closed. In my region, which is Dumfries and Galloway, the Dalry, Gretna, Moffat, Machars and Thornhill police stations are set to close to the public—without any analysis having been done—simply because they do not have a permanently staffed front counter. I argue strongly that the presence of those stations gives the community a huge feeling of security and reassurance.

Not when I have four minutes—I am sorry. The removal of those stations will have a seriously negative impact on the affected communities. I fully accept that some stations that are earmarked for closure are not exceptionally busy. In my constituency, Dalbeattie, Kirkcudbright and Newton Stewart are set to lose public counter provision, and a significant reduction in hours is proposed for the stations in Lockerbie, Sanquhar and Annan in the wider region. Those stations are the interface between the public and the police in Dumfries and Galloway. It is not as if they are not being used. In the 13-day review period, Dalbeattie received 82 visitors over 10 days, Kirkcudbright had 105 visitors and Newton Stewart had 110 visitors in 12 days. Let us be honest—we have all been here before. Relatively recently, the Scottish Court Service proposed the closure of a third of Scotland’s sheriff courts, including that in Kirkcudbright, in my constituency. As with the proposals for court closures, the closure of police stations to the public flies in the face of the local delivery of justice. As with the court closures, the consultation process has been flawed. As with court closures, the SNP Government is failing to stand up for local communities. In the debate on court closures, I made the point that people are already putting up with an enormous amount of inconvenience to play their part in ensuring that justice is done. The Government is undermining people’s willingness to do that. It did so with court closures and is doing the same with the station proposals. I argue strongly that increasing centralisation is no way to encourage people to engage with our justice system, and it is most definitely not in the interests of local justice. I support the motion.

The issue is not about Scotland being a full member of the EU but about the terms and conditions under which it would become a member and when that would happen. I am sure that, in his more charitable moments, the cabinet secretary would agree that we are where we are on CAP funding per hectare, largely because we opted unanimously at the time of the previous reform to have a system that is based on historical payments. As he knows, I support internal and external convergence, which can be negotiated as we move forward. The big decisions have been taken and signed up to in Europe, and the clock is ticking. Will the cabinet secretary now start—indeed, kick-start—the consultation on the options for implementing CAP reform, which is in his gift, so that Scotland’s farmers can begin to plan ahead, which they badly need to do?

Every now and again we come across an initiative that seems so obvious and so right that we cannot understand why we did not think of it ourselves or why we have not come across it somewhere else. That is very much the case with woodlots. In my farming days, the land that I farmed had some 100 acres of woodland in various stages of—to be frank—mismanagement. It was spread over areas that varied from as little as half an acre to more than 25 acres in one wood. They would have been planted to enhance the shooting asset of what was at one time a small sporting estate—long before my time, I hasten to add—but they would also have been planted with a commercial aim in mind. The woods were attractive and pleasing to the eye, and they undoubtedly enhanced the overall attraction of the fairly steep-sided valley in which they were placed. They would have been a lot more attractive and pleasing to the eye if I had managed them better, but my efforts were entirely focused on the farming aspect of the business and I freely confess that the proper management of the not-inconsiderable amount of woodland that was my responsibility was very low on my list of priorities. What I would have given for the Scottish Woodlot Association in those days! How typical of most of my life it is that, almost as soon as I have given up on a problem or found another way of disposing of it, the answer appears in front of me, as if by magic. My farming circumstances would have lent themselves to a woodlot licensee as perfectly as a duck to water. I dearly wish that woodlots had made an appearance in Scotland 40 or 50 years before now. As I said, the whole concept seems so simple that we wonder why it has taken so long to surface here in Scotland. That should not prevent us from whole-heartedly welcoming the development of woodlots, and I am more than happy to lend my voice to others in support of the initiative. As Aileen McLeod did, I congratulate my constituent Angus Carrick-Buchanan and the first Scottish woodlot licence-holder, Mark Rowe, for taking the first step in what I am convinced will soon become a common model of woodland and forestry management across Scotland. I have known Angus for some years, and I had the great pleasure of meeting Mark at the Galloway country fair in summer, along with other members of the Scottish Woodlot Association. Their enthusiasm and sheer joy at the project will set a fine benchmark for others to follow, as I am certain that they will do. As the Scottish Woodlot Association’s welcome briefing says, woodlot licences are an exciting new way of managing Scotland’s forests and connecting people to woodland, while providing a mechanism for people of all ages to have easier access to forest land. They will boost local economies, stimulate rural development and create employment. They will increase the availability of firewood and biomass fuel and—this is important—they will encourage the development of small-scale, decentralised forest enterprises across the country, in a way that can only be beneficial for everyone concerned. I can see no downside to the initiative. It has been welcomed by all the representative bodies that I am aware have commented on it, not least Scottish Land & Estates. The motion that is before us highlights that rarest of outcomes: a genuine win-win situation, in which there are no losers. I congratulate Aileen McLeod on lodging the motion. It might be 40 years too late for me, but this is surely an initiative that has found its proper time.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it has taken to ensure that draff remains available to the agriculture industry as a source of protein. (S4O-02469)

Although I am grateful to the cabinet secretary for that response, a year ago, in answer to a similar question from my colleague Mary Scanlon, he said that he was considering how to respond to those concerns. It rather sounds as if he is still doing so, but he will be aware that the concerns have not diminished. Draff remains a key source of home-produced protein, but more and more of it is being used as biofuel. When will the cabinet secretary be able to give us a fully formulated response to the concerns? Might he consider, perhaps through the Scotland rural development programme, building shared draff storage capacity to assist farmers to stockpile when supplies are plentiful?

This is a debate on which I wish it were possible for the Parliament to speak with one voice. We have often managed to do so on this topic in the past, but I regret that it seems highly unlikely that that will be the case at decision time this evening. That is not just a great shame but a missed opportunity on the part of the Government, as there is much in the debate around which I genuinely believe we could have agreed. Surely the Government would agree that a unanimous vote from this Parliament would carry a much stronger message to both the UK Government and the EU than the fragmented result that, I fear, we will see later this afternoon. Had today’s motion reflected the perfectly reasonable tone taken by the cabinet secretary in his speech this afternoon, we might have achieved such unanimity, but I do not think that that will be the case. In my view, the motion certainly does not reflect that reasonable tone. When I started to read the motion, I was filled with optimism that the debate would concentrate on the many really important issues that face rural Scotland in the wake of the CAP reform package, but, as I read on, my heart slowly sank as I came to what I can only call a remarkably self-congratulatory clause that asks us to welcome “the Scottish Government’s success in negotiating provisions that meet Scotland’s needs” in various fields. That phrase “success in negotiating” was penned by the same cabinet secretary who is forever complaining that he cannot negotiate anything because he does not have a seat at the top table. Well, I do not see how he can have it both ways. I very much welcome the fact that the UK Government was clearly impressed enough with the Scottish Government’s arguments on these issues that it negotiated hard for them—often, I believe, against its own instincts—succeeded in those negotiations and returned with a deal on CAP reform that might not have given us everything that we wanted but that the cabinet secretary pronounced as a good deal for Scotland. So I find myself asking why the motion calls on us to “deplore” that agreement. Let us get real for a minute. We all know that the overall EU budget has been reduced. How could it have been otherwise in these economic times? Let us also not forget that, as Liam McArthur reminded us, the SNP’s representatives at Westminster voted for that budget reduction, so it should surely have come as no surprise that there is less money in the CAP budget. The issue should be not how much blame and vitriol we can pour on the UK Government but how we can maximise the benefit of the smaller pot of money under the two pillars following CAP reform. As Claire Baker hinted, that may not suit the Government’s agenda on the outcome of next year’s referendum, but it is the question to which most people who live and work in rural Scotland want an answer. I will focus on those issues. I have a lot of sympathy with the cabinet secretary as he faces the task before him because, as we all recognise, the changes that he must now implement will involve many winners and losers across the agricultural sector as pillar 1 support moves from historical to area-based payments. However, it is worth reflecting that Scotland has historically had a low level of CAP funding because our historical payments have always been based on stock numbers and productivity. As we all know, and are constantly reminded, 85 per cent of Scotland’s land is classed as less favoured. We are geographically less productive and therefore have historically received less support. The change to area-based payments, as the cabinet secretary understandably hinted in his opening remarks, will inevitably have the broad effect of moving support payments up the hill. That presents the Government with a huge challenge: how to bring about the change without actually destroying the viability, possibly even the very existence of some agricultural businesses. In looking for the best answer to that question I cannot disagree with NFU Scotland’s priority of focusing pillar 1 payments on active, productive farming businesses in a carefully targeted way that will minimise the flattening effect of these reforms. That points us towards having three distinct payment regions rather than two. I am pleased that the Scottish Government can use up to 8 per cent of the Scottish CAP budget for coupled payment, which I strongly support. I will also take the argument for increasing that amount by having access to the whole of the UK’s CAP budget ceiling for modulation to the UK Government, because I believe that we will probably need to go above that level of 8 per cent maximum if the necessary safeguards are to be put in place to sustain our hill farming sector without causing irreparable damage to the other sectors of agriculture. It is also clear, as I think that the cabinet secretary said, that there will be huge pressure on the pillar 2 budget, because yet again we will have the smallest pot of jam to spread over a much larger slice of bread from 2015. The reforms give the cabinet secretary the power to increase the amount that can be modulated from pillar 1 to pillar 2 from the current 4 per cent to 15 per cent, as Claire Baker has already mentioned, without match funding. I am sure that he will be sorely tempted and heavily lobbied to use that power. Unlike Claire Baker—and I suspect that this is where I will lose some potential support for our amendment—I would urge him to resist that temptation because every percentage decrease in pillar 1 support will simply undermine what will be a very fragile agricultural sector that will struggle to come to terms with a very different support structure over the next few years. It deserves time to do so and, above all else, it surely needs to know what that structure is likely to be as soon as is humanly possible, to allow for effective forward planning. I will argue for Scotland to have a greater share of the CAP resources within the UK and I accept the case for the external convergence uplift largely to come to Scotland. The cabinet secretary told the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee two weeks ago that this could amount to, I think, €60 million by 2019. I think he repeated that this afternoon. That is a considerable amount of money that would not come to the member state of the UK unless Scotland was in the position that it finds itself in. There is a perfectly logical case to be made. I will do so using the language of persuasion and the arguments of logic. The cabinet secretary does not do his arguments any favour when he publicly accuses the UK Government, as he did at the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee two weeks ago, of stealing Scotland’s money. The rhetoric might fit the referendum agenda, but it does not do Scottish agriculture any favours. The simple reality is that the CAP reform package is now firmly in the hands of the cabinet secretary. As the headline of last week’s Scottish Farmer put it so succinctly: “Over to you, ScotGov” Indeed it is. I move amendment S4M-07892.2 to leave out from “and welcomes” to end and insert: “, which was welcomed by the Scottish Government as a good deal for Scotland; welcomes the Scottish Government’s success, alongside the UK Government, in negotiating provisions that meet Scotland’s needs on new entrants, active farming and increased flexibilities; looks forward to the Scottish Government’s future public consultations on implementing the new CAP in Scotland, and calls on the Scottish Government to negotiate responsibly with the UK Government to ensure the best possible outcome for rural Scotland and to inform Scotland’s farmers and other rural stakeholders without undue delay how these reforms will be implemented across the country.”

Will Rob Gibson take a brief intervention?

It is better to take interventions early. If what Mr Gibson said about the budget deal is the case, why did the cabinet secretary describe the deal that came back from Brussels as a good deal for Scotland?

If Owen Paterson was so neglectful of the needs of Scotland, why was he happy to negotiate 8 per cent for coupled payments, although he personally preferred not to have any coupled payments at all?

Will the member take an intervention?

I understand the member’s disappointment that Owen Paterson has not been able to find time in his diary to come in front of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee and hear all the vitriol to which he has been subject in the chamber this afternoon. Does she accept and agree that it is good news that he is in Scotland today, meeting NFU Scotland and learning more about Scotland’s desires and needs?

Given the amount that has been committed to the forestry sector for 2014 to ensure on-going plantings, is the cabinet secretary quite content that there will be enough left in the kitty to cover the agri-environmental schemes and other things that also need to be funded through the transition?

Given that the UK Government has committed itself to pillar 1 until at least 2020, surely the cabinet secretary would admit that he is basically talking out of a hole in his head.

I am broadly in favour of the principle behind a review of how the levy is deducted and distributed, but I think that the cabinet secretary has been tempted to go for headlines without thinking through the full consequences, which could include losing the benefit of up to £7 million that is ring-fenced for promotion and research on British meat. The cabinet secretary mentioned the forum that the UK minister offered to set up, which will include all the meat-levy-raising bodies. Can he say why he has so robustly dismissed the forum’s benefits, given that its remit would be to look at all the issues and to determine priorities in the UK?

In 2001, a teacher at Knox grammar school in Sydney, Australia, co-ordinated a series of three events, held over three consecutive days, that were collectively designed to provide a wide range of mentally stimulating challenges to teams of pupils from schools in New South Wales. It proved to be an extremely popular concept, to the extent that, in 2004, schools from several states were invited to take part in the inaugural national da Vinci decathlon. Gradually, the competition became so popular that each state now runs its own annual contest, with the winners and host schools of each state being invited to take part in the national decathlon, which is still held at Knox grammar over a three-day period every year. Clearly, the concept was one in which interest was bound to spread and, with further interest being shown from overseas, 2012 saw the inaugural international da Vinci decathlon, tested on the host schools in Australia, run simultaneously in several countries with links via Skype. Further, just as the original concept started in one state and expanded across a nation, the international concept of the challenge will take a huge leap forward this year when the first international da Vinci decathlon takes place in Milan, Italy, on 2, 3 and 4 October. Leonardo da Vinci was, of course, one of the world’s great thinkers and scholars and, back in the 15th century, it was he who identified a cerebral interconnection between the arts, anatomy, architecture, engineering and mathematics and astronomy, and the challenges of the decathlon that has been named after him are designed to bring the concept of that interconnection to life in a way that is relevant to us in the 21st century. The competition therefore places particular emphasis on higher-order thinking skills, problem solving and creativity, and it does so by setting each participating team a series of 10 tasks, which encompass art and poetry, cartography, code-breaking, creative producers, English, engineering, mathematics and chess, philosophy, science and general knowledge. To me, the whole thing sounds every bit as exciting as it does challenging, and I am sure that none of us would want to do anything other than encourage the further development of that great initiative. However, had it not been for the eagle-eyed observation of a young teacher at Dalbeattie high school in Dumfries and Galloway, I would certainly never have heard of the competition, and I suspect that many of the rest of us would never have heard of it either. A couple of years ago, I had the pleasure of visiting Dalbeattie high school at the invitation of that teacher—Mr Butler—to present the prizes at the end of a day of thought-provoking challenges that he had put together for the pupils, every one of whom had obviously been enthused and motivated by the tasks that had been set. It was clearly Mr Butler’s penchant for that type of activity that drew him to the da Vinci decathlon. Completely undaunted at the thought of having to raise at least £7,000 in the last four months—never mind dealing with the logistics of getting a team of 10 pupils and accompanying adults to and from Milan in October—the team from Dalbeattie high was duly entered for the decathlon and it is, I am told, the only school from the whole of Europe that is taking part in the competition. I thought that it was just the only school from the UK. It is also the only state school that will take part. It will take on teams from Australia, the USA, India and South Africa. One of the reasons why I wanted to bring the debate to the Parliament was simply to emphasise that that type of event does not involve just the individual participating school. Over the summer, the whole town of Dalbeattie witnessed a series of events and activities that involved, absorbed and intrigued the entire community. Over £8,000—not just £7,000—has been raised, and I believe that a final fundraising quiz night is to come this Thursday. Some £2,500 has been raised through grants; the rest has come through a wide variety of activities, such as packing bags in a local supermarket, a weekly sale of cakes made by the pupils—they make good cakes in Dalbeattie; that alone has raised £350—a coffee morning, work in local charity shops, quiz sheets, individual donations and so on. It surely says everything about our local communities that, even in these most difficult of times, they will dig deep into their pockets for a cause that they believe in. That also says a huge amount about the benefits of education beyond the classroom, the benefits of teamwork, the stimulus of competition and the unforgettable experience and benefit of social interaction between people of different nationalities and cultures. I have no doubt at all that those benefits will be heaped in abundance on the intrepid team of secondary 2, 3 and 4 pupils who will shortly leave the safe shores of Dumfries and Galloway to take on the world in Milan, and I am quite certain that—win, lose or draw—they will be different people simply as a result of having undergone the experience. I hope and feel certain that they will enthuse future generations of Dalbeattie’s pupils to follow in their footsteps; indeed, I would love to think that they will enthuse other Scottish, British and European schools to organise their own decathlons. Who knows? Perhaps it will not be long before Dalbeattie plays host to the international da Vinci challenge. That is very much for the future, of course. For now, I simply offer the good wishes of all members to the team and its supporting adults who, I am delighted to say, have been able to join us in the gallery. I am truly delighted to have put the motion to members.

I was pleased that the minister acknowledged the role that business plays in progressing the targets, and that he will work with businesses on that. Will he expand a little on what discussions he has had, particularly with small businesses, to ensure that, while we work together to achieve the targets, we do not engulf small businesses in extra red tape and regulation?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Should the Parliament not be asked whether it agrees that a single question be put on the amendments?

The minister mentioned the need for new ideas. Does he recognise that the tenant farming forum, NFU Scotland, the rent review group, the STFA and a myriad of other stakeholders have been working tirelessly to achieve exactly that and to introduce a vibrant sustainable tenanted sector? We all want to achieve that, but the cabinet secretary’s announcement has made that considerably less achievable. Does he agree that that announcement has undermined the work of those organisations?

I think that I was advised that I had five minutes, Presiding Officer. Is that not the case?

Right. I ended my contribution to the stage 1 debate by saying that I was not particularly looking forward to stage 2. I said that because I felt pretty certain that the Government would lodge some amendments to address the concerns that had been raised by eminent specialists in crofting law in evidence to our committee. I do not want simply to repeat the arguments that most members made during stage 1, but I think we can all agree that crofting law is a nightmare of complexity, which tends to throw up a plethora of unintended consequences whenever it is tinkered with. We all witnessed the criminal—I meant to say “eminent”; I am not sure what Freud would have to say about that—expert lawyers plainly disagreeing with one another, although it should be noted that it was agreed unanimously at the 2012 meeting of the crofting law group that the bill would need amendment. Crispin Agnew raised a number of concerns during our evidence sessions. Rather than being about whether the bill would address the unintended consequences of Parliament’s previous efforts to amend crofting law in 2010, they were about the lack of integration with the Crofters (Scotland) Act 1993. He said of the bill: “The provisions are in a complicated set of sections that stand alone, with no attempt to integrate them with the rest of the 1993 act. Problems may arise from that ... There is no clear link-up to all the various sections. It is very difficult to achieve that in the crofting context, but that is my concern—the legislation is perhaps overcomplicated.”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 15 May 2013; c 2193.] Sir Crispin went on to detail a number of instances in the bill in which he felt that greater simplicity was needed to provide more clarity in an area of legislation that we all know badly needs it. In one of his final comments to the committee, he said, quite simply, that, “The bill is vague”. Given that evidence and more, I was quite surprised that the minister did not lodge some amendments at stage 2. I asked him why he had not done so at the committee meeting on Wednesday 12 June. His reply was, essentially, that, having examined the bill in the light of the stage 1 evidence, his team was satisfied that the bill would achieve its purpose. However, no one was questioning that. The concerns that were raised were about whether the drafting of the bill was likely to give rise to further unforeseen consequences. In his response to me, the minister went on to say: “The Scottish Government is committed to drafting in as plain and accessible a manner as is consistent with achieving the necessary outcome.”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 12 June 2013; c 2410.] Given that statement, I cannot help but agree with Brian Inkster when he said that it would have been good and useful to have seen a detailed rebuttal of the concerns that were raised with the committee and an explanation of why they apparently did not need to be addressed. Sadly, that level of detail has been lost amid the urgency that is required to pass the bill. I take the minister at his word—my knowledge of the subject is not detailed enough to do otherwise—but, as I suggested in a previous debate, the bill could come back to haunt him. I genuinely hope that I am wrong in that prediction, but I could not help but notice Brian Inkster’s statement that “The crofting lawyers in question have actively tried to reduce that workload by seeking to assist the Scottish Government in the drafting process. However, the Scottish Government in rejecting that assistance appears content to increase the workload those lawyers will have by adding to the complexity of crofting law. So be it for now.” I guess that it has to be a case of “So be it for now”. We must all sincerely hope that the bill’s pluses greatly outweigh its minuses. Most of us played a part in the creation of the problem. As I said at stage 1, it is a clear measure of the complexity of crofting law that no one—neither the Government, the Parliament nor legal experts—picked up on it at the time. We support the Government in its efforts to secure the passage of the bill, as we think that it is right to do so. If nothing else, the retrospective aspect of the bill will ensure that the 159 crofters whose applications have been processed can sleep soundly in their beds in the knowledge that the law is once again firmly on their side. We will support the bill at decision time.

6. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to promote the uptake of the open market shared equity scheme in rural areas. (S4O-02257)

I am grateful for that response, but I am sorry to say that the scheme does not appear to be working—at least not in my constituency. Is the minister aware that, since 2009, there have been just 79 shared equity purchases in Dumfries and Galloway, of which 62 were in Dumfries town, but only five were in Galloway and only two were in communities of fewer than 8,000 people? Does she agree that there is not enough flexibility in establishing the scheme’s threshold prices, that the scheme is not being promoted enough—at least not throughout my region—and that it is not working as it should? Will she look into what improvements could be made to the scheme to ensure that my rural constituents are given an equal opportunity to get a foot on the housing ladder?

Does the minister accept that several of the concerns about drafting were raised by lawyers who are eminent in the field of crofting law—I admire them for being so—and that there are serious issues here? Will his Government look at them seriously before stage 2?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. The time available seems to be increasing by the second. I am eternally grateful that I am taking part in the debate early, because I suspect that a high degree of duplication is inevitable in debating a narrowly focused amending bill. I suspect that every member will, in effect, try to find a different way of saying essentially the same thing. That is not a criticism, because I think that it is almost impossible to do otherwise in such a debate. It probably says almost everything that we need to know about crofting law that, during the previous session of Parliament, no one spotted the anomaly that arose out of the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Act 2010 while it was undergoing its due parliamentary scrutiny. That act introduced the category of owner-occupier crofters into the Crofters (Scotland) Act 1993. The anomaly or unintended consequence of the legislation is that owner-occupier crofters are not permitted to apply to the Crofting Commission to decroft the croft unless the croft in question is vacant. That sentence alone summarises quite accurately the complexity of the law. We on the Conservative benches will certainly support any bill that is designed to sort out the problem. This short and focused bill is designed to do just that and no more—and yet, if the evidence that the committee received is anything to go by, even that seems to have given rise to a lengthy debate and even some controversy among those who inhabit the strange world of crofting legislation. As was discussed earlier, eminent lawyers, all of whom are experts on crofting law, were unable to agree on even such an apparently simple question as whether a bill is required to sort out the problem. Some say that it is, while others contend that the issue could just as easily be addressed through subordinate legislation. To be totally honest, I do not know and, frankly, if the bill really sorts out the problem—as most agree that it will—I do not care, either. The fact is that we created a problem and we need to address it. We commend the minister’s intention to do so quickly and effectively. Given past experience, which suggests strongly that it is virtually impossible to pass any law in crofting without giving rise to several other issues, I am willing to bet that the bill if passed—as I am sure it will be—will not be the end of the matter. Already, the crofting lawyer Brian Inkster has identified and highlighted the issue of multi-ownership of crofts, a subject that I think was first raised in the Parliament by my colleague Jamie McGrigor. The number of people who are affected by that issue has been identified to the committee as around 700. As Brian Inkster puts it in his blog, “there we have it. There are 700 owner-occupiers compared to say 3,500 owner-occupier crofters. Thus, due to the interpretation put on the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Act 2010 by the Crofting Commission, one sixth of owner-occupiers (if for present purposes we take it that owner-occupier crofters are a sub-set of owner-occupiers) potentially cannot decroft land they own. Furthermore, they still will not be able to following the enactment of the Crofting (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill”— the bill that we are debating this afternoon— “which, as currently drafted, addresses only decrofting by owner-occupier crofters and not decrofting by owner-occupiers who are not owner-occupier crofters.” If I may say so, that is another example of the complexity of the legislation. In anyone’s language—even the almost incomprehensible language of crofting law—one sixth of anything is a significant proportion. We should not take any comfort from the fact that, in trying to address the one small and focused problem that the bill seeks to address, we will probably fail to address several others. That really is the crux of the debate. No one questions the honest intention of the bill to fix a problem that we created and that no one picked up at the time. Yet in the all-too-brief time that the committee has had to get our heads round the issue, it has become obvious that crofting law is a very sick animal indeed and one that is in urgent need of major surgical operation, rather than simply more and more bits of sticking plaster to try to fix the wound, as Tavish Scott said in his earlier intervention. One day in the not-too-distant future, a Scottish Government will have to grasp this thistle, pull it out by the roots and start all over again. I am immensely encouraged by the minister’s hint in his opening remarks that the Government will consider doing exactly that, or at least start that process. All of us on the committee would welcome that. At one stage of the committee’s evidence gathering, I described crofting law as being like the Hydra, the mythical multiheaded serpent that grew two heads every time one was cut off. In yet another Brian Inkster blog—as I am sure most members know, there are many of them—he described one category of crofter as aliens. Crofting and crofting law have therefore attracted descriptions ranging from the ancient mythology of history to the futuristic world of science fiction. Again, that says everything. Crofting law is a monster that was created in the past, and it will exist long into the future unless it is effectively destroyed and replaced. In mythological times, it was Heracles who overcame the Hydra, although he needed a bit of help from a friend. With the greatest of respect, I think that the minister will need more than one friend if he is to be the Heracles who condemns this particular Hydra to the mists of time. We will of course support the bill at stage 1. I wish that I could say that I was looking forward to stage 2, but I am not entirely sure that I am.

I hope that Tavish Scott accepts that I did not say that the loophole should not have been found; I said that it was a measure of the complexity of the issue that it had not been found.

Does the member accept that considerable work is going on, particularly through the tenant farming forum, to look at land tenancy issues? Does she accept that progress is being made on this very sensitive area and that the deliberations of yet another outside group on the issues would not exactly be helpful, given the current stage of the talks that are taking place?

As it is often insinuated that we Conservatives are simply against land reform, I take this opportunity to say that nothing could be further from the truth. By way of endorsement, I refer anyone interested to the blog of one Andy Wightman, who is well known in the field of land reform. On Mr Wightman’s site, Professor Jim Hunter, a former member of the land reform review group and not exactly a well-known supporter of the Conservative Party, said only yesterday: “the first land reforming legislation in Scotland in modern times ... was the Transfer of Crofting Estates Act 1997—very much the personal work of then Tory Secretary of State, Michael Forsyth. So the land reforming credentials of the Conservative Party are way, way ahead of those of the SNP which has so far introduced no land reform legislation of any kind whatsoever.” As in land reform, so in so many other areas.

I am afraid that I have only five minutes, so the minister will have to forgive me that cheap jibe. On a slightly more important note, the same Professor Jim Hunter said in an article in yesterday’s Herald that was very critical of the LRRG’s interim report that the Government had been directly involved in the group’s work. I look forward to hearing how the minister defends his amendment in the wake of that statement. That aside, I am more than happy to take part in the debate, although I am a little mystified about Labour’s intentions in bringing the motion to the chamber. I have to say that I do not really understand its logic. It asks us to recognise that the review group was set up by the Scottish Government to “offer a ‘radical review of land reform’” and then asks us to call on the Scottish Government to “demonstrate a commitment to radical and bold land reform.” Far be it from me to speak for the Government but, if I were to do so, I would argue—probably quite strongly—that setting up a review group to look at a radical review of land reform demonstrates a fair commitment to that cause.

I just do not have time—I really am sorry. You chose to have a short debate, so I cannot help you. Furthermore, we are asked to recognise that “the Scottish Government has the power to deliver further land reform now”, presumably with the expectation that it should do so. Given that the Scottish Government has a majority in the Parliament, it could deliver free Mars bars to everybody daily if it wanted to do so, but I am sure that Labour would—rightly—be the first to object if the Government suddenly introduced land reform legislation halfway through a widespread consultation on radical land reform. The position simply does not make sense. I will concentrate on three aspects of the interim report that are not mentioned in the motion. When I met Alison Elliot and Sarah Skerrat in the early days of the work, I said that I had three main concerns. The first was that the community right to buy should be proactively promoted across the south of Scotland, because the perception was that it was really a Highlands and Islands initiative. I am delighted to have been proved wrong on that by the on-going success of the Mull of Galloway Trust in my constituency, which the minister mentioned. It has recently received a grant of more than £300,000 towards the purchase of the most southerly point of Scotland. That said, I still think that there is a misconception about the community right to buy and that there is scope for many more such purchases across the south of Scotland. The second concern that I highlighted, which is of much more concern from our perspective, is about the apparent willingness—keenness, even—to consider community purchase even when the land or property owner is not a willing participant. Apparently that willingness is shared by the land reform review group, the Labour Party, the SNP and others, I expect, but to the Conservatives it is simply a step too far. We cannot and will not accept such compulsion. Any project that results in community ownership—be it of land or a building—must be undertaken with mutual consent, because we genuinely believe that only with mutual consent can the real benefits of community ownership be achieved for all. The final item that I put to the LRRG was my strong view, which I still hold, that the group should not be tempted to get involved in the agricultural landlord and tenancy debate, because—as I said in my intervention on Claire Baker—it is already being looked at in considerable depth by the tenant farming forum, which was making and continues to make slow but steady progress. I am delighted that the LRRG has seen the sense in that position and I commend it for not getting involved in that highly sensitive policy area, despite the pressure on it. Progress is being made, and that progress would not be helped in any way by the involvement of yet another outside group, which could only further complicate the issue. We will not be able to support the motion at decision time. It implies that the LRRG has not delivered, and I do not understand how it could have been expected to deliver in what is, after all, just an interim report. I do not support all its findings, but I am willing to give it the benefit of the doubt. I move amendment S4M-06845.1, to leave out from second “Land Reform Review Group” to end and insert: “independent group is looking at the future of land ownership and management in Scotland with a view to enabling communities to benefit from further land reform; understands that the report simply ends phase one of the process and that much work still remains to be done; agrees that, while community ownership is to be encouraged, a willing buyer and willing seller are paramount, and welcomes the group’s decision not to examine land tenancy issues, which are currently being scrutinised by the Tenant Farming Forum.”

I listened very carefully to Tavish Scott’s comments because I appreciate that he has a great knowledge of the sector. I agree with him about many things, and many of his amendments to the bill, but I cannot entirely agree that there is no need for greater openness and accessibility for the industry. That is really what my amendment refers to. I draw the chamber’s attention to an article that was published in the Sunday Herald on 5 May, headed “Pesticides from salmon farms poison Scotland’s lochs”. I accept that we have to cut through the journalistic licence within that headline. What the story highlights, however, is a report by the Scottish Environment Protection Agency on the analysis of samples taken from about 24 fish farms in 2010, 2011 and 2012. SEPA detected residues of pesticides at 19 of the sites tested, with 12 of them—that is, 50 per cent—showing levels in breach of SEPA’s environmental standards. One of those sites, at Loch Shiel in the east of Lewis, showed residues of the pesticide Teflubenzeron, a delousing agent for salmon, that were up to 455 times higher than SEPA’s environmental quality standards for 2012. In anybody’s language, that situation suggests a problem. I absolutely accept that there is an on-going debate about the extent to which these pesticides harm other species and, indeed, the wider marine environment. Although today is not the time to enter that debate, I believe that reports such as SEPA’s highlight the need for the fish farming industry to be as open and transparent as it can possibly be in this day and age. My amendment 3 would ensure that farm management agreements and statements are publicly accessible. If they were, scientists in academia, together with non-governmental organisations, particularly those in the wild fish sector, would be far more able to evaluate and consider incidents and reports such as the one that I have highlighted, in the full knowledge of the agreements and statements that exist in relation to the area in question, which would provide them with a contextual background to those incidents. I believe that amendment 3 would greatly improve the relations and understanding between, in particular, the farmed fish and the wild fish sector, which is a key aim of the committee’s deliberations, without carrying any commercial risk or significant cost implications for the producers. I commend my amendment to the chamber. On the other amendments in the group, we support amendments 8 to 13 on the grounds of simplification and clarification. Although I am very attracted to the simplicity that amendment 15 brings, I need to be convinced of the need to delete the details of inspections that the bill currently contains.

If the current arrangements and the ones that the minister has described are working so well, why is SEPA finding pesticide deposits that are 455 times its agreed limits?

Does Mr Scott not agree that it is better to access some data rather than none at all?

At stage 2, I lodged an amendment that would have ensured the regular publication of sea lice data on a farm-by-farm basis. It was ably spoken to and moved by my colleague Jamie McGrigor while I was on hard-working parliamentary duty in Malawi. Despite Jamie’s almost irresistible arguments, somehow the minister found a way of resisting them, and the amendment was rejected. The same fate befell an amendment from Claudia Beamish to reach a compromise by seeking—as does amendment 14 today—the publication of data on a farm management area basis. Every scientist in the field wants farm-by-farm data for analytical purposes. However, if that is not to be—the Scottish Government has made it very clear that it will not countenance that—amendment 14 surely provides the most sensible compromise that has come forward so far. Farm management areas are already the agreed management units for the industry. They are accepted as such, to the extent that, as Graeme Dey has just indicated, the industry itself has voluntarily agreed to make the data available at farm management area level to Marine Scotland science for the purpose of scientific research. I think that the minister verified that at stage 2. If that is to be the case, surely the data that are held by Marine Scotland science must be publicly available through freedom of information legislation. Why not just go the whole hog and, as somebody once said, publish and be damned? The information is going to be available anyway, as far as I can see. If the industry does not take that final step, the unfortunate question of what there is to hide will continue to hang over it. I say that in the genuine belief that it is an industry of which we all want to be proud. I do not wish to denigrate the industry in any way, as it has a huge role to play in rural employment and in the whole economy of the country, but the subject will keep coming back until the industry is completely open and accessible. I believe that amendment 14 goes a long way towards helping that, and we strongly support it.

The minister has confirmed that the data will be made available to Marine Scotland science on request. Can he also confirm that, once the information is in the hands of Marine Scotland science, it will be accessible under freedom of information legislation?

I can be very brief because I simply want to associate myself with the remarks that Claudia Beamish and Tavish Scott made. It is regrettable that three groupings of amendments are introducing into the bill three completely different sets of provisions that we have not had a chance to scrutinise and on which stakeholders have not had a chance to make their opinions known. There might be other consequences of which we are not yet aware. The position is difficult because I do not disagree with the intention of any of the three groupings of amendments, but I very much regret the fact that the committee has not had a chance to scrutinise them in the way that committees of the Parliament are uniquely supposed to. It is the committees that hold the Government to account. I very much regret that we have not had an opportunity to do so.

The Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee’s stage 1 report on the bill strongly supported the individual numbering of tags, which it believed “would be an essential part of making the tagging scheme effective”, as would the recording of those tags for the sake of complete traceability. Such schemes are in place in every other part of the United Kingdom and in the Republic of Ireland. For once, sadly, Scotland is lagging behind the rest. Despite the robust recommendations in the committee’s report, the minister actually said very little about a tagging scheme during the stage 1 debate, so I was a little taken aback that it was not until my amendment on this subject was being debated at stage 2 that the minister came up with the theory that, if that amendment were accepted, the bill would need to be referred to Europe under the technical standards directive, with a consequential delay to the timetable. I am not entirely persuaded by that argument, because I am also advised that notification would need to be made only when the regulations themselves were made. Therefore, it seems to me that the issue is that any scheme under section 22 that was not accepted by the EU would be rendered unworkable and ultra vires. Can the minister say on what possible grounds he thinks the EU might reject such a scheme, given that schemes involving individually numbered and recorded tags are already in operation in England, Wales and Northern Ireland and, indeed, in the Republic of Ireland? Furthermore, if in some extraordinary way the scheme was indeed rejected by the EU, I cannot see how that would matter, because a scheme that does not use numbered and recorded tags is of no use to anybody at all. Therefore, ministers would no longer require the power to create a scheme that is given to them in section 22. I find it very hard to believe that accepting my amendment would constitute any real threat to the bill. I am grateful to the minister for the time that he gave to discuss the issue with me last week, and I will listen carefully to what he has to say. I very much hope that he will at the very least commit to making an individually numbered and recorded tagging scheme the central or principal proposal in the consultation that is to take place later this year. If he can do so, I will happily consider withdrawing amendment 4. On amendment 5, I am afraid that the minister and his advisers have somehow been overtaken by conspiracy theories. For instance, I have been asked whether the amendment is for the policy purposes of controlling trade in the interests of salmon conservation as a whole as opposed to being something fundamentally designed for the carcass tagging scheme in particular. I can say only that I am innocent of all such charges. The amendment is purely and simply about consistency of language. In no section of the 2003 act is there reference to the word “selling” without the addition of the word “buying”. If the amendment is not accepted, section 22 will be the only part of the resultant act that refers to selling without an equal reference to buying. This is no conspiracy; it is simply a request for consistency. I move amendment 4.

I think that the minister said that he would bring the timetable for consultation forward. If that is the case, I appreciate that. He also said that a scheme with individually numbered tags would be an option in the consultation. Will that be the principal option that will be consulted on?

I said that I would listen very carefully to what the minister said, and I did. I am grateful to the minister for taking an intervention. He has said enough to satisfy me that a scheme involving individually numbered and recorded tags will be a central part of the consultation that is to come. Therefore I do not intend to press amendment 4. However, I intend to press amendment 5, when it is the right time to do so, because I think that it is important to have consistency in any legislation. Amendment 4, by agreement, withdrawn. Amendment 5 moved—[Alex Fergusson].

Section 25 allows district salmon fishery boards to be criminalised for failing to monitor the effects of an order. One of the points that I made at stage 2 was that the level of penalty that the Scottish Government is proposing could have a deterrent effect, especially for some individuals who might wish to be involved in one of the smaller boards across the country. The minister was at pains then to point out that the impact could only be on boards as a whole, rather than on any individual. I draw the minister’s attention to section 25, page 28, line 27, which states that “A board which or proprietor who commits an offence” will be impacted—so I beg to differ on that point. My purpose in lodging the amendments is not to protect either a board or an individual. It is simply to seek a degree of proportionality in the level of penalty that is to be applied. A level 4 penalty, as is suggested in the bill, is the lowest that can be applied as an alternative to a custodial sentence; in other words, the alternative would be prison. It is normally applied to offences that pose “more appreciable and culpable risks to health and safety, such as careless driving”, using a mobile phone while driving a heavy goods vehicle or speeding on a motorway. The equivalent custodial sentence is about three months’ imprisonment. With the best will in the world, I do not think that we can equate the failure to monitor the effects of an order with serious misdemeanours such as careless driving and using a mobile phone while driving an HGV. Therefore I appeal to the minister, this last time on an amendment in my name, to let his sensitive side come out and to bring a more realistic degree of proportionality to the crime that we are about to establish. I move amendment 6.

I am so overcome by the minister’s sensitivity that I have nothing further to say, other than to express my gratitude. Amendment 6 agreed to. Amendment 7 moved—[Alex Fergusson]—and agreed to. After section 29

I will be brief. Again, I have no issue with the outcome or intention of amendment 28 or the other amendments in the group. My concern is that the normal scrutiny processes of the committee have been bypassed. I will not rehearse the arguments, as they have already been rehearsed but, for that reason alone, I cannot allow the measures to simply be nodded through.

Sadly, this is the third group of amendments that the Government has chosen to lodge without proper committee scrutiny. I do not need to go over all the arguments. I get the impression that the minister rather regrets the fact that he has had to introduce the measures in that way. Again, we do not disagree with the outcome but, on a point of principle, I simply cannot let the amendments go unopposed.

Surely not.

The passage of the Aquaculture and Fisheries (Scotland) Bill has been a long and arduous process, and I begin my speech at stage 3 in the same way that I began my speech in the stage 1 debate, by thanking the clerks to the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, who have made the process much easier and considerably more enjoyable than it might otherwise have been. We heard and read an enormous amount of evidence at stage 1. If I have one main regret about where we are today, it is that the bill does not do more to reflect some of the serious issues that we all basically agreed on during stage 1. I suspect it was bound to be thus because, as the committee said in its stage 1 report, “the Scottish Government could have been clearer in its consultation document ... in order to better manage understanding and expectations amongst stakeholders and the wider public.” I do not recall the Government ever disagreeing with that statement. The result was that expectations among a range of stakeholders were probably raised to an unachievable level, which is probably not a very helpful way in which to embark on a bill. The minister described the bill to the committee as future proofing the industry in the light of current growth targets and potential new operators coming to Scotland. Although there is much that I welcome in the bill, I fear that those words will almost certainly come back to haunt him. I say that not to disparage in any way the bill or the minister, but to highlight the inherent missed opportunities. For instance, the opportunity to have lanced once and for all the boil that is the publication of sea lice data has been missed. The industry has shifted its position, which I welcome, but I suspect that it has not done so enough to satisfy the non-governmental organisations, other organisations and individuals that have called for it and will continue to do so. To be frank, why should they not? The first voluntary publication of a report on sea lice management and control, which was agreed by the industry and the minister, should have been published last Monday, which was six weeks after the end of the first reporting period. By 1 o’clock this afternoon it had not been published: members can read into that what they will. The issue will not go away with passage of the bill, and Parliament missed a huge opportunity to address it more realistically when it rejected Claudia Beamish’s amendment 14 this afternoon. A properly worked-out tagging scheme should have been in the bill, but I take the minister at his word and look forward to what he will introduce in the consultation. Sadly, the bill will not do very much—if anything—to bring the wild fish and farmed fish sectors closer together, which was a desired aim of the bill. That is a real shame, because a continued stand-off is in no one’s interests—certainly, it is not in the interests of our inshore marine environment. I have no doubt that those issues will have to be returned to—I fear probably sooner rather than later. That said, I want to finish on a positive note. I very much welcome the inclusion at stage 2, as the minister has mentioned, of measures to toughen up actions that can be taken against suspected illegal cockle poachers, principally along the Solway coast. That has been long awaited and is greatly welcomed. Although it will not solve the problem—I believe that only the creation of a legal fishery will achieve that—it heralds a vast improvement on where we are today. I thank the Government for taking the opportunity to introduce those measures on the back of the bill. On that—I hope—positive note, I am pleased to say that we will support the bill at decision time. Despite my reservations about the Government’s introductions of substantive sections at stage 3, which thus bypassed parliamentary scrutiny, I congratulate the minister on steering his first bill through Parliament. If he thinks that I give him a tough time in questions, I say only that I suspect he ain’t seen nothing yet.

Not long after this session of Parliament began, I met Peter Peacock, our former colleague here, who is the part-time policy director of Community Land Scotland. More recently, I met Dr Alison Elliot and Sarah Skerrett in their joint capacity as two thirds of the land reform review group appointed by the Scottish Government to look at the further potential of land reform. To both of those eminent organisations I stressed the importance of any community right to buy policy not just being confined to the Highlands and Islands—as has often been thought to be the case—but being seen to be workable and effective in the south of Scotland as well. On being asked to provide examples of suitable projects within my constituency, I needed to look no further than the most southerly point of Scotland, the Mull of Galloway. As Aileen McLeod has just eloquently pointed out, the mull is a truly magical place. I recommend that it should be on everyone’s bucket list of places to visit while they are still on this earth; they would not regret it for one second. As I said, Aileen McLeod spoke eloquently of why that would be the case. Anyone who has visited the most northerly and southerly points of the United Kingdom—John o’ Groats and Land’s End—will agree, I think, that those iconic landmarks have been pretty well ruined by the no doubt good intentions of private developers over the years. I confess that I have visited neither place, but I am reliably informed by those who have that they are invariably disappointed when they get there. That is most assuredly not the case at the mull, and I feel certain that the successful conclusion of this community buyout project will ensure that it never is. The mull is tailor-made for a community buyout. It is to the immense credit of the whole community, the members of the trust and, indeed, Steve Hardy, who first brought this project to my attention, that the community has seized this opportunity. There have been other attempts in Galloway to persuade communities to undertake buyout projects—some good, some bad; some successful, some unsuccessful. However, when a community ballot achieves a 98 per cent vote in favour of the buyout—as was the case with the mull—it is clear that no persuasion has been required. As Aileen McLeod said, that percentage has been almost matched today by an agreed Scottish land fund grant that amounts to 95 per cent of the total sum that is required. That is a wonderfully welcome decision, and it is the right decision. It will be welcomed by everybody concerned. If I have one concern about the mull, it is a positive one. Aileen McLeod mentioned the wonderful seabird population and the wildlife that can be seen in the area, and the black guillemot predominates at the Mull of Galloway. The Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee has been discussing the national marine plan and the marine protected areas that are part of that plan, and it is a complete mystery to me why the Mull of Galloway has not been included in the plan. In my own cynical way, I can only assume that it is because it is in close proximity to an area that has been designated as a search area for an offshore wind farm—but that is just my suspicion; I am sure that the minister will answer differently. This is a great day and I congratulate Aileen McLeod on bringing the debate to the chamber. I suspect that it is more than a coincidence that the granting of the Scottish land fund money was announced today, but that is nonetheless welcome. I quote the press release that I issued when the result of the ballot was first announced: “Community purchases in other parts of Scotland have usually led to a re-invigorated local economy alongside a real sense of pride in community ownership, and I have every expectation that the same will apply in the case of Mull of Galloway. I warmly congratulate everyone involved in achieving this wonderful result.” I reiterate that this evening. I am proud and very pleased to support Aileen McLeod’s motion.

I am grateful to the cabinet secretary for his announcement. My constituents will greatly welcome it. I have received a number of calls from the wives and partners of farmers and shepherds in my constituency raising concerns about their partners’ mental wellbeing in the wake of the devastating impact of the recent snows on sheep flocks in particular throughout Galloway and other parts of Scotland. Is the cabinet secretary liaising with, or, if he is not, will he liaise with, his ministerial colleagues and the relevant charities and agencies to ensure that the necessary support is available to those people whenever and wherever a need for it is identified?

I know very little about being cosy with Gavin Brown, but I assure Ken Macintosh that Mr Brown did not have to persuade any of his colleagues to bring the motion for debate in the Parliament. We fully support the debate, which is as timely as it is important, given that we are approaching one of my favourite weeks of the year—volunteers week. Everyone who takes part in volunteers week is reminded of just what a debt we all owe to the voluntary and third sector, as Gavin Brown said and others reiterated. During volunteers week every year, I remind anyone who will listen to me that, as John Swinney said, if the third sector ceased to function, there is no way on earth that the state or the private sector—or even both together—could pick up the pieces and continue to deliver the range of services that the third sector provides. The third sector’s work is invaluable and I greatly welcome a debate that focuses on the financial security and sustainability of organisations in the sector. I commend the SCVO for responsibly saying, in the useful briefing paper that it sent us, that “Whilst this debate is about money, SCVO are clear that it is not necessarily about ‘more money’ for the third sector”. The debate is, however, about getting the best value for money. No organisation, however earnest its intentions, can do that when its funding is decided annually or more frequently, often so late in the budget process that bodies are left in the dark as to whether the services that they seek to deliver will be funded at all on 1 April. I am sure that I am not alone in having received, over the years, anguished calls from third sector organisations as the end of a financial year approaches, when they have had to issue redundancy notices to key employees as a precautionary measure, in case hoped-for funding was not forthcoming. No private or public sector enterprise could be expected to operate in such a fashion, and it cannot be right to expect third sector organisations to do so. As has been made clear, the Government’s intentions were entirely honourable when it brought out the joint third sector statement, which sets out guidelines for best practice in funding the sector. The statement says: “As a general rule funders will aim to take a 3-year approach to both grant and contract funding.” As we all know, the best-laid plans of mice and men gang aft agley. It is all too clear that, as the SCVO put it in another briefing paper: “in our experience three year funding is rare to non-existent between local authorities and third sector organisations”. I think that we all agree that that cannot go on, and I would like to think that the cross-party support for the motion that seems to be emerging, and which I think is achievable, might begin the process of changing the situation. Everyone wants the same thing; it is simply a question of having the will to make it happen. In the short time that remains, I will highlight a local situation about which I harbour serious concerns. Almost a third of Scottish Government funding for the third sector next year will be delivered through the third sector interface, which has been established for entirely understandable reasons. In Dumfries and Galloway, the interface has been put in place, but Stewartry Council of Voluntary Service and Nithsdale Council of Voluntary Service—the two most active and effective of four such councils in the region—felt that they had no option other than to exclude themselves from the new structure. I appreciate the cabinet secretary’s involvement in that debate and I understand why he felt that he had no choice other than to press ahead, but I put on record my concerns at the prospect of a third sector interface that excludes about 50 per cent of the organisations involved. That concern aside, I have great pleasure in supporting the motion in Gavin Brown’s name.

Without wishing to argue with what the cabinet secretary says, I point out that the words “rare to non-existent” were not mine but the SCVO’s.

Given the geographic conditions, there are significant differences between the court closures south of the border and those in Scotland in terms of the distance that people will need to travel, but I will come to that point later. The cabinet secretary spoke at great length about the importance of the consultation. What sort of Court Service or Government is happy to reject the findings of 95 per cent of consultation respondents?

Given what the member has just said and the Government’s amendment, which “notes the Scottish Court Service’s belief that the proposals will support a future court structure fit for the 21st century”, why should any member accept the arguments that his party is putting forward about budgetary constraints as anything other than a complete red herring that is designed to divert attention from the real impact of the proposals?

If we are to have a justice centre in every SNP constituency that is affected by the closures—as appears to be the policy that is coming out of the debate—what will be the cost and the impact on the apparent savings that are to be made?

The debate has raised many concerns that, on the whole, accurately reflect those that were raised by the 95 per cent of respondents who took part in the consultation on the proposals, which, as we have heard, will result in the closure of a fifth of Scotland’s sheriff courts and 13 JP courts, in the disestablishment of three further JP courts and in a reduction in the High Court circuit. Whatever else members might think about the proposals, they cannot deny that they will have a major impact on local communities the length and breadth of our country. In anybody’s language, these are massive changes, which, however much the cabinet secretary might wish to argue otherwise, are the choice of the Scottish Government and the Scottish Government alone. It is no secret that I wish much greater responsibility to be devolved to this Parliament. However, the beauty of devolution, even in its current form, is that it allows almost total flexibility as to how our fairly considerable resources are spent to address specific Scottish issues. In this case, the Scottish Government has chosen to implement these massive changes. It did not have to do so—it has chosen to do so, as John Mason has just agreed. In response to one of the many questions that were put to him during topical question time last week, on Tuesday 16 April, the cabinet secretary said: “I think that local justice is important.”—[Official Report, 16 April 2013; c 18531.] I do not think that any of us would disagree with that. I will spend a little time considering the impact that the closures are likely to have on local justice. As many members have pointed out, the biggest impact of the closures will be on the witnesses and others whose willing participation in the process is so vital to ensuring that the justice system actually delivers justice for both the victim and the perpetrators of any crime. I have been involved in a constituency case this year in which a constituent was approached and asked to give evidence against a neighbour who had been charged with benefit fraud. My constituent willingly agreed and looked forward—if that is the right expression—to playing a meaningful part in bringing to justice someone who had allegedly committed a fraudulent act. The problem is that my constituent has to make complex arrangements for another member of the family to take time off from work and travel a considerable distance to look after their elderly and very frail mother whenever a court appearance is scheduled. So far, my constituent has been asked to go, and has gone, to court on four separate occasions, having had to make those difficult arrangements, only to find that the case has been deferred for one legal reason or another. To say that those people are frankly sick to the back teeth with this due process would be to considerably understate their feelings, and the procurator fiscal has been informed that, from now on, the care of the mother will take precedence over any requested court appearance. In short, a once willing participant in the justice system is no longer as willing to participate. The reason why I wanted to share that story with the Parliament is to underline the fact that people already put up with a great deal of inconvenience to play their part in ensuring that justice is done, as Graeme Pearson put it so eloquently in his speech, but that there is clearly a limit beyond which people are not prepared to go. My contention is simply that the closures will bring that limit a lot closer for people in Rothesay, for example, who will have to make an 80-minute journey, partly by ferry, to get to Greenock; for people in Helmsdale, where witnesses will have to travel the 34 miles to Tain; and for people in Kirkcudbright, in my constituency, who will have to travel to Dumfries, which at best is a not inconsiderable 45-minute journey. I point out that the closures of the Kirkcudbright and Annan courts were robustly opposed by Dumfries and Galloway Council, so we should not labour under any illusion that it is just awkward individuals who oppose the proposals. Nothing about the proposals will encourage people to participate in the justice system and thus help to deliver justice to the victims of those who break the law. Another aspect that I want to highlight is the economic effect of the closures. Several members mentioned that, and it came up during the questions last week. It is an aspect to which due cognisance really should be given. The courts bring a significant economic boost to the towns in which they are located, many of which are county towns. As anyone who is even half acquainted with rural Scotland knows full well, these towns survive on fragile economies, and the closures will have a disproportionately negative impact on them. I hope that the Scottish Government has taken that fully into account and that it will continue to do so as it proceeds with its plans, as Lewis Macdonald asked it to do just last week and again today. As Margaret Mitchell said in her opening speech, there is surely something wrong when a Government that is undertaking such an extensive closure programme is simultaneously promoting a victims and witnesses bill that aims to “put victims’ interests at the heart of improvements to the justice system” and “help make what is often the most difficult episode in someone’s life a bit easier.” We would be hard pressed to find a better example of giving with one hand and taking away with the other. It is somewhat tragic that a Government that purports to be a listening Government that believes in consultation has apparently chosen to turn a deaf ear to 95 per cent of the respondents to the consultation. On that evidence, the consultation appears to have been purely a tick-box exercise or, as Iain Gray put it, a complete sham. It appears that the views of the vast majority are simply to be cast aside. We have already seen the centralising of our country’s police force and our fire service. It rather looks as if we are now witnessing the centralisation of our justice system. There have been some really good speeches in the debate, notably from Iain Gray, Roderick Campbell and Alison McInnes. Members from across the parties have suggested that much more thought is needed on the proposals. I entirely endorse that position and I really hope that that cry will be heeded.

Will the minister take an intervention?

Does that mean that I can go back to four minutes, Presiding Officer? The Presiding Officer is shaking her head, so it does not. I am pleased to take part in this short debate, even if it is just as an inadequate deputy for my colleague, Jamie McGrigor, who is unavoidably committed elsewhere this afternoon. The National Trust showed great sense in asking our former Presiding Officer to carry out the review that is behind the legislation that is in front of us. As the convener of the National Trust for Scotland (Governance etc) Bill Committee said, Sir George, in typical style, pulled no punches in undertaking the review. What is emerging as a result is a National Trust that is surely far more fit for purpose and ready to meet the challenges that it will face in the coming years. Given the time constraints, I will focus on one aspect of the bill, which is the provision that addresses co-opted membership of the board of trustees. The 1935 order that established the trust on a statutory footing provides for the board of trustees to co-opt additional members for up to one year at a time in order to gain extra expertise. The Reid review endorsed those arrangements, which it felt were important in continuing “to ensure an appropriate range of experience and skills among trustees.” That must surely be especially true in light of the drastic reduction in the number of trustees that has quite rightly taken place. The bill aims to add to the arrangement by introducing a longer period of co-option to the board of trustees, of up to four years, rather than just one year, as is currently the situation. The trust thinks that the measure will increase the likelihood of securing suitable candidates. I find it hard to disagree with that. The committee was surprised to learn during evidence that the chairman himself, Sir Kenneth Calman, is a co-opted member of the board of trustees. He described the need for co-opted members of the board as a means of ensuring that “we have people who fit the bits that are missing from the board.”—[Official Report, National Trust for Scotland (Governance etc) Bill Committee, 12 March 2013; c 27.] He argued that when he steps down it will be easier to find a replacement chairman if there is greater certainty about the length of the appointment. Again, it is hard to disagree. I understand that nothing currently prevents co-opted members from having their roles renewed each year. However, they can be appointed for only one year at a time. Sir George quite rightly asked why someone with significant skills, experience and reputation would take on a job for only one year. We did not often argue with him when he was our Presiding Officer and it would be unwise to do so now. Sir Kenneth Calman added that due to the size, complexity and geographical extent of the organisation, people need a year just to get up to speed with the board’s work. It is important to note that OSCR welcomed the provision. I understand that the committee is persuaded by the argument that there should be a mechanism that allows co-opted members of the board of trustees to be appointed for a term of up to four years. I note that the board will be able to continue to co-opt members for fewer than four years if it considers that to be appropriate. All that seems eminently sensible. We support not just the provisions in that regard but the bill itself.

As other members have done, I congratulate Nigel Don on securing the debate. I am delighted to take part in it, because I come from very close to Castle Douglas, which is a small market town that still maintains four butchers’ shops on its High Street. In typical Scottish fashion, a great deal of humour emanated from the horsemeat scandal. I particularly liked the campaign that Dumfries and Galloway’s Savour the Flavours initiated. It produced a logo that stated “Neigh horse meat here” to promote the fantastic butchers in my home region. I also understand that an enterprising Edinburgh entrepreneur started to sell horsemeat burgers with the absolute guarantee that they contained no trace of beef whatever. The Scots cannot be beaten when it comes to raising a smile in the face of a serious situation. That was all the more acceptable in this case, as the one certainty that existed throughout the horsemeat debacle was that there was no danger to human health. Nonetheless, the scandal blew a gaping hole in many previously held convictions. It blew a gaping hole in the conviction that the meat—in particular, the processed meat—that we buy from the shelves of our retail outlets is exactly what it says on the label; the conviction that the traceability of our food is foolproof; and the conviction that we have a trustworthy and robust regulatory regime. All those fundamental convictions in respect of consumer confidence have been blown out of the water by the scandal. One of the saddest aspects is that it has left many of our primary producers—our farmers—wondering why they have had to spend fortunes as the first link in the food chain in order to conform to a traceability scheme that they believe to be robust in order that the consumer can have complete faith in the product that he or she purchases. The farmer, as much as the consumer, has been badly let down by the shambles. One of the most amusing results of recent events was the unseemly rush by the major supermarkets to source their meat and meat products locally in the wake of the horsemeat scandal. For years and years, everybody from the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment through to many others who are involved in the industry had been encouraging the supermarkets to support local producers and, through them, to support the local economy. For years and years, those pleas had largely fallen on deaf ears. However, after one scandal—almost certainly caused by the supermarkets’ constant downward pressure on the profit margins of their suppliers—suddenly the supermarkets could not get enough local produce. It was almost laughable. As the motion highlights, throughout the horsemeat scandal and the many other previous food-related scandals, our local butchers have provided a continuing comforting and reassuring high street presence, and there has been a steady expansion of the farmers market network, both of which were superbly represented in the event in the members’ restaurant that Nigel Don hosted yesterday, and have maintained and promoted the superb quality of Scottish produce and kept it available to the consumer. As many others have said, this is about food miles, traceability, sustainability and quality, but it is also, if I may suggest it, about trustworthiness and faith in our local produce. I am delighted to support the motion.

I am sorry if I disappoint Sarah Boyack and others by not talking about the women’s caucus but I probably will not have the time. Like others, I congratulate James Kelly on securing this debate. It comes hot on the heels of Bob Doris’s debate two weeks ago; at least this evening I can say that I have signed the motion before us, unlike Bob Doris’s. However, nothing should be read into that other than woeful inconsistency on my part. I thank the CPA, to which I will be forever grateful and to which I will report more fully on our visit in due course. Two Sundays ago, I attended Sunday worship in Bandawe mission in the Livingstonia synod of northern Malawi. It was a two-and-a-half-hour church service and I would willingly have stayed for another two and a half hours, such was the sheer exuberance and enthusiasm of the packed congregation. Less than 10 years ago, that congregation had had to build a new church because the original brick-built church could no longer contain it and, indeed, it had recently sought permission to split into two because it was growing too fast to be contained within the current structure. I have to ask myself what our own kirk would give for such problems. The service was effectively a thanksgiving service for the life of David Livingstone and the missionaries who followed him. That several of those missionaries are buried alongside their wives and children at Bandawe is a stark testament to and reminder of the hardships and sacrifices that they endured to do what they believed they were put on this earth to do. Throughout the whole service, the name of David Livingstone provoked the most consistent and obvious reaction from that congregation of all ages. It is quite clear that his memory and legacy are still held in the very highest esteem, and I can only imagine that the reasons for that are the characteristics that were highlighted so well in the debate two weeks ago and again by James Kelly and other members this evening: his hatred of slavery and his determination to end it; his belief that education and commerce would provide the route to freedom; and his preaching of Christianity in a way that sought to persuade and encourage instead of his forcing his beliefs on an unwilling audience. David Livingstone was clearly a man of great understanding and enormous sympathy who empathised with those with whom he worked to such an extent that he earned not their acquiescence but their heartfelt love. That love has passed down through the generations and is as alive today as it has been through the past two centuries since Livingstone’s birth. At Bandawe mission, there is a nursery, a primary school, a secondary school for girls, a special school for the deaf and a medical clinic, all of which provide as good a quality of service as is possible in conditions that we would scarcely believe unless we saw them for ourselves—and I really mean that. Given the paucity of those conditions, what is delivered is truly remarkable; it is also the most incredible testament to David Livingstone’s life, beliefs and, indeed, passions and the ethos that he taught and personified. I felt incredibly humbled to be in that location just two days before Livingstone’s 200th birthday. It was an immense privilege to be there, just as it is to relay that experience to the chamber this evening.

I am pleased take part in the debate. The subject is an important one. It will impact not only on this session of Parliament but on the next three as well. The policies and proposals in the report that we are talking about take us up to the year 2027—a long time hence—and some of the scrutiny of the policy area seemed like something of a lottery at times. That surely makes it all the more important to be as robust as possible in any report of this nature. All the committees have delivered suitably robust reports on this occasion, and I commend the minister for the changes that he has already committed to making. The Scottish Government has rightly earned plaudits from far and wide on account of the carbon abatement targets that it has set. Government ministers are fond of calling them world leading, and why should they not? In many ways, they are world leading. In the previous debate on these issues, I said that the Government could easily have set less challenging targets that were easier to achieve but that it was wise not to go down that route. Instead, with the backing of Parliament, it has set challenging targets and gained a lot of good publicity for doing so. The only problem was that the Government failed to meet the first target that was set. During the previous debate, the minister shifted some of the blame for that to the UK Government, but more accurately he then focused on the truly dreadful winter conditions of 2010 as the primary reason for the failure. Having just returned last Saturday from more than 80° in Malawi to minus quite a lot in Dumfries and Galloway, I am tempted to suggest that the minister might need to dust off those arguments again when this year’s results are eventually published. There is a serious point here. Given the vagaries of the Scottish climate, I find myself asking whether it is realistic to expect any Government to “ensure Scotland achieves each annual target, as well as the overall emissions reduction set out in the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009”, as stated in the very first paragraph of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee report. I suspect that it is not realistic but it should certainly remain our constant aim to do so, even if it necessitates the setting of challenging targets that run the risk of not being met, as those annual targets undoubtedly do. I commend the Government for sticking to its guns in that regard.

Of course one should factor in as much as possible, but we cannot factor in how cold a winter is going to be. We are always at risk of freak weather conditions. Although it is absolutely right that we should try to take that risk into account, it is inevitable that, from time to time, conditions will arise that give us an even greater challenge to achieving the targets—but that is not to say that we should not try to achieve them all the time. It is difficult not to harbour some concerns about how the Government proposes to carry out its plans. As witness after witness in committee and speaker after speaker today have said, the Government’s strategy is strong on proposals but a bit short on policies. In others words, it tends to be high on aspiration but low on action. I will spend a little time on two areas of RPP2 that fall within the remit of the committee on which I serve: forestry and agriculture. Our committee report rightly welcomes the forestry planting targets, and I am happy to agree with that. However, I raised my concerns at committee about whether those targets can be met. I do not think that it reads well that the Government has switched its planting target from 10,000 hectares per year to 100,000 hectares over 10 years. I know that the final outcome will be exactly the same, but the ability to scrutinise progress towards that outcome will be greatly diminished by the change and I rather regret it. It looks to me—and, I suspect, to neutral onlookers—that that is the action of a Government that is seeking to cover its back in a policy area in which it is increasingly unsure of itself and with a sector that is increasingly uneasy about its direction of travel. That is not a good place to be, especially given that forestry has a huge part to play in achieving our abatement targets. As our report highlights, the situation with agriculture is even more concerning. It is absolutely right to point out that the levels of abatement and reduction being sought from the agricultural sector will depend on significant levels of behaviour change. Behaviour change is, however, an inexact science, particularly perhaps in the agricultural sector, so an awful lot is being taken on trust. That might not matter, were it not for “the lack of information and detail regarding the proposals, which account for significant volumes of abatement in the later years of the draft RPP2.” Those later years are the years 2024 to 2027, and the figures given for agriculture in those three years exactly mirror the assumed abatement levels from transport in those same three years. When we combine the two figures, we end up with 11 per cent of the total abatement forecast for the whole period—surely an unwise level to commit to in what is essentially a pretty vague aspiration that will only be delivered after 2024, if at all. I have some difficulty in agreeing that that is the proper basis for a policy of this importance, and it should concern all of us that the back-loading that Claire Baker referred to is quite as evident as it is. I will highlight one factor over which we have little control, yet which could render all of these proposals almost unachievable. As many people from outside this Parliament—and from within it—have told us, unless the EU moves to emission reduction targets of 30 per cent, only one of the Scottish Government’s targets can be met. The good news is that the UK Government fully endorses a move to 30 per cent and I hope that both our Governments will pressurise the EU on the matter at every available opportunity. If they can do that, it will achieve two things: it will make RPP2 doable, which we all want, and it will prove that, as in so many other things, we are indeed better together.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to encourage the use of air source heat pumps. (S4O-01921)

I acknowledge those steps. However, why is it the case in Scotland that planning permission is required for the installation of air source heat pumps when it is not required across the rest of the United Kingdom and has not been for some time? That requirement adds a cost of at least £150 to each installation and can act only as a major disincentive to householders, social landlords and others who are seeking to decrease their carbon footprint. When will the Government remove the requirement and catch up with the rest of the UK?

Will the cabinet secretary acknowledge the effectiveness of Dumfries and Galloway’s Savour the Flavours initiative? Does he agree that that organisation provides a good example of how a local food-related network can operate? Will he give an update to Parliament on the progress of the think local initiative, which he announced last October but of which not an awful lot has been heard since?

CAP reform is invariably traumatic. That is an inevitable and undeniable fact, which is due largely to the incredibly difficult task of trying to devise a common system of agricultural support across 27 different member states whose agricultural systems vary almost as widely as it is possible to imagine. It is a system that has to support subsistence farmers in southern and eastern Europe who have perhaps just a handful of sheep and a couple of cows, and the UK farmer with perhaps 1,000 ewes, 200-odd head of beef cattle and a couple of hundred acres of arable land. To have such a system in place at all is hard enough, but to reform it to the satisfaction of all member states, never mind the satisfaction of each individual farmer, has to be nigh on impossible. The fact is that reforming the CAP will result, as I think Claire Baker said, in winners and losers not just among the member states but especially among the farming sector within each member state. That is particularly true for Scottish farmers under the current reforms. As we have already heard, the reason for that is in essence the change from historic-based payments to area-based payments, which any basic calculation shows will tend to shift huge amounts of financial support from the south and east of the country to the north and west—that is, from the most productive parts to the least productive parts of the country. Whatever measures are introduced to mitigate the more extreme impacts of the changes, there will be winners and losers—of that we can be certain. As previous CAP reforms have taught us, farmers are remarkably good at adapting to change that is put in front of them. I have complete faith that our agricultural sector will adapt to the changes and challenges that the CAP reform will eventually introduce. However, one thing that every farmer needs to know before he or she can plan for such changes is how they will affect their business. That is why I think that the Liberal Democrat motion is absolutely right to highlight the action that the Welsh Assembly Government has been able to take to give Welsh farmers the information that they need to prepare for the changes. Surely that is the constructive, proactive approach that the sector requires if it is to be fully prepared for and supported through the changes that are to come. However, what we get from the Scottish Government, if its amendment to the motion is anything to go by, is not a constructive or proactive approach but yet another whinge at the UK Government, as if the debate were just another opportunity to open up a divide that does not have to exist and should not do so.

I am coming to that. My amendment, which I must say, for Claire Baker’s benefit, is largely self-explanatory, shows that members on the Conservative benches are very willing to work with the Scottish Government to secure the best possible outcome for Scottish agriculture from the reforms. I have already made and will continue to make representations to the UK Government about moving towards internal convergence and achieving the target rate of €196 per hectare by 2020. There is a perfectly good case for doing that—simplistic or not—and for making those arguments, but the Scottish Government is making it extremely difficult for us to do so. I urge ministers to drop their use of aggressive terminology, of which the Government amendment is a perfect example, so that we can all genuinely try to work together to achieve the best possible outcome for Scottish farming. The Scottish Government must consider what it can do during the negotiations, as well as continually blaming others for what has not been achieved. It is far from blameless in some of the problems that the sector faces. It was not the UK Government that dramatically reduced the funding that it puts into the co-financing of the SRDP. It is not the UK Government’s fault that the SNP has not lived up to its manifesto commitment to “work with communities to explore the creation of new National Parks” in Scotland. It is not the UK Government’s fault that the whole structure of forestry grants is now so overly bureaucratic that many people who have spent their whole lives working in the private forestry sector now wish that they were not doing so. I commend the Liberal Democrats for lodging the motion, which we will support. I wish that the Scottish Government had lodged an amendment that we could support, because that would have implied a real intention on the part of the Scottish Government to work with all members as the reforms are thrashed out. I fear that the Government’s priorities incline towards the divisive rather than the positive, and I cannot possibly support an amendment that takes for granted that an independent Scotland will automatically become the 28th member state of the European Union. The jury is very much out on that, just as it is on the motives that lie behind the Scottish Government’s amendment to the motion. We are keen to work with the Scottish Government; I wish that I was convinced that the Scottish Government is keen to work with us. I move amendment S4M-05898.1, to insert at end: “; believes that Scottish farmers should receive the same EU payments per hectare as their counterparts in the rest of the UK following reform of CAP, to ensure that Scottish farmers are not left at any competitive disadvantage; urges the Scottish Government to work constructively with the UK Government to move toward internal convergence across the UK to ensure that all British farmers are paid equally, and believes that all governments should work toward the proposed target rate of €196 per hectare by 2020, in accordance with the EU budget agreement.”

Will the member take an intervention?

Like others, I congratulate Bob Doris on securing the debate. However, I apologise to him and other members because I have not signed his motion, which I did not realise until this afternoon. I thought that I had signed it, but I will put that right, albeit that it is a question of better late than never. I am delighted to take part in the debate, a mere six days short of the 200th anniversary of the birth of surely one of the most remarkable men in Scotland’s history, which abounds with remarkable figures. As we have heard, David Livingstone was born in Blantyre into the most humble of surroundings and by the age of 10 was working up to 12 hours a day in the cotton mills, with school lessons to be attended in the evenings. It surely says everything about this extraordinary man that his thirst for knowledge overcame his physical fatigue to such an extent that he became a voracious reader at a young age. Despite his father’s strong belief that theology and science should not be mixed, he decided to study medicine and theology in Glasgow, and eventually decided to become a missionary doctor. Of course, it was in that capacity that he found himself posted, in 1845, to the edge of the Kalahari desert in southern Africa. He soon became convinced that he had a mission to reach new peoples in the interior of the vast continent of Africa, to introduce them to Christianity and, as members said, to free them from slavery. His anti-slavery stance was notable in its robustness for the day. It was that firm belief that inspired and encouraged him to undertake the explorations across Africa for which he rightly became famous. He discovered the Victoria falls in 1855, and in the following year he became the first European to cross the width of southern Africa. What I find remarkable is that, unlike other expeditions of the time, which almost always involved large numbers of soldiers and other armed personnel, for security reasons, Livingstone’s expeditions always consisted of a small number of people, who clearly constituted no threat to anyone. I cannot help but think that that is why he was usually greeted with enthusiasm and respect by local chiefs and tribes, whom he respected in turn—every bit as much as they did him. Livingstone lectured on and extolled the virtues of Christianity, but, again unlike other explorers and missionaries of the time, he did not try to impose Christianity on people against their will if he met with resistance. There is no doubt that that explains the reverence with which he is remembered across Africa to this day, which Maureen Watt, in particular, mentioned. When the Malawian high commissioner to the UK, His Excellency Mr Bernard Sande, visited the Scottish Parliament recently, Sarah Boyack and I had the great pleasure of meeting him. Ms Boyack and I will visit Malawi later this week and next week on behalf of the CPA Scotland branch; I thank Maureen Watt for her kind words and we will take the good wishes of the Parliament with us. His Excellency told us that he had visited the David Livingstone centre in Blantyre the day before, and that he had been virtually transfixed by his surroundings, to the extent that he could hardly bear to tear himself away. Indeed, I understand that he overstayed his scheduled visit by more than an hour. He was clearly deeply moved by the experience. The deep feelings for David Livingstone that people across Africa still have are partly why I am so pleased to take part in this debate. Commemorations of this nature are not always about a part of our history that does us great justice—if we are being perfectly honest—but any commemoration of David Livingstone is a commemoration of everything that is best about Scotland’s pioneering past. I particularly welcome the Scottish Government’s intention to fund a bicentenary scholarship programme. David Livingstone realised at an early age that education and knowledge produce the only real way to loosen the chains of poverty and slavery, so it is fitting that we should celebrate the 200th anniversary of his birth by seeking to further that empowerment, even in a small way, through a scholarship programme. As it says in the motion, the programme will help “the long-term continuation of Livingstone’s legacy”— a legacy of which we can surely all be immensely proud.

The minister’s statement, for which I thank him, suggests that the new body will have a much wider remit than the current Food Standards Agency in Scotland. Given that and the fact that the Government has reduced its contribution to the running of the FSA, I want to press the minister a little more for any detail that he can give on the new body’s likely costs.

I am not absolutely persuaded that the need to inform the public is as important as the minister suggests, although I accept that that is desirable. However, I am persuaded that there is a need for science and academia to have a considerable amount of farm-by-farm data in order to monitor the expansion of the industry. Would the minister care to comment on that?

To address all the issues and concerns that the bill embraces in a mere six minutes is an almost impossible task, so my remarks must be focused on just a few of the topics that it covers. Despite the time constraint, I cannot begin my contribution to the debate without thanking the clerks to the committee for the outstanding job that they did in the preparatory work and the publication of the report, which they undertook with patience, humour and no little expertise. The clerks and, indeed, members of the Scottish Parliament information centre have made a monumental task for the committee’s members a great deal easier than it might otherwise have been. It has been a monumental task, which has involved an equally monumental amount of written and oral evidence, through which we have had to wade and which, I believe, still leaves quite a few questions hanging unanswered. I reiterate what other members have said: our deliberations have not been made easier by the very public tit-for-tat battle of words between the aquaculture industry and the wild fishery sector that took place during our evidence gathering and which is on-going in various national journals and newspapers today. Although that has not made our task any easier, the degree of agreement among the committee on many of the basic issues that the bill deals with has been impressive. The two items on which I want to make particular comment were not in the original bill. The first of those is the contentious matter of publication of sea lice data, which has already been mentioned. It would be fair to say that the committee heard from a large number of organisations that believe that radical changes to publication of such data are imperative, and one that does not. Over the past months, I have become more and more convinced by the views of the many, and less and less convinced by the view of the one, which seems too often to state that the sea lice issue is not an issue at all. However, it has to be an issue. Ministers quite rightly say that they take decisions and act only on the advice of the best available science. Therefore, it cannot be right that the authors of that best science cannot access farm-by-farm data on an issue as important as sea lice numbers. In response to the recommendation that the committee made in paragraph 204 of its report, that “the Ministerial Group on Aquaculture gives careful consideration to how farm-by-farm sea lice data can be made available to inform scientific research”, the minister stated that “we already have access to the information on sea-lice levels that we need to meet our current regulatory requirements, as well as access to industry data to undertake and inform our scientific work as required”, and he repeated that in his opening remarks. That concerns me, because in a report that Marine Scotland science published recently called “Development and assessment of a biophysical dispersal model for sea lice”—on a study at Loch Linnhe—which was commissioned to help to establish more effective farm management areas, the authors state that they had to make a fairly major assumption, which is surely not the best thing on which to base a scientific paper, because “actual sea lice data from each farm site are not available”. At the very least, it is obvious that there is a considerable discrepancy there. I cannot help but feel that it is vital for the industry—which the Scottish Government is encouraging to expand very rapidly indeed—to make public, or at least to make available to our scientists and academics, the data that they need to monitor safely the sustainability of that expansion. I give notice that I therefore intend to lodge amendments at stage 2 to explore how that can best be achieved. I heard what the minister said in his speech, and I undertake to monitor carefully any initiatives that the industry or the Government develop in the meantime. As the convener so accurately forecast, I cannot possibly discuss the bill without making reference to a naturally occurring species in our marine environment: the humble cockle. Reference to this shellfish is not included in the bill, but ministers will be aware of my long-standing determination to see a cockle fishery re-established on the Solway—something that I believe is achievable, and which could be of great benefit to our local economy. I very much welcome the steps that Marine Scotland is undertaking to bring that about, even as we speak, and I greatly welcome the Government’s willingness to strengthen during stage 2 current laws in relation to illegal cockle fishing. As I think the minister mentioned, as long as illegal cockling takes place—with the large amounts of money in cockles, the temptations are huge—there will not be a legal fishery. That has been the case for too long on the Solway, so I highly commend the Government’s actions and intentions in that regard. The bill also touches on wild fisheries—in particular, the governance of district salmon fishery boards. Although the Government is leaving much of the detail of management of wild fisheries to the review to which the minister referred, I have concerns about some aspects of the bill’s impact on the work of the boards, which I seek also to address at stage 2, specifically in relation to the suggested publication of notices for certain proposed applications and to the scale of the penalties that have been suggested for the failure of boards to monitor the effects of an order. There is a great deal more to the bill than I have been able to cover in the time that has been available to me, and my colleague Jamie McGrigor will expand on some aspects. For now, I commend the committee’s report to Parliament, and I assure Parliament that the Conservatives will support the general principles of the Aquaculture and Fisheries (Scotland) Bill this evening.

Will Stewart Stevenson take a brief intervention?

Does the member agree that the best way to prevent illegal shellfish, and particularly cockle, fishing is to encourage legal fishing activity? The more that can be done to bring about an open cockle fishery on the Solway, the less likelihood there will be of illegal activity.

As a newcomer to this annual debate, I will stick to the motion and—although I know that she will be disappointed to hear this—I will resist the temptation to respond to the cabinet secretary’s opening remarks; they had no bearing whatever on the content of the report, which focuses solely on Parliament’s EU priorities for its committees. To my mind, the one thing that the debate has clarified and highlighted is the absolute necessity for us to keep our eye firmly on the European ball, given the very high percentage of our work that emanates from the EU. Last year—I think the convener reiterated the same figure for this year—the Parliament received notification of up to 20 European issues every week. The other fact that we must continue to recognise is the cross-cutting nature of the issues. The fact that the European and External Relations Committee’s report includes annexed reports from seven different committees—with one absentee, for understandable reasons—highlights the extent of that cross-cutting nature. As a member of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, I am very aware of the impact and importance of European policy to our area. It completely dominates our agenda, as is shown by the fact that while no other committee identified more than nine bullet-pointed priorities in its annex to the report, the RACCE Committee identified 22. In highlighting that, I am not in any way criticising other committees; I am seeking simply to underline the impact of European measures on the RACCE Committee’s agenda. The RACCE Committee’s agenda is as wide as it is varied. It includes on-going reform of the common agricultural policy and common fisheries policy—neither of which are easy and both of which require Governments at all levels to engage actively and early with the European Union if we are to get the best possible results for Scotland, which I think everyone in the chamber wants to achieve. These are not words that I ever thought I would hear myself say, but I agree entirely with our former colleague George Lyon MEP, who stated that our priorities on CAP reform must be to ensure that the needs of Scotland are taken into account in the final package. I particularly agree with the statement in his response to the European and External Relations Committee that we “need more flexibility on the transition from historic to area-based payments and a fairer distribution of both direct payments and rural development funding.” We must all work together to achieve that aim.

Do I have time, Presiding Officer.

In that case, I cannot. I am sorry, cabinet secretary. Fiona Hyslop rose Okay. Very quickly.

I give the cabinet secretary one assurance: this Government will have the Scottish Conservative Party’s absolute support in trying to achieve in the negotiations the best deal, as we agree it to be, for Scotland. The responses of all our MEPs to the report highlight a number of areas on which continuous active engagement by the Scottish Government, its civil servants and the Parliament is essential. Ian Hudghton warns of dangers in negotiation in the European maritime and fisheries fund. Alyn Smith highlights the potential for Scotland’s involvement in the €80 billion research and innovation programme. Others give similar examples. The message is absolutely clear: if we are to ensure the best possible outcome for Scotland in all policy areas, the Government and its agencies and Parliament have to be in there early, lobbying from the word go and ensuring that we get the best possible deal. I hope that the European and External Relations Committee continues to scrutinise all that activity as closely as possible. I commend Stuart McMillan for his measured speech. I absolutely agree that it would be wrong if Scotland had to take a disproportionate reduction in structural funding. We must all work together; we must continue, through devolution, to work with the UK Government and the EU to ensure that we achieve the best results for Scotland.

During earlier discussions and debate on the issue, the cabinet secretary was at pains to point out that she could not direct NMS towards any particular course of action, although she wanted to ensure that Dumfries and Galloway was given what she referred to as a better offering from NMS than the simple closure of the national museum of costume. How will she measure the eventual offering that NMS proposes? What steps will and can she take to make certain that a better offering is delivered?

I thank the cabinet secretary for the copy of his statement. Understandably, he highlighted in the statement the fine qualities of Scotch beef. However, the problem is surely not whether the beef is Scottish, English, Irish, Welsh or from anywhere else or whether it is 100 per cent beef when it leaves the farm; the problems come later in the chain. Obviously, the considerable reduction in food safety testing and in the number of environmental health officers is a major cause of concern that must be addressed, but the real issue is, as the cabinet secretary said, the consumer’s loss of trust in what was supposed to be a robust food chain. Does the cabinet secretary agree that the supermarkets’ relentless grinding down of the prices that they pay their suppliers inevitably leads to those suppliers trying almost anything to make a profit? Given that food labelling and food safety are already within the remit of the FSA in Scotland, what difference does the cabinet secretary think that a stand-alone Scottish FSA could make in situations like the current one? What assurances can he give that the regulatory changes that will inevitably be introduced on the back of this fiasco will be of a sufficiently permanent nature to restore the trust that has been lost, and will not be allowed just to fall into disuse, as has happened too often in the past?

11. To ask the Scottish Government what measures are being taken to improve access to GP services. (S4O-01779)

I am grateful for that response, but I am sure that the cabinet secretary is aware that the number of general practices has continued to decrease since 2007 and in Scotland has fallen below 1,000 for the first time. Many GP surgeries do not even have a website, and I am sure that the cabinet secretary is aware of moves in other parts of the United Kingdom to ensure that patients can arrange repeat prescriptions, book appointments and obtain test results online by 2015. What steps is the Scottish Government taking to encourage Scottish general practices to expand that type of activity particularly in rural areas, where I think it would be very helpful?

No matter what the future holds—let us face it: we have heard all that before—the fact is that, under the reform proposals, basic payments are likely to be capped at €300,000, with banded reductions within that. Does the cabinet secretary share my slight concerns on how that might impact on employment at some of Scotland’s larger farms? I understand that there might be a provision for the reductions to be reduced if they were to have an impact on employment. Does the cabinet secretary share that view? Will he make representations to the UK Government to ensure that it, too, shares that view?

The minister will be aware of a recent initiative by Tesco to increase the amount that is paid to its suppliers for beef and pork. Does he accept that the major retailers, as well as Government, have a large part to play in ensuring that farmers get a fair price for what they produce?

I will be quite brief because members have already said some of the things that I wanted to say. However, I want to touch on a couple of issues. The first is something that almost every speaker has mentioned, which is the dissatisfaction with the news coverage that we get at present. We need to be a little bit careful about the direction in which we point the finger for the cause of that dissatisfaction. As a constituency member, I have to agree with something that Elaine Murray said. Many of my constituents, particularly those in the east of my constituency, are interested in what happens in Carlisle and Cumbria. It would be wrong to write that off as a reason for having to look at the matter. It is important to look at the research, which showed clearly that the dissatisfaction exists largely because it is felt that the area that is covered in the current offering is too big. The cause of the dissatisfaction is the amount of local news—for Dumfries and Galloway or the Borders—that is contained within the wider offering of ITV regional news. We need to be clear about that. The amount of national news is not a key driver of satisfaction. That leads me on to the issue of real choice, which the motion mentions. I grew up on the west coast of Scotland, where we could get only BBC Northern Ireland. I missed many punchlines of jokes and high spots of films because of cuts to newsflashes in Northern Ireland during the awful troubles, which are, fortunately, largely behind us. The current situation is therefore a lot better than the situation then, despite there being room for improvement. We must recognise that the Ofcom research showed quite clearly that the respondents believed that the BBC’s news coverage acts as quite a good complement to the ITV offering. Jim Hume referred to that. People see the two together. If they want national news, they will possibly go to the BBC rather than to the ITV offering. Therefore, viewers have a choice, particularly when we add in the increasing number of people who watch through digital channels and online systems and programmes. The desire for much more local coverage is not in doubt. I, too, remember the debate back in October 2011—I think that it was then—when we discussed exactly that matter. Chic Brodie showed clearly what advances are being made in local stations and how people are taking matters into their own hands. I very much welcome that. I also welcome the fact that Ofcom and ITV are apparently working together to try to address concerns. Maria Miller told them to do so—I welcome that, too. If some of Joan McAlpine’s suggested options to improve that are workable, I welcome them, because there is a genuine issue. The one thing that shines through the debate that is quite clear and on which everybody agrees is that the vast majority of participants and constituents in our part of Scotland have called for a return to the footprint and, indeed, the format of the pre-merger ITV Border news. I strongly endorse that. If something like that comes out of the discussions, I warmly welcome them.

The minister was right to highlight the importance of the whole Parliament remaining committed to achieving the challenging targets. I agree with that entirely. However, he suggested that progress would have been much better if it had not been for “key powers being reserved to the Westminster Parliament.” That was odd, because he then rightly blamed the adverse weather for the failure to reach the targets. Does he agree that, on this subject of all subjects, such mischief-making statements do little to encourage the cross-party consensus that I think we all agree is important to achieve the targets?

14. To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to encourage new business start-ups. (S4O-01722)

I am grateful for the minister’s response, but I must question the effectiveness of the Government’s policies. I note that in the third quarter of last year business start-ups fell by 16 per cent and that that had been the third quarter in a row in which there was a fall in Scotland. Given that I am sure the minister agrees that economic recovery depends to a large extent on new business start-ups, what further steps is the Scottish Government considering to reverse the current trend?

Of the many definitions of biodiversity that I have come across, the most accurate is this: “the degree of variation of life forms within a given species, ecosystem or planet.” In other words, I think it is what used to be called quite simply the balance of nature. Scottish Environment LINK put it rather more dramatically, though, in a manner that certainly focuses the mind on the importance of this debate on this subject, when it termed biodiversity as “the foundation of all life on earth”. Until very recently in our planet’s evolution, nature made a pretty good job of balancing herself. Since time immemorial, species have become extinct through natural evolutionary processes, but the overall balance of nature has generally been maintained and the sustainability of the planet was never in doubt. However, evolutionary development and the demands of one species in particular—mankind—have now accelerated that natural process to such a degree that, according to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, by 2010 60 per cent of the world’s ecosystems were either degraded or being used unsustainably; 75 per cent of fish stocks were being overexploited or significantly depleted; and 75 per cent—three quarters—of the world’s genetic diversity of agricultural crops had been lost, worldwide, in only 20 years. More than 100,000km2 of the world’s tropical forests are still cleared every year. When one puts all those figures together and looks at others—many of which have been mentioned today—one would be entirely forgiven for echoing the words of Private Frazer in “Dad’s Army” in forecasting that “We’re a’ doomed.” Among all that potential doom and gloom there is, however, surely positive news. It has to be positive that there is broad agreement across the world that we simply cannot go on like this and that something has to be done. Indeed, in this decade of biodiversity and through the Aichi targets, there is now broad agreement not only that something has to be done, but on what has to be done. The question is how we in Scotland play our part in reversing the worldwide trend of biodiversity loss. We can do so only by focusing on our own efforts. To do that we must begin by recognising that those efforts have, to date, failed to meet the targets that we have set. As has been pointed out, we are by no means alone in that failure, and it would have been entirely wrong to have set unambitious targets in order to avoid possible failure—that would have been the wrong way to look at the situation. However, it is important to start with a recognition that our 2010 targets were not met, as we turn our attention to meeting new targets for 2020, which is now only 7 years away. If we are to meet the latest targets, we must first understand why we did not meet the previous ones. I was struck by the number of representations that were made to us prior to the debate that called for the biodiversity strategy to be rolled out across all Government departments—as Claire Baker mentioned—and for all Government policy to conform to it. That has to make sense if there is to be any degree of joined-up thinking on how we tackle the issue. I found the minister’s opening remarks to be encouraging in that regard. Sadly, there are too many current examples of absence of joined-up thinking. I looked at the Government’s proposals on marine protected areas with some interest, and specifically on what might be done to protect our seabird population—a population for which Scotland is widely renowned, despite many species being in steep decline. Although I happily acknowledge that within the Scottish Government’s proposals protection is given to seabird breeding areas, that seems to be virtually meaningless unless protection is also given to the feeding areas that those species rely on to sustain them. What is the point of protecting the area where a species breeds if you do not simultaneously protect the areas in which it feeds?

I am happy to acknowledge that, but there are wider issues on which we will be able to focus as discussions proceed. I accept what the minister says. I find that some of the lack of joined-up thinking tends to fly in the face of the Scottish Government’s correctly stated intention in its biodiversity consultation on the 2020 challenge to “support healthy, well-functioning ecosystems.” That is an absolutely correct aim that we must all work towards. One of the EU’s six targets is to ensure tighter controls on invasive alien species—which Rob Gibson mentioned—and we have a lot of ground to make up on that front. I look out on to Loch Ken in Galloway from my home. That is a loch whose biodiversity has been almost completely destroyed by the frighteningly rapid and completely uncontrolled expansion of North American signal crayfish. Ironically, an ecosystem has been virtually wiped out in the Galloway and southern Ayrshire biosphere, which is now recognised by the United Nations Education, Scientific and Cultural Organization as a “new way to demonstrate good nature conservation”. I have to say that that is a slightly odd way of demonstrating it. Of course, the problem is not just about crayfish; grey squirrels, Japanese knotweed and the imported trees and shrubs from which so many diseases come—the latest being ash dieback—have all impacted on our biodiversity. All those examples and many more suggest that our record is not terribly impressive and can be only improved—as it must be. I greatly look forward to the committee’s work on a huge issue that goes far beyond party politics and which is, in fact, about the future of our country and our planet, and the sort of country that we will bequeath to our children, our grandchildren and future generations. I am very struck by a quotation from the Senegalese conservationist, Baba Dioum, who said: “In the end, we will conserve only what we love, we will love only what we understand, we will understand only what we are taught”. I suggest that we still have quite a lot of teaching to do. So far, we have made a bit of a mess of things. Let us hope that we do much better this time around.

Will the minister give way?

I thought that he might be grateful. I referred to seabirds in my speech. I hope that I did not mislead the chamber by saying that they were given some measure of protection in the Government’s proposals on marine protected areas because, of course, they will largely be covered by special protection areas rather than MPAs. However, my understanding is that, even when the special protection areas are designated, it is unlikely that we will fulfil the obligations under the birds directive to protect the feeding hotspots on which those species rely. Do the Government’s proposals to protect seabirds go far enough?

14. To ask the Scottish Government what training is given to teachers to help pupils with additional support needs. (S4O-01692)

I am grateful for that response and indeed acknowledge and recognise that some progress has been made in this area in recent times. Nonetheless, the evidence overwhelmingly points to the fact that successful detection of learning difficulties in the very earliest years makes the biggest difference to children’s life chances. To that end, is the minister able to tell me what additional resources might be available specifically for nursery and primary 1 teachers?

I wonder whether the First Minister is aware that Swift Horsman Ltd, a high-quality joinery provider, went into receivership just two days ago, resulting in 40 redundancies in the town of Dalbeattie in my constituency. Coming on top of 12 redundancies at BSW Timber in the same town, this loss of 52 jobs is certainly not a welcome Christmas present to that rural community where alternative employment is far from plentiful. What will the First Minister’s Government do to ensure that all available support and advice is given to the affected employees, particularly at this time of year, and what assistance can and will the Government give to the receivers, PricewaterhouseCoopers, in searching for a buyer for Swift Horsman’s now-empty premises?

Can Richard Lyle tell us of anything that he has heard while he has been on the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee that has pointed him to make such an extraordinary statement?

Annabelle Ewing is not trying to be helpful at all.

As Tavish Scott said, it has been a largely positive debate, with one or two exceptions. On that basis, I will try to keep my remarks positive. Like other members, I am delighted that the Parliamentary Bureau managed to find time—again—to include this important debate in our schedule. I am even more delighted than I was originally, because it has given us all a chance to enjoy what I might call the aqua-reminiscences of Stewart Stevenson, which is always a pleasure. In a strange way, it is quite fitting that the week’s delay has resulted in our having the debate immediately after yesterday’s debate on the role of scientific evidence and advice in public policy. It seems to me that the balance of scientific evidence and advice that comes from our fishing industry—which is an industry that has worked, and continues to work, commendably closely with the scientific community—would suggest that we are doing a lot of things right here in Scotland, but that the resulting evidence and advice that is available is, in effect, ignored by our masters in Brussels, who seem determined to impose a centralised management regime on an industry for which the term “localism” was surely coined. The Rodust amendment, to which Angus MacDonald referred, is a prime example of the ill-thought-out solutions that seem to come out of Brussels. If ever there was an industry sector in the EU that demands local management, it must be the fishing sector. Roderick Campbell spoke very well on the issue. If there is one single outcome that I want from the on-going attempts to reform the common fisheries policy, it is the adoption of the proposal for regionalisation of fisheries management, not just as a meaningless phrase but as a genuine reality. I do not want to sound complacent, but it seems to me that the Scottish fishing sector has a pretty fair idea of what needs to be done to ensure the sustainability of our stocks and is perfectly capable of delivering that. However, the sector seems to be increasingly prevented from doing that by the on-going wranglings in Europe, which many members have mentioned and which Tavish Scott described—last week and this week—as the lunatics taking over the asylum. Year on year, Europe seems to deliver the polar opposite of common sense as a way of managing our fisheries sustainably. Now, the same lunatics seem to be engaged in a new power struggle over who has the effective decision-making power to enable a new fisheries management plan to be put in place. Given that having such a plan in place is vital, it surely beggars belief that it could be blown out of the water at this stage by a sort of internal European trench warfare that has nothing to do with the sustainability of fish stocks, with fishing fleets or—as many members have said, and perhaps most important—with those who man vessels and the onshore industry that depends on them. Presiding Officer, if you wrote all that down as the script of a play, people would say that you had taken fantasy a step too far and that it was entirely beyond belief. I often think that that is exactly the case. As Jamie McGrigor highlighted in the amendment that is in his name, the Scottish industry has in recent years spearheaded a range of conservation initiatives that include technical modifications to fishing gear and real-time area closures, which have reduced discards and aided stock recovery for a wide range of species. To those achievements I add the impact of the catch quota trials, which many members have mentioned. They have had huge success in reducing discards. However, the worth of all that tremendous effort will be in great danger unless next week’s talks focus properly on a worked-out management plan for Scotland’s white-fish and prawn fleets in 2013. That means focusing primarily on quotas and days at sea, and we can do that sensibly only if the local scientific evidence that is available to us is taken into account properly. If that happens, the evidence will show without any doubt—as many members have said—that our stocks of cod, along with several other species, are recovering and that the measures to reduce discards that I mentioned are effective. We can deliver a sustainable stock while cutting discards, and we can back that up scientifically. It therefore patently cannot make sense to impose a further cut in the number of days at sea for the Scottish fleet in 2013, just as it cannot make sense to propose a 20 per cent cut in the cod quota to pursue what the cabinet secretary referred to as a “deeply dysfunctional cod recovery plan”, which the science tells us is no longer serving its purpose. As the Scottish Fishermen’s Federation points out, “The larger part of the Scottish fishing industry is subjected to constraints in days at sea and the governing regulation has for a long time been widely recognised by scientists, fisheries managers and the industry as being fatally flawed.” We all know that much of what is being proposed is counter to Scotland’s interests and the interests of fish stocks. The cabinet secretary has—rightly—been bullish and robust in his statements about what is and is not acceptable for the outcome of next week’s talks. As he heads off for the talks, we genuinely wish him well, just as Rob Gibson did—although that is just about the only part of Rob Gibson’s speech with which I agreed.

Well, it was not the only bit, but it was one of the few bits. [Interruption.] I thought that Rob Gibson was going to intervene there. I have no doubt that we will talk about the issue in the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee. We genuinely wish the cabinet secretary well in pursuing the outcome. I hope that the outcome will live up to not just our hopes and expectations but our fisheries sector’s needs and requirements.

Like other members, I begin by applauding and thanking Alison McInnes for bringing the motion to the chamber and I echo the delight in being able to participate in the debate. I first became aware of the Camphill movement early in my MSP career, if it can be called that, when my wife and I attended an open day—Maureen Watt said that she had the same experience—that was held by the Loch Arthur community at Beeswing, which is in what is now my constituency. I am delighted to welcome the three representatives from Loch Arthur to the gallery. At that open day, I bought some of the most delicious cheese and bread that it has ever been my pleasure to consume. What is probably more important is that I learned a great deal more about the Loch Arthur community and the Camphill movement. The subtitle on the website of the Loch Arthur Camphill community—as it is known—is “A life of many colours”. I can think of no more fitting description for that extraordinary place. It is a community of nine houses that are occupied by more than 70 people. The houses are not just somewhere for a group of individuals to live. As the movement says, “We want each house to be a group of people who benefit from and enjoy living together.” Loch Arthur is a self-help society that caters for every level of disability and need through mutual care, friendship, respect and support. However, it is also a working community, and an incredibly effective one at that. It is based around a farm and a large garden, which are highly productive and have gradually expanded to include a creamery, which is increasingly renowned for its fantastic cheeses—I can still taste the Criffel cheese that I had at lunch time, which is strong as well as fantastic—as well as a bakery, a woodwork shop and a weaving workshop. Since the end of November, the community has had a magnificent new purpose-built cafe and farm shop, which sells the full range of Loch Arthur products, all of which are produced to the highest standards of certified organic production. Loch Arthur is a massive success story that has come up against many a hurdle since its establishment in 1984—not the least of which was the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease in 2001, which resulted in the wholesale destruction of much of Galloway’s livestock. That situation reduced many a hardened Galloway farmer to tears, so I simply leave it to members’ imagination to picture how the Loch Arthur community felt when it was caught up in that horrendous scenario. However, as always, Loch Arthur bounced back—not just to where it was before, but to the extent that only a year ago it was awarded the BBC’s food and farming award for being the best food producer of the year, which is just about the highest accolade that can be got and which is a truly outstanding achievement and recognition for a truly outstanding community. I suspect that that is typical of Camphill communities across the country. I do not want to give the impression that Loch Arthur is in any way a closed community; it is very much the opposite. It is now an important local employer—it has 17 employees from outwith the community. It sponsors students on the BA in social pedagogy to which Alison McInnes referred. That course was developed as a successful partnership between the University of Aberdeen and the Camphill Rudolf Steiner Schools in Aberdeen. I was more than happy to join the community in opposing changes to that course that the Scottish Government, through the Scottish Social Services Council, sought to make in 2011. Those changes would have had a detrimental impact on Loch Arthur and I am delighted that they were successfully opposed. The Loch Arthur community recently presented its own production of Shakespeare’s “The Tempest”. There is surely no finer way to describe that community and the Camphill movement than by quoting from that great work: “How beauteous mankind is! O brave new world, That has such people in’t.” I applaud the work and the ethos of Camphill, from which we can all learn a great deal.

The cabinet secretary rightly mentioned the fact that a 20 per cent quota cut for cod would greatly endanger the catch quota trials that the UK and Denmark have been running together, which have been successful in reducing discards. What representations has he made within the UK and the EU to promote an extension of the trials? How likely does he perceive any such extension to be?

4. To ask the Scottish Government when it will be in a position to confirm which company will be responsible for trunk road maintenance in south-west Scotland for the next contract period. (S4O-01549)

I am grateful to the minister for that reply. He will be as aware as I am that, of course, that is under legal challenge, so I cannot ask any further questions about it. However, the minister will be aware that that has resulted in a delay of what will be—by the time the next contract comes into force—almost a year. I am sure that he is also aware that many subcontractors, many of which are small businesses in my constituency, need assurances that the Scottish Government will continue to monitor and maintain the trunk road network in the region. At this time of year, that obviously includes gritting. Can he give me an assurance that normal service maintenance and repairs will continue to be carried out, and that small businesses in my constituency will not be forced out of business while no formal contract is in place?

2. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on whether National Museums Scotland should make its collections available throughout the country. (S4O-01497)

I entirely agree that National Museums Scotland can go about this in many ways. I know that the cabinet secretary is fully aware of its proposal to close its national collection of costumes at Shambellie house. Indeed, there is to be a members’ business debate on that this evening, which I am sure the cabinet secretary is looking forward to as much as I am. Does the cabinet secretary agree that, in putting forward the proposal without any prior local consultation, National Museums Scotland is failing to explore the many alternative arrangements that could make Shambellie a more sustainable operation? Does she agree that a postponement of the decision for around 12 months would give an adequate period of grace in which to do that?

I commend Claudia Beamish warmly both for lodging the motion and for prevailing on her business manager to ensure that it came before Parliament timeously. It was important that it did so, and I am delighted to take part in the debate as the constituency member for Galloway and West Dumfries, within which Shambellie house lies. The BBC’s south of Scotland website today headlines the debate’s taking place this evening. In doing so, it points out that the proposal to close Shambellie has “provoked cross-party concern about the possibility of closure and its potential impact on the economy of Dumfries and Galloway.” I want to spend the time that is available to me looking at both halves of that sentence. First, the issue has “provoked cross-party concern”. Claudia Beamish rightly mentioned that, but I cannot emphasise enough how true it is. From the word go, back at the beginning of October, the degree of cross-party support among MSPs on the issue has been quite remarkable for both its consistency and strength, to the extent that, most of us having met individually with NMS director Gordon Rintoul, five of us then met jointly, as Claudia Beamish pointed out, with the cabinet secretary, following which we jointly signed a letter that was sent individually to each trustee of NMS in advance of their meeting next week. I hope that that degree of inter-party and cross-party co-operation does not go unnoticed by those who are responsible for taking the decision on Shambellie. It does not stop just with us MSPs. As I highlighted in the amendment to Claudia Beamish’s motion, to a man and woman Dumfries and Galloway Council, Dumfries and Galloway Chamber of Commerce, VisitScotland and other stakeholders, such as ADGAP, are totally united in asking NMS to think again. That is not, I emphasise, to reverse its proposal immediately, because we recognise the very great pressures that NMS, like other organisations, is under, but to give us all a breathing space—a period of grace, if you will—within which we can look sensibly at the many alternative management models that could, although not necessarily would, point the way towards a sustainable future for Shambellie house. Anyone who is not acquainted with Dumfries and Galloway might ask why we need a future for what is basically an old house that employs only a few people and which closes every winter, anyway. That brings me to the second part of the BBC’s sentence—the part about the “impact on the economy of Dumfries and Galloway”, which Claudia Beamish quite rightly highlighted. As anyone who lives in that part of the world will know, the local economy is extremely fragile, and within it each small enterprise tends to feed off the others. The closure of one instantly has a major detrimental impact on the others. As Claudia Beamish has, I have had many emails from constituents who are enormously concerned about the impact that closing Shambellie would have on their fragile enterprises. We live in an age of consultation, and it is NMS’s failure to undertake a local open consultation before announcing the closure that has caused most concern to all of us and to the local stakeholders. That needs to be put right, and it can be. It can be put right by ensuring that we are given time—I suggest a year—to explore the very real options that exist for partnership working, innovative thinking and radical solutions that could ensure a future for Shambellie. Thus far, we have been denied the opportunity to do so. It cannot be right that NMS’s facilities become just an asset of the central belt. I cannot help but notice and point out that the flagship of those facilities here in the heart of Edinburgh is absolutely free for all who wish to enter it. We have just one request: give us some more time to take a long hard look at the proposal. If Shambellie house has to close, so be it, but it should not do so before all interested parties have had an opportunity to explore every last prospect of keeping it up and running.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

I gently suggest that if Shambellie house had only two weddings after seven years of promotion, it could have perhaps promoted the possibility a little better. At portfolio question time today, I asked the cabinet secretary whether she would welcome an extension to give us time to talk about the radical solutions that we have all referred to today. I am not asking her to intervene in the NMS’s decision-making process, but would she welcome such an extension? It would be welcome if she did.

I am sure that the cabinet secretary will agree that, in the case of any disease such as Schmallenberg, rapid reporting is important for its control. Where has the cabinet secretary got to in his consideration of the Kinnaird review, which recommended the closure of a number of Scotland’s veterinary investigation centres?

With the best will in the world—and I mean that—how can anyone truly support the long-term victims of child abuse and bring the perpetrators to justice when there continues to be a time bar in place for prosecution?

I accept what the cabinet secretary says, although I think that it is all open to debate. There is growing uncertainty about whether Scotland would automatically become a member state of the European Union in the unlikely event that it decides to become independent. Where would support for agriculture come from between the time that Scotland became independent and the time that it became a member state, which could be a matter of several years?

I refer members to my entry in the register of interests. I greatly welcome Paul Wheelhouse to his front-bench role. That is a rapid promotion, which I am sure is thoroughly deserved. We look forward to further contributions from him. I add to the cabinet secretary’s thanks—I think that that is the right word—to Jim Paice, who is shortly to be Sir Jim Paice, for the role that he has played. He has been a friend to farmers throughout the UK. Differences with the cabinet secretary might have arisen on some occasions, but they were always dealt with in a perfectly respectable and responsible way. I hope that that continues to be the case in negotiations between the Scottish and UK Governments. I am delighted that the Government has brought the debate to the chamber, just as I am delighted to take part in it, because CAP reform is of huge importance to the whole country—the cabinet secretary put that well. It is important not least in my constituency, where—as with other areas in the south and the east—any change from historically based payments to area-based payments will inevitably mean big changes in the nature and the level of support that is available for agriculture. Quite a lot of people out there in the wide world would contend that agriculture already receives too much support. I am not one of them because, as I have said many times in the Parliament, a thriving and sustainable agricultural sector means a thriving and sustainable rural sector. Without that, we will never have a thriving and sustainable national economy. I am absolutely convinced that that is true and always will be. That is what is at stake in the on-going negotiations, and I am sure that every one of us in the chamber genuinely wants the best possible outcome for Scottish agriculture from the negotiations on CAP reform, which are clearly difficult. I assume that they are difficult because it is pretty clear that no one expects the reforms to be introduced in their entirety by 2014. The first thing that must be secured is an adequate bridging arrangement from 2014, on the assumption that the more likely full start date will be at least 2015. I was pleased to hear the cabinet secretary tell the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee last Wednesday that, although the first priority is—understandably—to ensure that the European Commission has such a bridging arrangement in hand, the Scottish Government is working on a contingency plan that it will be ready to implement if the need arises. I hope that that plan will not be needed, but the Government is right to work on it. I trust that the Government will keep the committee and the Parliament fully informed about the details of its emergency plans as 2014 draws ever nearer. We are all aware—as I am sure will become evident as the debate goes on—of the salient points for Scotland in these negotiations, but some of them are worth repeating. It is vital that the transition from historic to area-based payments is as gradual as possible. If it was deemed to be right that the change in England and Wales should take place over eight years with a linear transition, why should Scotland be expected to make the change in five years with a transition that is heavily front loaded? That cannot be allowed to happen. It is vital that an adequate national reserve is created to support new businesses and—just as important—to bring those who have been locked out of the support system since 2003 back into the fold. It is vital that we try to increase the amount of modulation of pillar 1 support to provide voluntary coupled support for the livestock sector. The cabinet secretary was right to highlight a stark reminder of the importance of that when he referred to the publication of the annual agricultural census figures. Those figures showed a further decline—not a large decline, but still a decline—in livestock numbers, despite as good a level of market returns in the livestock sector as I can ever remember. It is vital that the Scottish Government is able to pay out up to 90 per cent of the support that is due to any farmer as soon as it is due, with the balance payable once any necessary checks have been carried out. The current situation, whereby any farmer whose claim requires even a second glance is put to the back of the queue for payment, has resulted in genuinely lengthy delays in payment and a consequential—and sometimes catastrophic—delay and disruption to farmers’ cash flows. All those measures—and others that have been and will continue to be mentioned during the debate—will receive our full support, and the support of all members in the chamber. They must be among the top priorities for Scotland as the negotiations progress, if progress is the right word. That brings me to the motion and the amendments that are before us. The Conservatives will, of course, support the motion, despite some reservations about the last part of it. I was originally inclined to try to amend that part, but I believe that we should try wherever possible to present a united front during such negotiations. What the cabinet secretary unfortunately referred to in a previous debate as the cuddly side of my nature came to the fore, and I decided to leave it in place. I know that the cabinet secretary will one day live to regret the fact that he referred to me as cuddly.

Yes, he is probably regretting it already. We will support the Liberal Democrat amendment, just as we will support Labour’s amendment, which—with great respect—seems not to add very much to the motion. I say that simply because if the CAP is not “delivering public benefit and supporting rural communities”, it ought to be abolished, never mind reviewed. However, it bears repeating that it should do those things, so we are happy to support the Labour amendment.

I accept that in its entirety. As Claudia Beamish will know as a South Scotland representative, it is not just communities in the Highlands and Islands that are living on the edge: there are many others in the south of Scotland that do the same. I do not wish to denigrate the Labour amendment in any way; I just think that the two elements that it mentions should be a fundamental part of the CAP in the first place. As I said, I am happy to support the amendment, which highlights the very issues that Claudia Beamish has just mentioned. In closing, I will expand briefly on my reservations about the motion. The final sentence—which states that the Parliament “believes that the UK Government’s negotiating position must take account of the priorities of devolved administrations, which should play an appropriately full role in the negotiating process”— is of course somewhat mischievous, although I would expect nothing less. It is designed to lay all the blame on the UK Government for anything that the Scottish Government does not deem to be acceptable in the negotiations—

I am glad to hear agreement on that. However, the possibility of laying the blame elsewhere has been blown wide open by an excellent briefing paper from NFU Scotland, which was sent to members yesterday.

The paper outlines NFU Scotland’s top 10 priorities for the reform, with action points listed under each priority. Each and every action point relates to not what the UK Government or the European Commission can do, but what the Scottish Government can do, and that is the point of my amendment. We will back the Scottish Government’s motion, but we will keep a careful eye on what the Scottish Government does with its existing powers to ensure that those action points are addressed.

Rural Scotland deserves no less. I move amendment S4M-04263.3, to insert at end: “, and further believes that the Scottish Government must take every opportunity to make its priorities known to both the UK Government and the European Commission.”

I have not read verbatim any of Mr Paterson’s comments, but I believe them to be aspirational and hopeful that, one day, British and Scottish farmers will be able to live without subsidy. I do not know of one farmer who would not like to be in that position. Does Rob Gibson?

I trust that the member agrees that as our amendment would not delete the part of the motion that he quoted, we think that it is quite in order to say that the devolved Administration should play an appropriate role in the negotiations.

Does the cabinet secretary agree that front loading of the current arrangements is hugely disadvantageous and that we need to look to a more linear transition?

8. To ask the Scottish Government what consultation was carried out prior to deciding that all refurbished and new-build hospitals would comprise single-room-only accommodation for patients. (S4O-01223)

Is the minister aware of two surveys that were carried out by a senior clinician in Dumfries and Galloway royal infirmary that concluded that 60 per cent of patients in four-bedded wards and, perhaps more interesting, 40 per cent of patients currently in single rooms would prefer to stay in four-bedded wards if they were readmitted to hospital? Given that only patchy evidence seems to exist on the effectiveness of reducing hospital-acquired infections by having single-room-only hospitals, never mind the cost of building them, would it not be wise to listen a little more closely to the views of those who are most affected by the decision on such hospitals, namely the patients themselves?

I do not think that I will need two minutes. I still believe that the issue of common good is a matter of considerable complexity and that the number of common good leases throughout the country remains unclear. That concerns me. Unfortunately, I was unable to attend the stage 2 committee meeting on the bill, but, if I had done so, I would have supported Jim Hume’s amendment, which would have resulted in a 5:4 division, which would have been a little closer than the 5:3 division that there was. Having previously accepted the view in the committee report that, although concern remains about the bill’s impact on common good assets, it should not provide for an exemption, I now think, on reflection, that that view should be reconsidered in order to avoid possible further conflict and the need to revisit the issue in the future, should it become a genuine grievance. I acknowledge that complexities would arise from including an exemption in the bill and understand the minister’s decision not to lodge an amendment in relation to the common good, as it is likely to impact on only a very few cases, but I feel sure that the minister would agree that complexity alone should not be a valid excuse for failing to amend legislation where that is necessary, and we should not be encouraged to agree to legislation on issues that remain unclear, as they do in a number of common good cases. I am persuaded that the amendment is in the public interest and I therefore support it.

I accept what the member says about the Buccleuch lease in the context of common good cases that we know about, but we know that there is no clarity about the situation. Would she therefore accept that there is still a need to protect the common good? That is what she talked about in discussing the amendment at stage 2.

It is only a matter of time.

Like Claire Baker, I was not present for the stage 2 discussions at which the two amendments were debated but, like her, I have spent some time studying what the minister referred to as his relatively lengthy remarks on the subject of one of them. Unlike Claire Baker, I was not much the wiser having studied those remarks. That is not a reflection on the minister; it is entirely a reflection on my ability to absorb fairly technical information. Despite that inability, I am happy to take part in today’s debate, the outcome of which will mark the final stage of the Scottish Law Commission’s structural review of land law and, therefore, the abolition, in effect, of the feudal system in Scotland. No one in the chamber will mourn its passing. The Scottish Government has estimated that there are currently some 9,000 ultra-long leases in Scotland that are eligible for conversion under the bill. As we are all very well aware by now, broadly speaking, an ultra-long lease, as the minister said, is defined as a registered lease of more than 175 years. The Abolition of Feudal Tenure etc (Scotland) Act 2000 prohibited the granting of any type of lease for longer than that and converted other types of quasi-ownership to true ownership. The leases that are eligible for conversion under the bill are those that have more than 100 years left to run. The main policy rationale for the bill is that a tenant’s right under a long lease is akin to a right of ownership. The bill therefore provides for such a right to be automatically converted to a right of ownership, with compensation being paid to the former landowner if necessary. I apologise for the repetition, Presiding Officer, but I guarantee that it will not be the last bit of repetition that we hear in the debate. I am pleased that the bill has passed through the Parliament relatively swiftly and with little contention, but a couple of points continue to be grounds for a little concern. In his opening remarks, the minister described the bill as modest, and so it is, but as he acknowledged, it is also complex. There are a lot of complexities in the issue, and where there is complexity, there is concern. One of those issues is the common good. I am sorry that Jim Hume’s amendment was defeated this morning. I remain somewhat mystified as to Labour’s change of position, but it is not the first time that we have seen such a thing. As a result of the defeat of the amendment, the bill is not as tidy as it could have been. Members can call me old fashioned if they will, but I do not believe that we should be in the business of passing untidy legislation. The second issue about which I remain to be convinced—Claire Baker touched on it—is the lack of a statutory requirement for Registers of Scotland to update the land register to reflect the change in ownership once an ultra-long lease has been converted to ownership. In response to my intervention on the issue during the stage 1 debate, the minister tried to appease me by arguing as follows: “Registers of Scotland has decided not to carry out a bespoke exercise to update the land register as a result of the bill as it now stands, because updating the land register is not required for the bill to work.” He went on to say that the conversion “will happen independently of any action that is taken by Registers of Scotland.”—[Official Report, 25 April 2012; c 8366.] I remain concerned that, as a result of that, the land register will wrongly show the original landlord as the owner and the new owner as the tenant. Surely, if only for the sake of the accuracy of Scottish property law, it is important that the register can be relied upon, yet if there remains no requirement to update the register, it cannot be. The minister mentioned the Land Registration etc (Scotland) Bill, which was recently agreed to, and indicated that perhaps that would be the correct vehicle through which to address the issue. I understand that his officials will work closely with Registers of Scotland to ensure that the land register is kept as up to date as possible. I welcome that, but even if, as the minister stated in the stage 1 debate, the two pieces of legislation will work in tandem, I remain to be convinced of the reasoning behind the refusal to make a particular provision in the Long Leases (Scotland) Bill merely because of the possible complexity involved. Others might expand on or otherwise comment on the issue during the debate, but I cannot accept that complexity alone is a reason not to address an issue.

I am grateful to the minister for that explanation. I hear what he says. The Presiding Officer has indicated that my time is up, so I will reflect on that before I make my closing remarks. For the time being, I am pleased to note that the bill has got to stage 3 with relatively little contention. I welcome the fact that the end of the feudal system is now within our grasp.

And so we approach the end of a process that will, in effect, bring about an end to the feudal system—something that I have no doubt is welcomed on all sides of the chamber, as I said in my opening remarks. As one who served on the Rural Affairs Committee in the first session of the Parliament, and who is delighted to be serving on its later version, the RACCE committee, as it is referred to, I am only too pleased to note that, in this instance at least, the rural affairs committee has succeeded where previous justice committees failed, even if that failure was for an entirely justifiable reason—I think an election could be called that. If I have a remaining concern about the bill, it is summed up by comments from various members highlighting the modest nature of the bill, to which the minister rightly referred, while raising the issue of the complexities within it. Most of those complexities are legal in nature and highly technical. Anyone who knows me even reasonably well knows that my mind is not one that easily absorbs legal complexities. Graeme Dey suggested, accurately, that the topic is not one that most of us might have expected to be dealing with when we first came together as a committee. I tend to accept the minister’s assurances that all will be well, which is, in effect, what he is saying in relation to the concerns that I and others have raised about common good and the updating of Registers of Scotland, which Margaret McDougall mentioned. They are and remain genuine concerns. If I have picked him up right, Graeme Dey stated that the exemption of common good leases would have thrown up complexities. The problem as I see it, however, is that by not accepting Jim Hume’s amendment to exempt common good leases, we continue to promulgate complex matters in an inconclusive way. I remain unhappy that the minister was content to say, as he did at stage 2, that there is not absolute certainty in relation to the number of common good leases. I repeat my claim that the complexities of this small bill mean that we are about to pass untidy legislation that could easily lead to future challenge and further complexity. Nonetheless, as Jim Hume said, we are where we are, and the end of the feudal system is in sight. When I look at the current designs of buildings on Princes Street and compare them with those in George Street, I ponder that feus were not necessarily a bad thing. However, they are behind us now. Times move, and we are moving with them. Overall, I welcome the end of the feudal system and, despite the concerns that I have raised, we will support the passing of the bill this evening.

Like others, I commend Christina McKelvie for bringing the debate to the chamber, particularly as this is armed forces week. I thought that she spoke with great principle on the subject. If I may say so, I do not think that anyone has to be a warmonger in any shape or form to address the issues that she brought to the chamber today. I thought that she spoke with great emotion and relevance. I probably ought to declare an interest in that I am the convener of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on armed forces veterans and a board member of the Scottish advisory board of the Royal British Legion, which is better known as Poppyscotland. I was very pleased to have been at the meeting at which it was agreed that Poppyscotland should provide considerable funding towards the armed services advice project. It might help Margaret Burgess to know that there was not one moment of hesitation or doubt about the benefits of doing so. Around the table, we all felt to a man or woman that it would be a very worthwhile service, as I think the very good report to which members have referred has proved. The way in which the public have reacted to the sad legacy of recent conflicts and the issues for armed forces veterans has been welcome. That reaction is as heart warming as it is necessary, although obviously we would all prefer it to be otherwise. However, it is impossible not to be hugely impressed by the way in which the British public have responded to modern-day needs in that regard. One does not have to look far to see evidence of that. For example, there are the results of last year’s Poppyscotland appeal. We know all too well the economic difficulties that we are all being subjected to, but that appeal saw a rise of 14.7 per cent in its figures and brought in the sum of £2.68 million last year, not by way of corporate donation or massive sponsorship but by people putting their hands in their pockets and putting money into tins. That is an extraordinary result. As Christina McKelvie said, extraordinary people are now doing extraordinary things for the benefit of our veterans. Of course, veterans are no longer 80 or 90 years old, as I grew up believing them to be, but 18 or 19 years old in some cases. I want to mention just two extraordinary people, if I may. The first is the remarkable Anna Baker Cresswell, who created the charity Gardening Leave. In my previous parliamentary guise, I had the great privilege of visiting the Combat Stress charity in Ayrshire. I met a veteran there, but I could not get a word out of him over lunch. He simply would not speak to me and did not want to speak to anybody. I accompanied him and others down to the garden of what was the Scottish Agricultural College Auchincruive estate, where Anna Baker Cresswell started her charity. When we got into the greenhouse that the veteran was looking after, I could not stop him talking. The transformation from somebody who did not feel able to talk for much of the time into a person who suddenly felt comfortable in his surroundings and able to talk was extraordinary and remarkable. The other person whom I want to mention is a constituent of mine called Jennefer Tobin, who has begun a charity called Southwest Scotland RnR through which she simply provides a week’s orderly rest and recreation for servicemen returning from modern battlefields, who are often mentally injured. I asked her once how she measured success and she said that if they laugh and sleep by the end of the week, they have succeeded. Such people do extraordinary things. In recognition of such services, I commend the great work that the armed services advice project is undertaking. It is a true partnership between CAB, Poppyscotland and all the other partners that are mentioned in the motion. The need for that work in Scotland is vividly highlighted by the briefing from Poppyscotland that members received earlier this week. I will mention just one statistic—veterans in Scotland are 10 per cent more likely to be homeless than their counterparts in England and Wales. There are other statistics that highlight the issue. This is not a party-political issue, but it is an issue that is peculiar to Scotland, and I am proud of the efforts that are made here to address it. ASAP is a vital part of those efforts. I commend the motion.

I hope that the minister will accept that I was not trying to make a political point or, indeed, any criticism of the Scottish Government’s housing or homelessness policies, particularly in relation to the armed forces. The Scottish Government and the Parliament are both highly regarded by the armed forces as being open, accessible and doing everything they can to help. However, although I was not making a party-political point, the fact remains that ex-servicemen are 10 per cent more likely to be homeless in Scotland than they are in other parts of the United Kingdom and, despite the Government’s laudable efforts to address the matter, that must surely be a matter for concern.

What hope can the cabinet secretary hold out to those who have entered farming since the previous reforms and who, consequently, have no entitlement to the single farm payment? What assurances can he give that their situation will be addressed in this round of common agricultural policy reform?

1. To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met the chief constable of Dumfries and Galloway Constabulary and what matters were discussed. (S4O-01139)

I am grateful for that response, but I am sorry that the cabinet secretary has not discussed recently what I can only imagine is the frustration of the police over the Scottish Court Service’s inability to enforce compensatory orders. Three years ago, a constituent of mine had her car badly vandalised. The perpetrator was caught and ordered to pay a compensatory fine of £199, which he agreed to pay voluntarily over a period of time. Does the cabinet secretary agree with me that it is unacceptable that three years later, despite numerous summonses and court appearances—I presume at considerable cost to the public purse—the fine remains unpaid and the criminal remains unpunished? The Court Service tells me that “there are still cases where we cannot manage to collect the money due”. Does the cabinet secretary agree that that is not acceptable? What might he be able to do about it?

Can the cabinet secretary say a little more on how he can ensure that the voice of Scotland’s fish-processing sector, which sustains many valuable onshore jobs, can be heard consistently in the reform talks to ensure that new policies are aligned with that sector and do not threaten the supply chain?

8. To ask the Scottish Executive what powers police forces have to deal with illegal cockle fishing. (S4O-01096)

Illegal cockling has been a serious issue in my constituency this year. An e-mail dated 13 March says that Marine Scotland “state that the Police have adequate powers to deal with this problem”. However, as the cabinet secretary has just confirmed, the police are adamant that those responsibilities lie with Marine Scotland and that they have few or no powers to deal with the issue. The result is that a massive amount of illegal activity has taken place along the coast of the Solway this year. Local residents are too frightened to intervene. Will the cabinet secretary do so to bring the impasse and, along with it, this illegal activity to an end?

The cabinet secretary said that there is a need for a lot more land to come on to the rental market in the coming months. Can he reassure me on that? I do not believe that the matter can be addressed in a few months. Does he agree that this is a longer-term thing? As he says, progress is being made, and we need to encourage that progress so that, in the coming months and indeed years, more land comes on to the market.

I refer to my entry in the register of members’ interests, in which it will be seen that I own land that is tenanted—I am delighted to say that I have a very good relationship with my two tenants. I echo the cabinet secretary’s comments to the other Deputy Presiding Officer in welcoming him back to the chamber from Scotsheep. If we are truly serious about parliamentary reform, in two years’ time our sitting hours will revolve around us all having the ability to go to Scotsheep—I was very sad not to be able to do so for the first time in a very long time. I am delighted to take part in the debate, particularly as we had no stage 3 amendments to discuss and only one stage 2 amendment, to which I will return a little later. I am greatly heartened that no attempts were made to amend the bill substantially from the bill that was introduced. The potential for that existed, and rumours abounded that amendments might be lodged to widen the definition of a “near relative” to include the nephews and nieces of existing tenants, in addition to their grandchildren, as was always proposed in the bill. I will continue the excellent example that my colleague Jamie McGrigor set this morning by quoting himself. In the stage 1 debate, I said: “I heartily commend the cabinet secretary’s efforts to resist those possibilities.”—[Official Report, 28 March 2012; c 7787.] I am happy to repeat that endorsement now, just as I am happy to commend those who might have wanted to lodge amendments for not doing so. Lodging amendments would have been a great mistake, and I will explain why. As has been said, we all know that the situation between landlords and tenants is at a delicate stage. It would take little by way of an uninformed intervention by politicians to upset it. I say that in the full knowledge that a time might well come when someone feels that the situation must be upset or that they need to intervene, but that time is most assuredly not now. Members might well ask why I say that. I say it simply because I agree with the cabinet secretary that progress is being made. It is better progress than I have ever witnessed in the Parliament’s lifetime. As responsible politicians, we must do everything in our power to support, encourage and sustain that progress if we are to bring about what we all want in our country’s national agricultural framework—a genuinely vibrant tenanted sector in which trust is restored and in which both sides can have confidence in each other.

I hope that the member accepts that I was being as gentle as I always try to be in debates in the chamber. I was very aware of the possibility that amendments would be lodged and I hope that she accepts that I commended her and others indirectly for not lodging amendments, for the reasons that I just gave. Trust and confidence already exist in much of the tenanted sector. I was really pleased to hear the cabinet secretary acknowledge that in reply to Rob Gibson’s question this morning. It is a fact—even if some seek to deny it—that most landlords and tenants in the agricultural sector get on quite well and have a mutually beneficial relationship.

I will give way if I can have some time, Presiding Officer.

I will answer that better when we as the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee have seen a number of those relationships across Scotland—the member was right to call for that this morning and I commend him for that. If he will forgive me, I will not answer his question at the moment, but I will bear it in the open mind that I always have on such issues, as I am sure that he would concede. The problems of which we are all made aware all too often on the pages of the farming press—almost weekly at the moment—are largely at the extremes of the debate. It is absolutely right to address them, which is why I am pleased to note the great progress that is being made in the tenant farming forum. I have said before that my party will support any measures that are agreed through that forum, because we believe—in the words of the great and one and only Winston Churchill—that “To jaw-jaw is ... better than to war-war.” Talking through the issues, negotiating the way forward and agreeing the outcome might take longer than imposing legislation, but it must be the best way forward if we are to maintain the progress that has been made. I hope that we all agree on that, for the time being at least. The legislation that is before us today is essentially, as other members have said, to tidy up the previous legislation, and it will of course have our support at decision time. The sections that relate to VAT and rent reviews are to be welcomed, and I am happy to join other members in warmly welcoming NFU Scotland’s announcement this very morning that it has established a short-life working group to consider specific aspects of rent review procedures in Scotland. It is worth noting publicly that that announcement was made on behalf of the tenant farming forum. That is yet more progress, which I am sure that we all applaud. I endorse the comments that have been made about the four individual members of the short-life working group, who are hugely respected throughout the agricultural world. I have one reservation that concerns the issue of retrospective legislation. At stage 2, I had a discussion with the cabinet secretary about what I believe is a retrospective element of the bill. The cabinet secretary said: “Therefore, section 1 will now also cover circumstances in which the death of the tenant farmer occurs before the bill comes into force but the process of acquisition by the successor is not complete.” We then, if I may say so, added a touch of pantomime to the proceedings, if the Official Report is to be believed—and of course it should be—along the lines that I said that the bill is retrospective, the cabinet secretary said that it is not; I said that it is, and he said that it is not. My final comment was: “So there is a retrospective element to it”. The cabinet secretary responded: “In respect of the circumstances that lead to the notice to quit, but not in respect of the actual notice to quit.”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 9 May 2012; c 922, 924.] In anybody’s language, I think that that is a yes. I raise that issue not because I intend to oppose the bill, as I do not, but because I think that the bill has a retrospective element to it that has the potential to damage the confidence that is slowly but surely being rebuilt through the TFF’s efforts. It would be a pity if that happened. Time does not allow me to expand at this stage—I am sure that the Presiding Officer is about to remind me of that—but I may return to that topic in my closing speech. I finish simply by stating that the Scottish Conservatives will support the bill, and that we welcome it and look forward to its passage later on today.

I am not sure that I am capable of making my closing speech, because I am still in shock at Annabelle Ewing’s making an entirely consensual speech. That is a wonderful landmark for the chamber, and I encourage her to follow up on it in the future. I hope that she and I are in as much agreement the next time we discuss agricultural holdings as we are this afternoon.

I am delighted to hear that it is not a first. Having listened carefully to the content of the debate, I seek to remember that we are debating the Agricultural Holdings (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill, the purpose of which is to do exactly what it says on the tin—to amend the Agricultural Holdings (Scotland) Act 1991. It is worth noting, as the cabinet secretary and Rob Gibson have done, that the bill would not have come before us at all if it had been possible for the tenant farming forum’s agreed proposals to be dealt with in their entirety through secondary legislation. Most of them were but, for the legal reasons that we now know about, the changes to the definition of “near relative” and to the provisions relating to rent review required primary legislation. In addition, the opportunity was taken—very sensibly, in my view—to introduce a third technical change, to ensure that a VAT change should not count as a variation of rent. The Scottish Conservatives welcome the bill, as I made clear in my opening speech, when I also made plain my reservations about its retrospective element, on which I guess that we will simply not agree. I hear what Annabelle Ewing said, and I very much respect her views as a member of the legal profession, but I must hold firm to the view that there is a strong argument to be made that the whole bill is retrospective in nature. When the bill is enacted it will change the contractual terms that were agreed between two parties when they entered into a lease agreement at some point in the past—full stop. I am sorry but if that is not retrospective, I do not know what is. No matter—as I said, I do not seek to oppose the bill. I fully accept on this occasion that it will impact on only a very few people. For that reason, I am more than content not to seek to oppose it, just as I was at stage 2. However, I repeat my reservation that, in principle, retrospective legislation—no matter how it is dressed up—can undermine confidence in any sector and so should be avoided whenever possible. Other than that, the bill is eminently sensible. I repeat my commendation of those who might have wanted to broaden its impact but chose not to do so at this stage. I hope that that is the message that, with the passing of the bill, will go out to all sides in the debate. I think that Annabelle Ewing referred to that in her speech. Our message should be: “Keep working together and keep making progress together, and the Parliament will fully support your endeavours.” Much of the debate has been about what remains to be done to address outstanding issues. I argue that that is a debate for the future, although given some of the comments that have been made this afternoon, I foresee a rather more robust debate next time around. I end by again following the example of my colleague Jamie McGrigor, so I will quote myself when I wound up in the stage 1 debate, when I finished by saying: “The way to success is surely through agreement in and through the tenant farming forum. Anything that is imposed from outside, be it by Government, by Parliament, by committee or by any other body, will simply extend the current difficult situation. Frankly, that would do nobody any good at all.”—[Official Report, 28 March 2012; c 7787.] At this stage, I very much welcome the bill.

I warmly congratulate Colin Keir on his motion, which encapsulates the very essence of members’ business debates, and I am delighted to be taking part in the debate this evening. I am greatly indebted to Colin Keir for successfully prevailing on his party whips to bring forward the debate by two weeks from its original slot, because I would not have been able to take part in it on 20 June, and it is a debate in which I very much wanted to take part. I am not, of course, suggesting that that is the only reason why Colin managed to get the date changed. For most of the past century, no school year was complete without a visit to a farm. For urban and rural pupils alike, the farm outing was an essential part of the education process, providing a tremendous hands-on opportunity to discover more about where our food comes from and what goes into its production. Then, for a variety of reasons, such visits ceased to be a regular part of the curriculum. The advent of television, health and safety restrictions, E coli, fast food, ready meals and host of other factors conspired to bring to an end the hands-on experiences that had forged such a strong link between town and country. That link was broken: I am sure that no member will argue that it does not need to be restored. The link’s restoration was clearly the aim of the people who decided to establish in 1999 the Royal Highland Education Trust as the educational charity of the Royal Highland and Agricultural Society of Scotland. I have the great honour of serving that society as its president for the year 2011-12 and, as such, will be heading up the president’s initiative at the show to highlight the very best of Dumfries and Galloway. As Colin Keir vividly highlighted, RHET has enjoyed a phenomenal first decade of achievement through its programmes of farm visits for schools, classroom appearances by volunteer farmers, the provision of free educational resources for schools, outdoor education events across Scotland, and a range of other initiatives and projects. Not least of those is the schools education programme for visiting schools that is run during the Royal Highland Show, and the truly amazing children’s discovery centre at Ingliston. If I might be forgiven, I will make a quick plug and encourage every MSP and researcher who goes to this year’s show to make sure that they visit the discovery centre before they leave. They will not regret doing so. As other members have said, RHET’s work could not be done without the input of the army of volunteer farmers who participate. It is also right to acknowledge the incredible job that is done by the small but utterly dedicated and committed team of local co-ordinators, without whom RHET would simply not exist. Indeed, in the past year or so of my involvement, I have learnt that the paid infrastructure of RHET is absolutely minute when compared with the results that it has achieved. That is largely due to the work of Alison Motion, RHET’s project manager, and her team at Ingliston, along with the co-ordinators. I am delighted that Colin Keir was able to confirm what I could not with my failing eyesight, which is that Alison and some of the RHET team are with us in the gallery tonight. I was not too sure until Colin Keir said so. It is through their drive and inventiveness that we are faced with wonderful projects such as the recent tractor tour of Dumfries and Galloway that visited all 103 primary schools across the region, and the presence of various projects such as Daisy, who must be Mabel’s cousin. Daisy is a hollow plastic cow who can be hand-milked—I know because I have done it myself—to demonstrate that milk does not begin its journey in a carton. The two-day plough-to-plate events that take place across the country have helped schoolchildren to make the link between wheat and bread, cows and yogurt, and pigs and bacon, and to understand the many other links that exist in our food chain. RHET does great work. In its words, it “aims to provide the opportunity for every child in Scotland to learn about food, farming and the countryside, and to create a wider understanding of the environmental, economic and social realities of rural Scotland.” Who could possibly disagree with that?

I was similarly delighted to hear Jim Warnock’s name mentioned. I am sure that the minister will join me in applauding the fact that today, at Scotsheep 2012 at Dumfries house, he received an award in recognition of his contribution to the sheep sector.

As convener of the cross-party group on armed forces veterans, I am delighted to be able to take part in the debate. As other members have done, I commend Paul Wheelhouse for bringing the motion to the chamber. I know that he put a lot of work into getting the wording of the motion right and being careful not to point the finger of blame too accusingly in any particular direction. I commend him for that—he is right not to do so because, although it is easy simply to blame this or that Government, this or that theatre of war or this or that regiment, it will do nothing to solve the problem that is so accurately highlighted in the motion. The truth is that this is not about Governments, fields of war or regiments but about people. It is about people who have signed up to a job of work that may very well demand that they put their lives on the line in our defence, and it is about how we treat those people while they are undertaking that job of work and, perhaps even more important, as they prepare to return to civilian life—indeed, to a civilian life that offers none of the protection, camaraderie or peer support that they will most likely have come to depend on as servicemen and women. There is a remarkable charity called Southwest Scotland RnR, which is run by a constituent of mine called Jennefer Tobin. Jennefer comes from a military background and she knows what soldiering entails. Some years ago, she was struck by the bland, somewhat uncomprehending faces of the troops she saw returning from Iraq and Afghanistan and decided, in her inimitable fashion, that some of those returning soldiers needed what she calls a jolly good holiday. She contacted the regiment, converted her home in Dumfriesshire, cajoled, persuaded and attracted a veritable army of local volunteers, and built up an incredibly effective means of getting returning servicemen and women, all of whom are wounded—sometimes physically but more often mentally—back on to the straight and narrow. I once asked Jennefer how she measured the success of the exercise, and she said that if they are sleeping a full night’s sleep and laughing naturally by the end of the week, it has worked. It was not until I met one of the groups that had arrived for her unique form of treatment that I saw exactly what she meant. They were clearly a group of young people—in this case men—in a very fragile state of mind. They were young lads just back from Afghanistan, who were almost all from difficult and challenging backgrounds and who had quite possibly signed up to escape from those backgrounds. What they had signed up to was probably a heck of a shock to them. That will, I am sure, be replicated throughout the military. When they are sent into action, those brave young people will naturally seek comfort and reassurance with their mates over a few cheap subsidised drinks in the safety and security of base camp at the end of the day—comfort and reassurance that quickly becomes a daily habit and probably just as easily becomes a dependency. It is not hard to see how someone like that—and there will be many of them—will have the greatest difficulty when they are thrown back into the bear pit of civilian life. At the most recent meeting of the cross-party group, we heard of the considerable efforts that are being made in the armed forces to address the problems early. Those efforts are commendable, yet there clearly remains a huge dichotomy between what the military thinks it is returning to civvy street and what the numerous charities that pick up the pieces know is being returned to civvy street. There remains a great deal to be done. We owe it to those incredible servicemen and women to do everything that we can to ensure that it is done. Ending that dichotomy is our challenge. I suggest that it is also our duty.

I understand entirely what the minister said about the statistics on dependency in the armed forces reflecting those in normal society. One of the earlier speakers mentioned decompression, or coming away from the highly stressful situation of modern service and modern warfare and going back into civilian life. Will the minister accept that that is an issue? Given that the backgrounds from which many people come into the armed services allow potential problem cases to be identified, will he also accept that much more work could be done to identify potential problem cases, and to follow those people through the decompression stage and back into civilian life?

I am grateful to have the opportunity to bring this debate to the chamber. I am beginning to wish that I had entitled the motion slightly differently, because I see one of the health ministers here when the debate is more about transport than health. I have no doubt that the minister will pass on any comments to his colleagues if required, although health issues will also be discussed. In March 2011, Dumfries and Galloway third sector forum encouraged a small team of volunteers—I am delighted to see some of them in the gallery this evening—to come together under the Parliament’s community partnerships project to see what might be done to improve the provision of rural transport within the region for older people and their carers to maintain and, hopefully, improve their health and wellbeing. The group states, in the summary of its excellent report, “A Road to Health”, which was published in March this year: “We are seeking to influence the Scottish Government and Local Authorities by making them aware of the transport issues faced by older people and by presenting compelling arguments for changing practices in Dumfries and Galloway.” That is exactly why the Parliament established the community partnerships programmes—to encourage communities to engage with this institution and, in doing so, to empower those same communities in seeking to drive and influence change when they had identified a need for it. That is a true, bottom-up approach to policy making. I fully understand the budgetary constraints that have led to the CPP being wound up, but I, for one, very much regret its passing. Nonetheless, through “A Road to Health”, the CPP is going out with a bang, because those volunteers who did the work have no intentions of resting on their laurels having published their report. They are to be greatly commended for their on-going commitment to bringing about the changes that they identified. That commitment stems almost entirely from what they discovered as they went about the project. The project began with a questionnaire being widely distributed through a range of organisations. More than 1,000 were distributed, and a healthy number of 325 were returned from a remarkably even spread across the region’s postcodes. The questionnaire had been split into two parts, the first of which was on travel relating to healthcare, while the second was on travel relating to wellbeing. In the section on travel relating to healthcare, the findings were that 91 per cent of respondents had to travel for healthcare appointments; 69 per cent of them had to travel more than 10 miles and 14 per cent had to travel more than 50 miles to attend their appointment. Such is the rural nature of Dumfries and Galloway and of other regions, and I do not suppose that those statistics come as any great surprise. However, 29 per cent reported that they found the travel arrangements to and from their appointments either stressful or very stressful. That should come as a surprise to us and we should sit up and listen to that statistic. More worrying surprises appear in the section on travel related to wellbeing. I can do no better than quote from my contribution to Jim Hume’s recent debate on community transport, in which I summed up a lot of the work in Dumfries and Galloway by saying that the survey “found that more than 40 per cent of older people had difficulty getting out of their houses and that nearly half of that group found it almost impossible to get out. Finally, it found that a quarter of older people did not get out of their houses at all in a month—I find that staggering.”—[Official Report, 29 March 2012; c 8025.] When those figures are extrapolated across the region, they become stark, suggesting that 15,000 older people in Dumfries and Galloway cannot do their own shopping; that 3,000 older people live more than 10 miles from shops; that 18,000 older people have trouble getting out; and—this is the one that really hits me—more than 10,000 people get out of their houses less frequently than once a month. That is close to imprisonment. Presiding Officer, not even the authors of this excellent report would argue that the survey was scientific, but even if we halve the figures, they are alarming in the extreme and should demand our attention. What is to be done about the issue in these difficult economic times? Again, I refer to Jim Hume’s debate, in which Claudia Beamish, Elaine Murray, Aileen McLeod and I all made mention of the rural transport solutions pilot scheme in Wigtownshire. The scheme has encouraged out-of-the-box and joined-up thinking that has, for instance, freed up the school transport fleet for wider use when it is not required for its primary function. Before the pilot project began, the entire fleet in Wigtownshire was in use for two and a half hours a day during the school term. In the first four months of the scheme, the fleet travelled an extra 22,000 miles, carrying 8,000 non-school passengers who would otherwise have had no public transport options. Commercial opportunities have been identified to allow Wigtownshire Community Transport to operate scheduled services, giving older people access to shops and amenities that they could previously only dream about. That approach indicates a way forward and a way to alleviate some of the problems that are identified in “A Road to Health”. During Jim Hume’s debate, Aileen McLeod said of the initiative: “I am not suggesting that that precise model could or should be rolled out across the country”.—[Official Report, 29 March 2012; c 8023.] I do not disagree with Dr McLeod, but I think that the scheme should—indeed, it must—be looked at by the Scottish Government as a way forward in providing our older citizens in rural areas with a transport system that can genuinely be referred to as a road to health.

Will the minister give way?

Whatever I expressed, it was not meant to be disappointment.

9. My question follows neatly on from the previous one. To ask the Scottish Executive whether it plans to review its proposal on general binding rule 18, which would prevent fertiliser and pesticides being applied to land with a slope greater than 12 degrees. (S4O-00997)

Oh yes, indeed I do, Presiding Officer. I am grateful to the cabinet secretary for the two responses that he has given to the question, but the fact remains that the only mention of 12 degree slopes in guidelines throughout the United Kingdom relates to nitrate vulnerable zones. Neither the Welsh Assembly Government, the Northern Ireland Executive nor the UK Government intend to alter their general binding rules, as they do not believe that there is any need or requirement to do so. It appears that the Scottish Government is alone in believing that the wording in GBRs must be the same as that for NVZs. Will that not, in effect, turn the whole of Scotland into a nitrate vulnerable zone? Is that not an example of gold plating European regulations? Will the cabinet secretary admit that the Government has made a huge drafting error and will he undertake to scrap the changes to the relevant paragraphs of GBR 18?

Will the member take an intervention?

The minister mentioned that a bill was introduced in the previous session of Parliament. The question of registration was addressed in that bill. Why has there been a change of heart in the current bill?

I am more than happy to take part in this debate, but I come to it from a position of considerable disadvantage, given that the committee’s commendable and thorough investigations into the general principles of the bill took place while I was not a member of it. Therefore, my opening remarks will probably serve more as a memo to myself on the bill. I hope that I will be forgiven for any repetition of what has been said, although what has already been said perhaps proves that there will inevitably be some degree of repetition in a debate of this nature. It seems to me that the main policy rationale for the bill is that a tenant’s right under an ultra-long lease is akin to a right of ownership. The bill therefore provides for such a right to be automatically converted to a right of ownership on an appointed day, with compensation being paid to the former landlord, if necessary. Broadly speaking, an ultra-long lease is defined as a registered lease of over 175 years that has more than 100 years left to run. That has already been pointed out. The Scottish Government has estimated that there are currently some 9,000 ultra-long leases in Scotland that are eligible for conversion under the bill. Understandably and rightly, the bill contains certain exemptions to the conversion to ownership for leases that relate to the right to extract minerals, leases in which the annual rent in respect of the lease is over £100, leases for the sole purpose of installing and maintaining pipes and cables, and leases that include harbours for which there is a harbour authority. Ultra-long leases are essentially a relic of the feudal system, which was abolished in 2000. Indeed, the Scottish Law Commission’s 2006 report states that the conversion of ultra-long leases marks the “final stage” of its structural review of land law. The 2000 act prohibited the granting of any type of lease for more than 175 years and converted other types of quasi-ownership to true ownership. The conversion of long leases can therefore be seen as the final step in the abolition of the feudal system. So far, so good. However, in researching for the debate, it seemed to me that there are three key areas of interest, if not contention, in the bill, the first of which is the issue of common good. A common good fund is a fund of money and assets that is owned and administered by a Scottish local authority in respect of a former burgh within that local authority area. A prominent policy issue that is associated with the bill seems to be the extent to which common good land and buildings will be affected by the proposed conversion scheme for ultra-long leases. When the previous bill was introduced in the third session of Parliament, the Scottish Government wrote to all 32 councils in Scotland to ask them to identify ultra-long leases of common good land and property in their area. It has already been said that Scottish Government officials have recently confirmed that nine common good leases have been identified. I think that I am right in saying that that is still a matter of some complexity and that it is still unclear whether that number of common good leases is definitive. I find it quite hard to believe that the number can be so low.

I am grateful to the minister for that intervention. I entirely accept what he has said, but that simply highlights the complexity of the whole area. Although there remains some concern around the bill’s impact on common good assets, it does not provide for an exemption. The committee report acknowledges the complexities that would arise from including an exemption in the bill, and the committee remains unconvinced by the arguments for the introduction of such an exemption. Perhaps we can return to the issue in closing remarks. The second issue is variable rent. The bill provides an exemption for properties for which the annual rent is more than £100, in order to exclude commercial properties from the automatic transfer. The bill also provides that a landlord may register an exemption where the annual rent was more than £100 at any point in the five years before royal assent. That reflects the fact—it is, indeed, a fact—that some leases have variable rents. The whole of that aspect seems to me, with my rural mind, to be incredibly complex, so I look forward to hearing further comments on that during the debate. The bill contains no requirement for Registers of Scotland to update the land register or the register of sasines to show a change in the ownership of land once the ultra-long lease has been converted to ownership. I hear what the minister said in reply to my intervention, but I remain concerned that the land register will wrongly show the original landlord as the owner, and the new owner as tenant. Surely a key feature of Scottish property law is that the registers can be relied on. The minister referred to another bill that is currently going through Parliament as perhaps being the correct vehicle through which to address the issue, but I continue to have some concerns in that regard. Again, we may come to that later in the debate. I appreciate that time is against me, Presiding Officer. I look forward to the rest of the debate. We will, perhaps, in closing speeches return to the points that I have raised.

I had to smile slightly at the minister’s opening remarks. If I picked him up rightly, he said, “If Parliament agrees” the bill. The reason for my slight smile was that that is a highly likely outcome, given the majority that the Government enjoys. I have no objection to that likely outcome, although I find myself voicing a note of caution as we proceed towards stage 2. Almost all members have raised common good in general and Waverley market in particular. I continue to have concerns about the somewhat inexact nature of the evidence base behind the relevant part of the bill. As Claudia Beamish said in her speech, it is in the interest of the public to have those matters resolved. I agree entirely. When it comes to Waverley market, I have to raise the white flag of surrender in the face of the legal complexities that surround it. I came across the phrase “cumulo rent” in the Scottish Parliament information centre briefing, although not in the context of Waverley market. I had always assumed that the word “cumulo” related to cloud formations, and I am afraid that that is exactly what envelops my brain when trying to address that issue. Therefore, I am delighted that the minister will meet Marco Biagi and, I hope, Alison Johnstone to try to sort out the matter. If they succeed in that, they will have my backing as well as my congratulations. On a more serious note, I cannot help but feel that those matters and others reflect the degree of uncertainty—indeed, cloudiness—that surrounds the bill. Some of those other matters relate to the variable rents issue that I mentioned briefly in my opening remarks, but they are definitely in evidence when we consider the issue of registration. As I said earlier, if the bill is not amended, the land register will wrongly continue to show the original landlord as the owner and the new owner as the tenant. As I understand it, it is a key feature of Scottish property law that the registers can be relied on, and I am far from convinced that we should be party to a piece of legislation that might be seen in any way to undermine that principle. I believe that the bill should include a provision that compels either the keeper or the new owners of property to rectify that inaccuracy. Annabelle Ewing mentioned her time at Westminster—for a moment, I thought that I detected a tear in her eye as she recalled those happy days—and its poorly drafted Scottish legislation. I entirely agree with her about the need to avoid poor legislation. We must heed the evidence that several members of the legal profession gave to the committee during its deliberations, some of which was mentioned by Margaret McDougall. It is not often that one is offered free advice from members of the legal profession and, under some circumstances, I might be hesitant to accept it but, on this occasion, we should look carefully at the evidence if we are to avoid passing poor legislation. Westminster does not have a monopoly on that. Accuracy is vital. I am happy to confirm that we on the Conservative benches will support the bill at stage 1 but, as it proceeds, I will want to be sure that we do not run the risk of having to review the legislation in three or four years’ time because we have got it wrong.

Like other members, I am grateful to David Stewart for bringing the motion to the Parliament, but I perhaps have a slightly different reason for expressing gratitude. In the members’ business debate on wind farms in December, Chic Brodie—I am delighted that he is here—made the quite extraordinary remark that beneficiaries might now include the royal household, through the receipt of profits from the Crown estate. My colleague Jamie McGrigor did his best to put Mr Brodie right on that occasion, through a point of order, but I welcome this further opportunity to spell out on the record, for Mr Brodie’s benefit, that although the Crown estate does indeed belong to Her Majesty the Queen, it is managed by independent commissioners, as I am sure that Mr Brodie knows, and the surplus revenue is paid annually to the UK Treasury.

I am not convinced by the member’s argument, which appears not to be backed by fact. The surplus revenue from the Crown estate goes directly to the UK Treasury. It seems to me that much of the criticism of the Crown estate, throughout the UK and specifically here in Scotland, is aimed at the management of the estate rather than at the estate’s ownership or—to a lesser degree, I accept—at where the surplus revenue ends up. An interesting aspect of the Calman commission’s discussions on the topic was the argument that because the surplus revenue from the £307 million gross UK income in 2010-11 was paid to the UK Treasury, a disproportionately large amount of investment could be made in Scotland, from which the gross income was a mere £12 million or 3.88 per cent of the total. In other words, the Crown Estate currently has the flexibility to make investments in Scotland using capital that is raised from assets outside Scotland. There is evidence to show that that has come to light in, for example, its working in partnership with the Scottish Government on investment in the development of offshore renewable energy. Other arguments suggest that too much focus is placed on maximising revenue and that that focus could lead to unnecessarily high charges and the possibility that the surplus is not fully reinvested in Scotland. I know that Calman looked at evidence that suggested that that might not be the case if the Scottish Government played a greater role in the management of the estate. Please forgive me, but, with due respect, I cannot think of anything worse than a Scottish Government of whatever political colour being involved in estate management. The record is not good. That is why I am very interested in the proposal in the Scottish Affairs Committee’s report that the Crown Estate’s marine responsibilities and rights relating to Scotland be devolved to the Scottish Government on condition that the powers are further devolved to a local level. Mr Stewart made that quite plain in his opening speech, and that appeals to me as a devolutionist and someone who genuinely believes in localism. The Crown Estate has considerable influence in my constituency. It owns much of the Solway Firth and an offshore area in which DONG Energy is currently exploring the option of investing in a wind farm. I may not particularly approve of the wind farm, but if it is to be, I want to see the communities in my constituency deriving the maximum benefit from it. I am instinctively attracted to the possibility of the communities that I represent in Galloway and West Dumfries benefiting directly from the true devolution of the Crown estate—not to the Parliament or the Government, but to the communities that would most benefit from it. In conclusion, as always, the devil would be in the detail, but I am happy to accept that the general principles of the Scottish Affairs Committee’s report are worthy of much further consideration.

Will the member give way?

Mr Brodie was kind enough to show me the part of the act to which he was referring. It seems to me quite clear that the money is paid to the Treasury. The act bases the grant to the royal household on the income to the Treasury from the Crown Estate. That is very different from direct payment from the Crown Estate.

I, too, congratulate Jim Hume on bringing the important subject of the road forward for community transport to the chamber for debate. In the time that is available to me, I want to expand on a couple of points that Aileen McLeod made. Just two nights ago in the chamber, we had the final event of the third community partnerships project, which has been run under the auspices of the Parliament. A group from Dumfries and Galloway gave its final report on the road to health—Dr McLeod referred to that. The group started as a small group of volunteers, who came together under the auspices of the community partnerships project to campaign to improve the provision of health-related transport for older people and their carers in rural Dumfries and Galloway. As often happens, the project started with a fairly widespread questionnaire and consultation, some of whose findings are worth considering. The survey found that more than a third of the people in the sample—which was considerable—were unable to do their own shopping, and that two thirds of those who could do their shopping lived more than a mile from shops, while nearly 10 per cent lived more than 10 miles from shops. It found that more than 40 per cent of older people had difficulty getting out of their houses and that nearly half of that group found it almost impossible to get out. Finally, it found that a quarter of older people did not get out of their houses at all in a month—I find that staggering. When the figures are extrapolated across the region, they become stark, suggesting that 15,000 older people in Dumfries and Galloway cannot do their shopping, 3,000 older people live more than 10 miles from shops, 18,000 older people have difficulty getting out and—this is the figure that hits me—more than 10,000 older people get out of their houses less frequently than once a month. I fully accept that this was not a scientific survey but, even if the figures are halved, they remain alarming. I hope that a motion that I lodged on “Road to Health”, which has the support of Elaine Murray and Aileen McLeod—and I hope will have the support of Jim Hume—will be debated in May and that we will come back to the subject. No sooner had the “Road to Health” figures hit my desk than I came across the rural transport solutions information and networking day, which was held in Kirkcudbright in January. It was attended by a number of members, certainly from the Labour benches—I was outnumbered; let me put it in that way. The event was fascinating. We learned about a pilot scheme whose objective is to implement vehicle sharing by partner organisations, to reduce underutilisation of vehicles. The estimable Brian McIlwraith, who runs Wigtownshire Community Transport, which is very much the vehicle for the pilot scheme in the area, told us that before the pilot got under way, the school transport fleet in Wigtownshire worked for only two and a half hours a day. For the rest of the time it was idle, sitting in garages doing nothing. In the four months since a new, more joined-up approach was adopted and the fleet became available 24/7, the fleet has done more than 22,000 miles and carried more than 8,000 passengers, who would not otherwise have had a form of public transport to utilise. I very much take Sarah Boyack’s point that community transport is not just a rural issue. The Wigtownshire service now runs a service in Stranraer—it is unsubsidised and qualifies for concessionary travel under section 22 of the Transport Act 1985. Wigtownshire Community Transport recognised a problem and dealt with it. There are public transport difficulties throughout rural Scotland and in parts of urban Scotland, which I am sure the minister recognises. Community transport has a huge part to play in solving some of the problems.

Will the member take an intervention?

Given that the tax regime is the same throughout the United Kingdom and that farm business tenancies south of the border are similar to limited duration tenancies in Scotland, would the member care to speculate on why the number of tenancies has fallen in Scotland at a time when the number of tenancies has significantly increased south of the border?

This has been a welcome debate on the general principles of the Agricultural Holdings (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill. I am happy to welcome the three changes to the current law that the Government is seeking to introduce through the bill. As we heard, the Government proposes, first, to amend the definition of a “near relative” who may succeed to a secure agricultural tenancy, to include grandchildren; secondly, to prevent certain restrictions for rent reviews; and thirdly, to disapply VAT rate changes and options to tax as variations in rent that prevent rent reviews. The proposals are to be broadly welcomed and there will be no argument or opposition to them from the Conservative benches. There is much to be applauded in the committee’s stage 1 report, but I have reservations about some of the committee’s thoughts and recommendations, on which I will concentrate. In doing that, I am transported back to the heady days of the previous Agricultural Holdings (Scotland) Bill—those halcyon days when I convened the Rural Development Committee and the cabinet secretary and indeed the Minister for Environment and Climate Change were but enthusiastic members of it—[Interruption.] Oh, they were happy days, Mr Gibson. During the debate on the previous bill, which was somewhat hijacked by the current Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism’s enthusiastic advocacy of the absolute right to buy for agricultural tenants, I warned that, although no one wanted a reinvigorated, vibrant and effective tenanted sector more than I did, Ross Finnie’s genuine attempts to bring that about would be more likely to have the opposite effect. All these years later, it gives me no pleasure to say that I appear to have been proved right. The number of let farms has fallen dramatically. That has happened for a number of reasons, but I think that I can safely say that a principal reason is the suspicion of the right to buy that still exists, which has stifled an important sector for the past decade. However, there is good news. There is at long last a glimmer of light at the end of a particularly long and dark tunnel. Through sitting together in the tenant farming forum, all parties are slowly but surely achieving agreement and trust—several members have rightly mentioned trust—and are finally beginning to break the deadlock that has existed for the past 10 years. The prize is immense because, if we allow the tenanted sector truly to flourish, then we solve the new entrants problem, or much of it, at the same time. For generations the tenanted sector has provided the door into agriculture, but we politicians have done a lot to close that door. I think that it is up to us politicians to try to open that door again. That is why I shudder at the thought of any attempt to extend the definition of “near relative” and why there is still a degree of nervousness among those who have land to let that, if they let it, it could be lost to them for ever through the introduction of a right to buy. I heartily commend the cabinet secretary’s efforts to resist those possibilities. If he, too, genuinely wishes to bring about a reinvigorated, sustainable and vibrant tenanted sector, he must continue to resist. If he does, he will have our solid support. The way to success is surely through agreement in and through the tenant farming forum. Anything that is imposed from outside, be it by Government, by Parliament, by committee or by any other body, will simply extend the current difficult situation. Frankly, that would do nobody any good at all.

Why does the member feel that disharmony would be a good thing in an area—that is, the TFF—where harmony exists?

Does the minister accept the broad principle that one is entitled to do as one wishes with one’s own property, whether it is a house or land for let or otherwise? As members have said, what is needed is a degree of trust that will allow people to let land as they might wish to do, and as the cabinet secretary and I would wish people to do.

12. To ask the Scottish Executive when Scottish Natural Heritage will publish further guidance on the “cumulative impact [of wind farms] and a range of additional guidance on siting and landscape matters” to which the Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism referred in the members’ business debate on 1 December 2011. (S4O-00810) I refer members to my entry in the register of interests.

Indeed, SNH did publish that guidance—and I am happy to take some credit as the publication appears to have been prompted entirely by the lodging of my question. Nevertheless, I am slightly disappointed that the guidance on siting and design focuses entirely on what, as the minister pointed out, are termed small-scale wind developments. When the minister wound up the members’ business debate in December, he very much gave the impression that the guidance would address the many concerns raised across the chamber on the siting of large-scale wind developments. That aside, will he assure us that his Government will not overturn decisions on wind farm proposals that have been rejected by a local authority under its own guidance—and, indeed, on official recommendation from within the authority—but have been appealed by the developer?

I am delighted to take part in the debate. I join others in commending Sandra White for bringing the motion to the chamber, and indeed for the eloquent way in which she opened the debate. I am particularly struck by the opening sentence of the motion that we are debating, because in this day and age many people ask themselves whether the Commonwealth has much of a role to play and even, perhaps, what it is for. To be perfectly honest, I used to ask myself those questions, until fairly recently. I would like to share with members two experiences that will, I hope, help to provide answers to those questions. The first experience stems from the early days of my time as Presiding Officer, when I hosted a dinner at Borthwick castle that marked the end of the 19th Commonwealth parliamentary seminar, which took place here in Scotland. It was, as members can imagine, a relaxed event, with the representatives from all corners of the Commonwealth having got to know each other fairly well over the preceding days, and they were clearly enjoying the opportunity of their final session together. Sitting on my left at the dinner was the representative from Pakistan—a very senior political figure who was representing his nation and its population of more than 187 million people. Sitting on my right was the representative of Norfolk Island, which I freely admit I had not heard of before, and which is an island dependency of the Commonwealth of Australia, albeit one with a large degree of self-governance. Its representative, who was an equally senior political figure in Norfolk Island, was representing its population of 2,302 people—not 2,302 million, but 2,302. In effect, I had 187 million people sitting on one side of me and 2,302 people sitting on the other, yet the realisation struck me that, almost entirely due to being members of the Commonwealth, the two representatives sat as absolute equals at the table. Surely that is one of the immense strengths of this unique family of nations. The second experience that I would like to share with members is from when I visited Malawi just over a year ago with our special envoy, Annie Lennox. I join others in welcoming her to the chamber this evening. We visited Malawi on behalf of the CPA Scotland branch. There is a picture on display in the members’ lobby that shows Annie and me reading a letter with a pupil from a school near Lilongwe. We had taken the letter, with many others, from a school in Glasgow that wanted to be linked with the Malawian one that we were to visit and had asked us to take the letters. When we handed out the letters, their provenance having been explained to the pupils by their teacher, there was a stunned and prolonged silence, which I originally interpreted as disapproval and disappointment but which turned out to be sheer, unadulterated astonishment and delight that schoolchildren in Scotland should want to make friends with their peers in Malawi. It was incredibly moving, and to me it encapsulated the very essence of the strength of the Commonwealth. If we dissect the word “commonwealth” into its two constituent parts, I believe that we find the strength of the organisation as a whole. The first word is “common”, and surely any organisation within which the representative of 187 million people can sit as an equal with the representative of 2,302 people has to be worth preserving and supporting. Equally, any organisation that encourages schoolchildren to reach out across the globe, across our very different cultures and our often imagined adult divides, to share and profit from a combined wealth of knowledge can only be a force for good in a world where such forces are all too scarce. The Commonwealth is, I believe, unique in that regard. I finish by commending the CPA Scotland branch’s on-going work, which is greatly valued within the Commonwealth. I am very happy indeed to support the motion before us.

3. To ask the First Minister what steps have been taken to deal with Schmallenberg virus if it spreads to Scotland. (S4F-00492)

I thank the First Minister for his response and for acknowledging the importance of early reporting of any symptoms of the virus. Last November, the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment agreed to establish a strategic management board to oversee veterinary surveillance, which was a main recommendation of the Kinnaird report. Another of the report’s key recommendations was that the board should consider a phased reduction in the number of disease surveillance centres, of which we have eight across the country. Can the First Minister ensure that no steps are taken to reduce the number of disease surveillance centres without the widest possible consultation and an absolute guarantee that the service’s speed and quality will not be adversely impacted by any changes, given the importance of early detection, diagnosis and reporting in combating Schmallenberg virus and other similar diseases?

The minister rightly mentioned local concerns about Stena’s move to Cairnryan and he will appreciate that those local concerns have been somewhat exacerbated by the fact that Stena now buses its foot passengers to Girvan rather than to Stranraer to catch the train. I understand that Stena has approached the Government to say that it would be willing to consider busing foot passengers to Stranraer if the rail timetable were altered slightly to coincide with ferry sailings. What steps can the Government take to facilitate that? If there are steps that it can take, is it willing to take them?

Will the cabinet secretary explain his logic in restructuring the colleges on a geographical rather than specialism basis while he extols the virtues of specialism over geography in the restructuring of the land-based colleges?

Does the convener agree that there is also a need to create a year-on-year national reserve, so that people who enter farming after the base year are able to access support? That would be unlike the current situation whereby people who did not receive support in the base years of 2001 to 2003 are unable to do so now.

I refer members to my entry in the register of members’ interests. The backdrop to the debate is interesting in that, until recently, the typical reaction from recipients of CAP support to the question of reform tended to be along the lines of, “You must just make sure that we get a fair share of the cake.” That has changed to, “Will there actually be a cake to get a fair share of?” Such is the state of the euro zone, and such is the resultant uncertainty surrounding the European budget, that the size of the cake is now as much in doubt as our share of it. Nonetheless, we can surely assume for the purposes of the debate that the general principles of the proposals will remain the same, whatever the size of the cake—or the budget. Within the proposals, there are perfectly reasonable and valid arguments about fair shares. I will come to fair shares in Scotland later but, as members have said, there is no doubt that we have a strong case to make for a fairer share of pillar 2 resources, given that we receive the lowest share per hectare in the whole of the EU. I agree with the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee report from the previous session of Parliament that that is an unacceptable situation, not least because of the high proportion of our land that is classified as less favoured. I have no doubt that we are fully justified in seeking a fairer share of that particular cake. How we do that is open to question, but I hope that the degree of Scottish and UK intergovernmental joint working that marked the recent common fisheries policy negotiations will be replicated in the CAP negotiations. That would be a positive start, and in a very brief meeting that I had with Caroline Spelman last week, I was given the distinct impression that the door is well and truly open. I hope that the cabinet secretary will avail himself of it. I wish both our Governments well as we move towards the negotiations. There is an enormous amount at stake that affects both our rural and national economies and we all have a considerable interest in the outcome. I will use the time that is available to me to raise one or two concerns about the proposals. The first proposal that I will address is the much-vaunted greening of direct, or pillar 1, payments. The idea is to attach compulsory elements to those payments to ensure that producers undertake activities that are beneficial to the environment and help to tackle climate change. It is hard, if not impossible, to argue with the sentiment of that aspiration, but we need to exercise a degree of caution about the proposal. I have no problem with farmers being asked to produce food in an environmentally sustainable and friendly way, but I do have a problem if that environmental sustainability comes at too great a cost to food production—and I do not mean a financial cost; I mean a cost in terms of output. Food production and security are surely the primary functions of our agricultural sector, and they should remain as such. Of the three main elements of the greening proposals, which Ms Baker mentioned, crop diversification is barely relevant to Scotland, the definition of permanent pasture as anything over five years old would have a catastrophic impact on our time-served agricultural practices, and the idea of leaving 7 per cent of eligible hectares fallow simply takes us back to the dreadful days of set-aside, which we have finally managed to put behind us. I therefore argue that the rightful place for greening measures is in pillar 2 and that we should be wary of the pillar 1 element of the proposals. I also harbour major concerns about the local impact of the shift from historical payments to area-based payments—not about the principle, which I fully accept, but about the potential to transfer vast resources from our most productive agricultural areas to our least productive areas. In 2009, the total value of single farm payment entitlements was €56 per hectare in Caithness and Sutherland and €256 in Dumfries and Galloway. That is not a measure of unfairness; I believe that it is a measure of comparable productivity based on historical support payments. What we must therefore strive to achieve is as fair a redistribution of support as is possible, coupled with as long a period of transition as is possible, to allow our producers to adjust their businesses to any new system of support. Farmers are extraordinarily flexible in adapting to what their political paymasters ask of them, but they need time to make adjustments and we must ensure that they get it. Time is something that is running out for me, which from my perspective is a great shame as I have an enormous amount that I would like to discuss. To the detriment of the chamber, I will not be able to do that. However, I will mention the need to create a year-on-year national reserve, which the convener of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee and I briefly discussed, and the need to support new entrants to farming. That issue is terribly important and it needs extensive debate. In Scotland, it cannot be divorced from the need for a policy on land tenure that encourages those who have land to let to do so without fear that it will be taken from them. We also need to discuss the forestry sector, which was hugely disadvantaged by the transition period during the previous reforms, as the convener briefly mentioned. Bridging the gap between periods of reform is vital, and it is a good note on which to wind up. I do not think that anybody really expects the reforms, whatever their final shape, to commence on time in 2014. Therefore, all Governments must be prepared to have an arrangement in place to ensure that CAP support is continued to all recipients so that their work can continue uninterrupted in the event of any slippage. At the end of the procedure, we must not forget that there is a world out there to be fed. It is a world that is expanding rapidly, and the ability to feed it, and ourselves, must remain the priority for current and future CAP reform. I wish the committee nothing but success in its continued deliberations.

I am sorry to interrupt a very good speech. Does Mike MacKenzie accept that the door of DEFRA is, as I understand it, open to the cabinet secretary, just as it was in the fishery negotiations, and that joint negotiations are the best way in which we can set out the real problems that Scotland has with the reforms.

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

6. To ask the Scottish Executive when the Dunragit bypass on the A75 will be completed. (S4O-00514)

I am grateful for that response, and I think that we can now take it as read that the Dunragit bypass will be constructed. That being the case, I invite the minister to give the people of Springholm and Crocketford the perfect Christmas present—this is a good time to do it—by assuring them that their communities will be bypassed within the lifetime of his Government’s 15-year infrastructure plans, given that those two communities will be the only ones on the A75 without a bypass once the Dunragit bypass is complete.

Dumfries and Galloway Council made great strides in its recycling record when it built an Ecodeco plant—an energy from waste plant—in Dumfries some years ago. Since then, SEPA’s reinterpretation of European Union recycling statistics has called into question the impact of the council’s considerable investment. What action is the cabinet secretary taking to work with the council to address the situation?

There are many in the fishing industry who believe that the whole debacle over article 13 was simply a clever tactical ploy by EU officials that allowed them to cut days at sea, leaving our fishermen to pay a heavy price for the settlement. What is the cabinet secretary’s view on that theory?

6. To ask the First Minister what percentage of the £60 billion that the Scottish Government has allocated for infrastructure projects over the next 15 years will be spent on roads. (S4F-00331)

When he opened the new Stena Line port in Cairnryan recently, the First Minister made bold statements about recommencing the Dunragit bypass on the A75—which his Government cancelled last year—and he announced that Maybole on the A77 would also be bypassed. This week’s announcement—which, I am afraid, contains little joy on roads infrastructure for the south-west of Scotland—suggests that nothing will happen on the Maybole bypass project until 2017 at the earliest. In light of that, can the Deputy First Minister now confirm a start date for the recommencement of the Dunragit bypass? In the structure plan, will she also commit to bypassing the villages of Springholm and Crocketford on the A75, which, along with Dunragit, currently have the dubious distinction of being the only communities without a bypass along the entire length of the trans-European network system between the south of Spain and the ferry ports at Cairnryan?

The cabinet secretary rightly mentioned in his statement that all the European Commission proposals will have an impact on the onshore sector. Indeed, he will be aware that the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee recently took evidence from representatives of that sector, who highlighted the precarious state that it is already in. What representations has the cabinet secretary made to ensure that the commission is fully aware of the relationship between days at sea and the sustainability of the onshore sector? Does he feel that the commission takes into account the state of that sector when it introduces such proposals?

I refer members to my entry in the register of members’ interests, in which they will see that I receive an annual fixed rental for seven turbines that are part of Hadyard Hill wind farm in south Ayrshire, so I begin from the position that I am not against wind farms in principle. However, wind farm development is a hugely topical subject. The motion covers the issue that is most consistently raised with me in my capacity as the constituency member for Galloway and West Dumfries. I am sure that the First Minister will recall his Cabinet’s meeting in Stranraer last summer, which was, on the whole, well received and very welcome. My abiding memory is of something that happened during the two-hour-long public question-and-answer session in the afternoon. Three quarters of the way through that session, a slightly critical question was asked about the Scottish Government’s drive to develop wind farms. For the one and only time in that two-hour session, the audience spontaneously burst into vigorous applause—not some of them, but all of them—and that applause was sustained. The First Minister’s response was interesting. Although I paraphrase this slightly, he said effectively, “Wind is free and if you want the jobs you must put up with the wind farms.” Wind itself may be free—so are oil and gas—but harnessing them most certainly is not free. It is massively expensive; it is something for which we are all paying through the nose through our electricity bills. The energy that is produced by wind farms would not be produced by any normal commercial company without the huge subsidies that are raised through those electricity bills. Free it most certainly is not. I have to ask the minister what jobs the First Minister was referring to. Yes, there are consultants all over the place and there are some civil engineering jobs during the construction phase of any wind farm, but there are no residual employment benefits for the communities that are increasingly dominated by these installations—none.

I am sorry. I would like to take interventions, but, as the Presiding Officer has made obvious, we are horribly tight for time. We have to ask ourselves, is it any wonder that people get upset and very angry when they realise how much subsidy is required to make this technology viable; or when they read of millions of pounds being paid to operators to turn their turbines off because the grid is at full capacity; or when a minister proudly declares that a new wind farm will power 200,000 homes, when we all now know that wind farms never work at more than around 30 per cent of capacity and that it will therefore power only some 70,000 homes, and intermittently at that; or when a local authority rejects an application only for the developer to appeal to the Scottish Government and, often, have the decision overruled? Time is tight, so I will conclude by suggesting that the continuing lack of any proper guidance to local authorities from Government on the siting of wind farms is the root cause of much of the anger and frustration. The cumulative impact of more and more wind farms is becoming almost unbearable for some people—in fact, I would suggest, for an increasing number of people. I respectfully suggest to the Government that the time has come to consider a moratorium on further development until people’s justifiable concerns have been addressed. The saddest fact in all this is that most people who are anti-wind farm are not against renewable energy, but the two are becoming increasingly conflated. It might soon become impossible to promote the latter without addressing many of the concerns that have been raised tonight about the former.

I hope that Mr Gibson will accept that I did not denounce wind farms. I am not against wind farms in principle. However, I believe that there is a lot of concern about their siting, on which there is a lack of guidance. Many other concerns have been raised perfectly reasonably tonight. Let us keep this debate reasonable.

I am sorry about the complete negativity of the cabinet secretary’s speech so far. Does he recognise that the UK minister said in his statement that “no centres will close before the robustness of the system is demonstrated.”—[Official Report, House of Commons, 22 November 2011; Vol 536, c 166.] Does he acknowledge that that assurance in some way addresses his concern that, if the proposed closures lead to a downgrading of the system—which I entirely deny—it would not happen because its robustness will be fully tested before any centre closes?

I accept that that idea made a lot of sense under Labour’s original proposals, which would have been consulted on, as Labour proposed that the rest of the United Kingdom’s coastguard centres would be part-time centres. Does Lewis Macdonald accept that the position has changed, as the current proposals would make all the centres full-time centres?

I am pleased to take part in this debate, although I am left with little choice other than to say that I rather regret the tone of both the Government’s motion—

I have support for that. I also regret the tone of the Labour amendment. The Government’s motion represents what we are slowly getting used to in this session of Parliament: a blind denial that any change or review is ever needed or worth while unless, of course, it is sponsored by the Scottish National Party. The Labour amendment’s attempt at a more constructive approach is welcome, but it is let down by its assertion—as in the Government motion—that the modernisation plan has “prioritised cost over other considerations”. I prefer the stance that was taken by Lewis Macdonald’s colleague in the House of Commons, who said—and I agree—that he has “no doubt that these proposals are at least partly driven by financial constraints.”—[Official Report, House of Commons, 22 November 2011; Vol 536, c 164.] I simply do not accept that costs were the overriding factor in announcement of the plan, because I do not know of any review that has been undertaken by any Government of any country in the world that does not take the opportunity to consider more cost-effective ways of delivering the services that are under review. I argue that it would be a dereliction of duty not to do so. Although I do not doubt that the cost of delivery is a factor—as Lewis Macdonald’s Westminster colleague acknowledged—I reject any notion that it is the top priority.

That was all perfectly clearly explained in the statement that was made by the minister in the House of Commons, to which I refer Lewis Macdonald. We in the Conservatives totally recognise the continuing concerns over the closure of individual coastguard stations such as the Clyde and Forth stations. The closure of the Clyde station is of immense concern to my constituency, which is covered by it. As was recognised by Lewis Macdonald—and slightly belatedly by the cabinet secretary—the Liverpool station also covers that area and both are to close. As an aside, it might be of interest to note that the Scottish Government is apparently so blinkered by what happens only within Scotland’s boundaries that its response to the UK Government’s consultation on the planned closure of the Liverpool station said that that was not an issue that concerns the Scottish Government. Given that that station covers a large area of the waters off south-west Scotland, which has been referred to, I gently suggest that the matter should have concerned the Scottish Government. Apparently it did not.

The point is summed up by the minister’s use of the word “subsequently”. Initial representations might have been helpful. There are, of course, serious local concerns that that extensive area of Scotland’s coastline is about to become the only part of the UK’s coastline not to be covered by a station in its own region, with the potential loss of vital local knowledge. I do not think that anybody would argue about the importance of local knowledge. I want to see what level of resourcing and upskilling of personnel will take place at the Belfast station, which will now cover the area, before I can be convinced that this is the right move. I am quite sure that similar concerns must exist around other stations that are to take on the work of those that are to close. Local knowledge is a precious resource, which is not easily transferable simply from one station to another.

I absolutely accept that there is a concern there, but it depends on the transfer of that local knowledge, which is so important. I will come to a reason why I think it can be done later on. In among all the doom and gloom that appears to be being spread by the two major parties in this Parliament, the first thing that I want to do is acknowledge the UK Government’s willingness to act on the 1,800-plus submissions to the first consultation that were received. It was launched in December 2010 on proposals that were, effectively, those of the out-going Labour Administration. It is worth repeating that the majority of those submissions agreed that the service was in need of change and modernisation. As a result of the further consultation—I welcome the fact that the UK Government undertook it—part of that change and modernisation is to increase the number of regular officers in the coastguard rescue service by some 50 per cent and the number of locations from which those officers operate by 80 per cent, from 10 to 18, including new locations in the Moray Firth, Strathclyde and Oban. I greatly welcome the fact that the increase will bolster support for the fantastic work of the 3,500-plus volunteers who make the rescue service possible in the first place. I am slightly saddened that neither Labour nor the Scottish National Party seem to have it in them to welcome the change, which—just for once—heralds the introduction of fewer chiefs and more Indians; usually, it is the other way round.

With due respect, I say that have taken three interventions already and I have only six minutes, which are just about finished. Furthermore, as the Liberal Democrats’ amendment rightly points out, the regular staff will benefit from enhanced terms and conditions. I think that that is good news, and Tavish Scott thinks that it is good news, but it seems that we are alone in taking that view. In conclusion, there are, of course, concerns about the modernisation programme, and we share some of them. Change does not come without concern for its consequences, and these changes are no different in that regard. I remember visiting the coastguard station at Stornoway two summers ago, and being hugely impressed by the set-up there. I found it almost impossible to believe that the complexity of the seas and coastline could be effectively covered by the station, but I came away utterly convinced that, through the professionalism and dedication of the staff whom I met, those who sail those treacherous waters are in the safest of hands. I remain convinced that that same professionalism and dedication will successfully take on the challenges that are presented by the plan. I cannot wholeheartedly welcome it at this stage, but I have complete faith in the coastguard service to deliver it. I move amendment S4M-01408.1, to leave out from “with concern” to end and insert: “the UK Government’s announcement on coastguard modernisation; recognises that concerns remain over some local aspects of the announcement but that a significant number of the 1,800 responses to the December 2010 consultation acknowledged the need for change and modernisation; welcomes the UK Government’s decision to undertake a second consultation in light of those responses; further welcomes the commitment to increase the number of regular officers in the Coastguard Rescue Service by 50% and the number of Coastguard Rescue Service locations by 80%, including locations in the Moray Firth, Strathclyde and Oban, and believes that the outcome is a genuine attempt to provide a coastguard service that is fit for the 21st century.”

Will the member at least have the grace to accept that the original proposals were Labour’s proposals?

Will the member take an intervention?

The member raises understandable and justifiable concerns about the closure of the Clyde centre. If he listened to my earlier speech, he will know that I share some of those concerns. However, how can he say categorically that the decision to close Clyde and strengthen Belfast would have led to a different outcome in the Stena Line ferry incident to which he refers, given that the incident took place an awful lot closer to Belfast than to the Clyde? It is not to do with proximity; it is everything to do with technology. How can he say that there would have been a different outcome?

Would the member like to take a genuine intervention?

I would like to make two brief points. First, will the member accept—as the cabinet secretary did not seem to—that the UK minister has said clearly that no centres will close before the robustness of the system is demonstrated? Because of what the UK minister has said, I do not accept the member’s criticism that Scotland is being used as a guinea pig. Secondly, I would have liked to have a motion that I could support this evening. I cannot vote in favour of the motion because of its tone. If the member is so keen to achieve consensus, perhaps he might have a word with the cabinet secretary about lodging a more consensual motion.

Will the minister give way?

6. To ask the Scottish Executive what its position is on Scottish Natural Heritage’s proposal to remove the site of special scientific interest designation from Pibble mine in Wigtownshire. (S4O-00394)

The minister is correct, but the British Geological Survey’s review was published in 1998, some 13 years ago—one might have thought that action would have been taken by now. The same review recommends the removal of the designation of several other SSSIs, yet only Pibble mine is currently to have it removed. Is the minister aware that Pibble mine lies on the site of a proposed wind farm development, and that the other sites that the review mentions do not? Does the minister believe that that is just a coincidence?

Tomorrow, the First Minister will visit my constituency to open the new Stena Line port at Loch Ryan. I know that he will join me in welcoming the investment that that represents, but does he also recognise that Stena’s move leaves the town of Stranraer with what is effectively an industrial wasteland at its waterfront? Will he ensure that every available resource from his Government is put at the disposal of the local authority in its efforts to implement the excellent regeneration master plan that it has put together to breathe some much-needed new life into the town?

In the on-going discussions that the minister has with the UK Government on CAP reform, will he do everything that he can to ensure that the change of support from the historical basis that he just mentioned to an area basis, which will come about as part of the reform, will not impact unduly on farmers in the south and west of Scotland, which it could do without considerable Government intervention?

I acknowledge the work that has been done, particularly in the NHS, to ease our veterans’ lot. However, it has been brought to my attention that there is still an issue as regards general practitioners’ acknowledgement and recognition of specialist issues in relation to veterans. Does the Government have any thoughts on how that might be addressed?

Although it is customary to begin any debate by saying how pleased one is to take part in it, I am genuinely pleased to participate in the debate this morning. I very much endorse Richard Simpson’s opening remarks about the Government’s record on the issue—the word “exemplary” is not too strong—and take his later criticism to be entirely constructive. I hope that the debate will continue to be constructive. I commend the minister for lodging the motion, which allows all of us to discuss the matter. As he said, this is the right time for this debate. Perhaps I should declare an interest. I am a member of the Poppyscotland Scottish advisory committee to the Royal British Legion—it was much easier when that was called simply the board of Poppyscotland. I also have the great honour of having recently been elected as convener of the cross-party group on armed forces veterans in the Scottish Parliament. In that regard, I pay tribute to the work of Jeremy Purvis in the previous session. He founded that group and did a great deal to raise the profile of veterans issues in this institution. He is no longer an MSP, but through that work, he has left us a legacy for which we should all be extremely grateful. I am more than happy to assure members that the work that he initiated will be continued through this session with the able assistance of the cross-party group’s deputy conveners Stewart Maxwell, Hugh Henry and Willie Rennie. I give the minister due notice that I wrote to him just yesterday—he can put this in his diary if he wants to—to invite him to attend the cross-party group on Wednesday 13 June at 6 o’clock. We all hope that he will be able to accept that invitation, other commitments allowing. During the previous session, I was greatly privileged in the role of Presiding Officer to visit and have contact with a number of organisations and individuals whose efforts are entirely focused on improving the lives of veterans, such as Lady Haig Poppy Factory, which the Presiding Officer recently visited, Whitefoord house, Combat Stress in Ayrshire, its partner charity Gardening Leave—which Richard Simpson has just spoken about—Southwest Scotland RNR, Erskine, SSAFA Forces Help and others. Anyone who has encountered or visited any of those organisations or any of the many others that are involved with veterans issues cannot help but be made aware of the emotional nature of such encounters or visits, and it also becomes horribly apparent just how badly the services that they offer are needed. In a way, I find it quite frightening that Veterans Scotland now has 53 member organisations under its umbrella, and that there are many others that are not. That signifies the immense need for veteran support. That is troubling enough, but that need appears to be growing, which is doubly troubling and serves as a reminder to the Parliament that we must never take our eyes off the ball. I am glad to say that much of what I have learned over the past four years is positive, in particular in respect of how much better the armed forces now are at recognising and dealing with symptoms of health issues—Richard Simpson touched on that—and especially mental health issues, while individuals are still serving in the forces, rather than leaving it to others to cope with them once those individuals have returned to civilian life, as used to happen, although the return to civilian life still brings its problems. Another huge step in the right direction is the reduction in the number of years between people leaving the forces and their seeking and being referred to appropriate support if they need it. Although my memory is not what it used to be and I am open to argument, I think I am right in saying that, not too long ago, the average gap between a person’s leaving the forces and their seeking support was more than 30 years and that, despite the improvement, the gap is still in the teens of years. The mind boggles—mine does, at any rate—at what those individuals must go through mentally and/or physically before they seek the help that is available, which they either do not know about or perhaps are too proud to ask about. Whatever the reason, I cannot praise highly enough the organisations—Dr Simpson mentioned Combat Stress and its outreach service, for example—that make it their business to go out and try to ensure that people know that help is at hand, that there is absolutely no shame in seeking it, and that that help is the very least that we can offer as a society for what those extraordinary men and women have given us. Dr Simpson has done the debate a favour—indeed, I think the minister acknowledged it in his speech—in highlighting in the amendment the role that is played nowadays by the Territorial Army, which is much more active and involved in the military scene than has historically been the case. I vividly recall talking to a Territorial Army soldier who had not long returned to his office job after a first tour of duty in Afghanistan. I asked him whether the change had been difficult to cope with in any regard. His reply surprised me somewhat, but he was clearly troubled. He said that the usual reaction to his return was along the lines of “Oh well, six months in the sun, eh? Some people get all the good jobs,” or “I’d’ve thought you’d have a better sun tan than that by now.”; whereas he had clearly been emotionally expecting something rather more inquisitive, sympathetic and understanding. I suspect that the reaction of his work colleagues was the reaction of those who do not quite know how to react to an unusual and perhaps awkward situation. However, it highlights the acute sensitivity and understanding that returning servicemen and women need, but perhaps often do not receive and which will often play on them mentally with who knows what end result. The Labour amendment rightly asks us to recognise the continuing value of supported employment for disabled veterans. I suggest that there is also a need to consider greater support within normal employment for returning Territorial Army personnel. We are often reminded that a country is judged by how it looks after its elderly people, but I believe that it should equally be judged on how it looks after its veterans. As we approach armistice day and remembrance Sunday, it is entirely appropriate that we remember those who have given their lives so that we can live in relative freedom and stability today, but it is every bit as appropriate that we redouble our efforts to support our serving soldiers, sailors, airmen and women not just while they serve but long after they have returned to civilian life. Presiding Officer, I trust that the voting system will not be further tested this evening when we decide on the motion and amendment, because I hope that the vote will be entirely unanimous. Certainly, we on this side are proud and pleased to support the motion and the amendment.

4. To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to revisit the basis under which businesses are assessed for a licence to sell alcohol under the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005. (S4O-00271)

I genuinely thank the cabinet secretary for that response, which is very different from the one that he gave a couple of months ago when I spoke to him on this issue. I am delighted at the outcome and the announcement of the review. Acknowledging the cabinet secretary’s comment that the review will be independent, I wonder whether, as part of it, the Government will look at changing the basis of assessment and consider assessing fees on the actual turnover of alcohol instead of on rateable value. The current system has led to huge increases for small businesses, with the result that more than 30 per cent of such businesses in my constituency have surrendered their right to sell alcohol.

Will the cabinet secretary take steps not just to speed up the process but to simplify it, so that it becomes more accessible for smaller farmers who find it difficult to afford the fees that professional agents ask for? Will he also take steps to make the process easier for people who are not computer literate to apply, so they may do so not necessarily online? Those two problems are often flagged up with me.

I am grateful to you, Presiding Officer. I am very well aware of your desire to allow back benchers more time in debates and I will probably allow that to happen, because my comments might be relatively brief. I thank Elaine Murray for recognising that our proposed amendment stated very much what hers states. I point out only that, in typical economic fashion, our amendment used 19 words to say what Labour’s took 56 words to say. However, I find the rejection of our proposed amendment entirely understandable under the circumstances and that is in no way meant as a criticism. This is a timely debate, given the importance of the Scottish fishing industry and the massive influence that the common fisheries policy has on it. It is all too easy simply to rail at length against the hated CFP and all who have anything to do with it. Indeed, I was very tempted to begin my speech by doing just that, but I found myself drawn to a comment in the briefing that the SFF helpfully sent to us, which states, perhaps somewhat surprisingly: “some credence must be given to the fact that since the last reform in 2002: ‘Using the simple indicator of sustainability, the proportion of stocks that are within safe biological limits has increased ... from about 10% to about 40%.’” So, something must have gone right over the past decade—although presumably and probably not as quickly or efficiently as was originally promised—and it would surely be churlish not to recognise the positive achievement that that statistic represents. It was in that spirit of magnanimity that I reread Maria Damanaki’s words on the latest proposed reforms. In a press release that has accompanied the announcement of the reforms, she said: “Action is needed now to get all our fish stocks back into a healthy state to preserve them for present and future generations. Only under this precondition can fishermen continue to fish and earn a decent living out of their activities. This means that we have to manage each stock wisely, harvesting what we can but keeping the stock healthy and productive for the future. This will bring us higher catches, a sound environment and a secure seafood supply. If we get this reform right, fishermen and coastal communities will be better off in the long run. And all Europeans will have a wider choice of fresh fish, both wild and farm produced.” Like everyone else, I am sure, I cannot disagree with one single word of that statement, and yet for some reason my heart sinks when I realise that the vehicle for the delivery of that unarguably magnificent aspiration is the common fisheries policy itself. History tells us—both previous speakers underlined this—that the best interests of Scotland’s fishermen and, therefore, its fishing industry, rarely if ever coincide with the general principles and thrust of the CFP. We have to look at the main proposals of the reforms very carefully. In the time that is available to me—however generous it might be—I will take a brief look at just three of the proposals in the reforms: on discards, transferable fishing concessions and aquaculture. I make no apology for the degree of repetition that I am sure there will be throughout this debate. I share completely in everyone else’s widespread revulsion at the dreadful waste and wilful disregard for our marine environment that discards personify and I welcome whole-heartedly the determination to do something about them. However, I add a word of caution about the dangers of a possible knee-jerk reaction to a very public and high-profile campaign by a celebrity TV chef, which has rocketed this issue up the agenda, even though that chef—this is a rather Stewart Stevenson-like statement, for which I apologise—was my first cousin once removed’s best man. I am influenced in my observations on that not just by the Scottish Fishermen’s Federation, which points out that the proposals for a ban on discards do not necessarily present a solution to the problem, but by the cautionary note that is sounded in the briefing papers provided by the RSPB, which argues that “the Commission’s current proposals focus overwhelmingly on the issue of landing all catches, rather than on ways to avoid the capture of potentially discardable fish in the first place.” That view is echoed to an extent by WWF Scotland, which states: “we believe the proposed discard ban is not the right solution to a highly complex problem. We need to catch less, and make better use of what is caught.” Those are powerful arguments and I am certainly not persuaded that a simple land-all-catch policy is in any way the right answer. I therefore must urge caution in that area of reform. I was warmed by Elaine Murray’s powerful arguments in that regard. I urge similar caution on the subject of TFCs. Some, like the SFF, argue that the proposal poses little threat. Others, like Ian Hudghton and Struan Stevenson, two MEPs who appeared in front of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee by videolink just last week, argue that the proposal holds a very real threat to the basic principle of relative stability that currently underpins fisheries policy. Like Elaine Murray, I suspect that if TFCs are kept within the member states, the SFF’s position will be justified, but that if TFCs become tradeable between member states, the fears of our MEPs will be more than fully realised. Caution has to be the watchword on this matter if our Scottish industry is to be properly protected. Finally, I turn to aquaculture. I find myself instinctively nervous at the prospect of the EU spreading its bureaucratic tentacles over the aquaculture sector to an even greater extent than it does already, and I am relieved that that nervousness is shared by the UK and Scottish Governments. The Commission’s proposals include the suggestion that an aquaculture advisory group be established. Although that is not our preferred outcome of the reform process, if it is the outcome, I believe that Scotland must have a lead role to play in that advisory group, given the pre-eminence of our aquaculture industry. Even with the Presiding Officer’s kind offer to extend the time that is available to us, time does not permit me to look at the reform proposals in any greater detail, although I know that others will do so. I cannot overestimate the importance of getting the reform of the CFP right for Scotland. Of course we support the Scottish Government in its efforts to do just that, and I welcome the cabinet secretary’s commitment to working as closely as possible with the UK Government as it does so. For our part, Conservative members will do everything that we can to encourage the UK Government to work as closely as possible with the Scottish Government to achieve that outcome.

Does the minister accept that there is a perception that there is a distinct lack of guidance to local authorities on the appropriate siting of large-scale onshore wind farms, which has led to many cases of what can only be called sporadic development of such installations? As sporadic development is specifically disallowed for all other forms of development, why does the Government tacitly encourage sporadic development of wind farms?

I congratulate Aileen McLeod warmly not only on achieving her first members’ business debate, but on the subject that she has chosen. It is exactly the type of subject that fits most comfortably within members’ debates and, as the constituency member for Galloway and West Dumfries, I am only too delighted to speak in support of the motion. My only complaint is about the timing of the debate. However, that is a purely selfish concern arising from the fact that I have to attend a constituency event at Castle Douglas at eight o’clock this evening, which means that I must offer apologies to Aileen McLeod, the chamber and you, Presiding Officer, as I must leave as soon as I have finished my speech if I am not to incur the wrath of the police force. One of my great pleasures since 1999 has been to witness the quite remarkable growth of local food production, processing and marketing in Dumfries and Galloway. From the occasional smokery that one used to pass, the industry has grown into one that spans Scotland and is of ever-increasing importance to the rural economy. I have no doubt that its importance will continue to grow. As the motion points out, entrepreneurs and artisans have ensured that local food and drink production now encompasses a vast range of products. Those range from smoked fish and meats to breads, cheeses, preserves, beers, wines, cordials and fish—even tilapia is now produced in Dumfries and Galloway. If members do not know what it means, as I did not, they should google it. There are game products and venison, native beef and sheep products—the list goes on and is, frankly, as long as the imagination and ingenuity of the producers. All that is aided greatly by the growth in farmers markets, as was mentioned, and the huge interest in cookery programmes on television. As someone who has considerable trouble just boiling an egg, I confess to a fascination with programmes such as “MasterChef” and others. We should not downplay the influence of those programmes, nor of the TV chefs themselves, in raising consumers’ interest in locally produced and sourced products. Savour the flavours of Dumfries and Galloway has captured all that in the flavour fortnight, and I endorse everything that Aileen McLeod said about that organisation in her opening speech. I believe that after a sticky start, the organisation is now very much on the right tracks. A perfect example of the ingenuity that has been shown by the local participants in the flavour fortnight—to which Aileen McLeod has already referred—is the production of a special beer just for the fortnight, called FestivAle, by Sulwath Brewers Ltd in Castle Douglas. It is a great initiative by a wonderful microbrewery. However, I want to highlight a considerable disadvantage that has been imposed not only on Sulwath Brewers but on all microbreweries throughout Scotland by an act of this Parliament, namely the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005. The purpose of part of the 2005 act was to make the liquor licensing regime self-funding. There is nothing wrong with that in theory, but in practice somewhere between 30 and 35 per cent of all licence holders across Dumfries and Galloway chose not to renew their licences, simply because of the vast increase in cost of applying for a licence to sell alcohol. Without exception, those licences were held by village and farm shops, tea rooms, delicatessens, garden centres, small restaurants and other similar outlets that have nothing to do with binge drinking or the alcohol-related social problems that we abhor. They have everything to do with enhancing the eating and tourism experience that was mentioned earlier and which is so important for rural areas such as Dumfries and Galloway. As a result of the act, Sulwath Brewers has lost nine retail outlets for its excellent products in Castle Douglas High Street alone. The damage could be simply undone if the Government were to change the basis for the licence fee from rateable value to turnover of alcohol. I have discussed this with Kenny MacAskill, but I urge the Government to look at doing this for the sake of its otherwise excellent policy on the promotion of Scotland’s food and drink. I am out of time, but I would have liked to have mentioned the importance of re-instituting local abattoirs as part of local food chains—something that we all agree on. I endorse the motion and I wish savour the flavours every possible success over the two weeks. One or two members have been kind enough to mention that I lost a little weight over the summer recess. I fully expect to have reversed that trend by the end of flavour fortnight.

3. To ask the Scottish Executive when the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy last met officials from NHS Dumfries and Galloway and what issues were discussed. (S4O-00094)

In 2009, 39 men in the NHS Dumfries and Galloway health board area died of prostate cancer, which is almost double the number 10 years previously. That is a worrying trend, especially as only one in three men over the age of 50 has ever heard of the prostate-specific antigen test that can detect prostate cancer. Is the cabinet secretary aware of the Prostate Cancer Charity tour ride that will come to Dumfries in early September? Perhaps more important, what assurances can she give that the charity’s efforts in raising funds for and awareness of prostate cancer are matched by the Scottish Government’s efforts to ensure that the male population is made aware of the PSA test and given sufficient information to enable men to decide whether to take it?

I will see what I can do for you, Presiding Officer. I am delighted to wind up the debate on behalf of the Scottish Conservatives, but I must begin by agreeing, to a large extent, with Elaine Murray and Jenny Marra on the wording of the motion. I do so with considerable relief. A little over 12 years ago, as a new and somewhat naive politician I lodged the first non-Executive motion in the Scottish Parliament, which eventually resulted in the establishment of time for reflection. It was described at the time by no less a figure than the late Donald Dewar, our first First Minister, as quite possibly the worst-worded motion that it had ever been his misfortune to encounter—or words to that effect. Ever since then, I have proudly held on to the title of lodger of the worst-worded motion of all time. However, I think I know when I am beat, and in the spirit of pre-recess generosity that Alex Johnstone mentioned I am prepared to concede my title to the cabinet secretary whose name is attached to the motion that is before us today. In the motion we are asked to welcome a wish and to note that key to that wish is a strategy that wishes something else, particularly in terms of rural wishes. There are so many wishes in the motion that I am afraid that I must describe it as somewhat wishy-washy. To be frank, I wish that it had been better worded. Despite the quality of the motion, the subject of debate is important for all members, and particularly for members who represent rural constituencies, as so many members pointed out in excellent speeches. We are happily talking about providing next-generation technology and superfast broadband across the nation, but—like, I am sure, many members—I have constituents who are still marvelling at the wonders of dial-up technology. Indeed, I had an e-mail only last week from a constituent who runs a bed and breakfast in a remote part of Galloway, whose provider had contacted him to inform him that his dial-up service, which is the only service that is available to him, is about to be discontinued because there is no longer a demand for it. He will be left with nothing, while we comfortably talk about the massive improvements that are to come. It is to be hoped—dare I say “wished”?—that massive improvements are to come, and soon, because I do not think that it is overstating the case to say that the regeneration of the rural economy largely depends on such improvements. I was impressed by what Elaine Murray said about how we can go about securing them and by Rob Gibson’s more cautionary approach in pointing to some of the challenges in that regard. I am sure that we all agree that there is a wealth of entrepreneurial talent and spirit abroad in rural Scotland and that constituencies such as mine, Galloway and West Dumfries, offer the finest workplaces for small and micro-sized enterprises. However, without a level of connectivity that at least challenges if not equals connectivity in our urban areas, rural entrepreneurs and wealth creators have to start out at a huge competitive disadvantage. If we want to walk the talk of releasing people’s full potential, we simply have to give them the connectivity that will allow that to happen. On mobile phone coverage, the admirable community of the Isle of Whithorn in Wigtownshire in my constituency established one of the earliest first responder units in the south of Scotland. The unit’s wonderful volunteers turn out whenever they are called on to do so by the Scottish Ambulance Service, and it is no exaggeration to say that each time that they are called out they could be saving a life. The call-out on which they depend comes by way of a Vodafone pager, for which the signal in the area is, as with all other networks, desperately patchy. At a nearby caravan site, which is hugely popular in summer, there is no signal at all. Lives are potentially put at risk because of that. Vodafone is deaf to appeals to put up a mast, simply on the grounds of cost. Despite my considerable sympathy with George Adam’s occasional desire to be out of range of any signal whatever, I can think of no better example of why we need mobile coverage for the whole of this country, not just the 90 per cent of it to which the cabinet secretary referred. I am sure that that will come, but it simply cannot come fast enough for the Isle of Whithorn’s first responder unit. This has quite rightly been a largely consensual debate—that is understandable—and I am delighted that the south of Scotland has been mentioned as often as it has. As a south of Scotland member, I often feel that debates such as this are very effectively hijacked by the Highlands and Islands members, but that is not the case this time. Others have mentioned other parts of Scotland, too: this a national issue—there is no doubt about it. Although the debate has quite rightly been consensual, I want to address one point that the cabinet secretary made in his opening speech. He stated—I think I have got this right—that it is important for the UK Government to work with us. I gently suggest that the Scottish Government must also ensure that it works with the UK Government, as our amendment suggests. I hope that the process will become a two-way process—a process of partnership, which surely has to be the right way forward, rather than a process that carries the danger of the Scottish Government sitting back, waiting to be included and then complaining bitterly if it is not. I have no doubt that the UK will not allow that to happen. I hope that the Scottish Government will be proactive in the process and not just reactive. I believe that that is the way forward. I hope that it is the way forward for a better Scotland.

I am sure that the cabinet secretary will recall that in March, I think, the National Farmers Union Scotland had meetings at the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs and with ministers from Westminster. They came back saying that the doors of the Westminster Government were more open than they had ever experienced them being during devolution. Does he not welcome that and would he not say that that is a good way for Scotland’s case to be put forward?

I draw members’ attention to my entry in the register of members’ interests. I am delighted to participate in the first rural debate of the new parliamentary session but I have to confess that trying to encapsulate my thoughts on the huge remit of the policy portfolio within six minutes is almost impossible. I will achieve it, however, Presiding Officer. Despite the limit on the time that is available to me, I cannot begin without saying what a pleasure it is to speak from a position that allows me to intervene and occasionally disagree with members, rather than having to listen to contributions with which I was occasionally in profound disagreement, usually with gritted teeth, from the esteemed position of the Presiding Officer’s chair. You might get used to that this afternoon, Presiding Officer. Let me put it another way: it is good to be back on these benches, particularly for a rural debate. I look forward to many more of them. There will need to be many more of them because we are entering a five-year period that will be decidedly serious for rural Scotland. It is half a decade in which much might change. If we get things right, the change will almost certainly be for the better, but the opposite is also true. Therefore, I wish to state from the outset that we on these benches will support the Government fully when we agree that the best interests of rural Scotland will be served. I also serve notice that we will oppose the Government to the best of our ability if we disagree, and there will inevitably be occasions when we disagree. Like Sarah Boyack, I commend the cabinet secretary for his policy of leaving his door open to Opposition spokespeople, although I express the hope that it will be as open when we do not agree as it will be when we do. In fact, the former is probably more important than the latter. It is clear that CAP reform is the big issue before us in this session. With some 700 members of the European Parliament all arguing their corners, it is difficult to foresee that the negotiations will have a wholly agreed, detailed outcome. It is surely more likely that there will be an overall policy agreement that contains within it a degree of flexibility. Personally, I think that that would not be an entirely unhelpful outcome—indeed, perhaps it is one that we should aim for. We must also seek to achieve a fairer share of the available budgets. That applies as much to the UK Government, as the member state that is involved in the negotiations, as it does to the Scottish Government, as it seeks a fair share for Scotland within the UK’s overall CAP budget. The needs for flexibility that I referred to are many and varied, but are perhaps best highlighted by the huge challenge that will be faced post CAP reform, as we move to area-based payments for agricultural support. The Scottish Government rightly says that we need a regime that supports active agriculture, but I argue that we must also ensure that we reward productive agriculture, or at least ensure that we do not disadvantage the most productive areas of the sector as support is redistributed on a non-historic basis. On its food and drink policy, we are highly supportive of the Government’s intentions. I particularly welcome the SNP’s manifesto commitment to continue efforts to improve food education in Scotland’s schools. I endorse the work of the Royal Highland Education Trust in that regard, whose activities several members have been engaged in over the past few months—indeed, I think that the picture of me milking a full-size plastic cow that appeared in a recent edition of The Scottish Farmer is bound to become a collector’s item. More seriously, I cannot commend RHET’s efforts enough, and I trust that the Government will continue to be supportive of that organisation. On regulation, there is much to do, and we will support every effort to simplify it and to reduce the endless form filling and bureaucracy that are now such a massive part of every farmer’s life. I offer a helpful suggestion to the cabinet secretary: he could do worse than start with the Scotland rural development programme application process, which we spoke about at this morning’s meeting of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee. He and I know that that process is expensive, highly complex and, as I know from my constituency work, a significant deterrent to a large number of smaller producers. The fact that they are put off by the application process means that they cannot benefit from the SRDP, which is particularly disappointing, given that the issue could be addressed quickly and relatively easily. In addition, I think that the industry would benefit greatly from a clear statement by the Government on its priorities for the three remaining years of the SRDP. The goalposts have moved too often and it is surely time for some clarity. That would benefit all parties involved. The land use strategy, which was laid in the dying days of the last session of Parliament, is high in aspiration, but there are parts of it that I am not convinced have been thoroughly thought through. For example, I am having great difficulty following how it ties in with the forestry strategy. I think that comparison of map 3 in the land use strategy, which is entitled “Woodland Cover in Scotland”, with map 5, which is entitled “Suitability of Land for Woodland”, shows that it is not possible to achieve the target of afforesting 25 per cent of Scotland without removing a considerable amount of land from sustainable agricultural production. The RACCE committee will look at that. Afforested areas are decreasing rather than increasing and the Government has serious questions to answer on that policy, as it does on many others. I have not even got started on the subject of sheep tagging—which, incidentally, is not one on which I and the cabinet secretary would disagree strongly. I want briefly to mention the land reform and agricultural holdings legislation, both of which I understand that the Government seeks to review during the session. Those are pieces of legislation on which we are less likely to agree, but I genuinely hope that the SNP will learn the lessons from the Parliament’s first session, when, even though it was in opposition, it did more to stop the supply of agricultural land for rent than any Government or organisation has ever done, simply by raising the prospect of a compulsory right to buy. I hope that that sort of rhetoric is behind us. If it is not, the outcome will be the opposite of what the Government seeks to achieve. If it is, we can all work together in partnership to improve what is not an altogether satisfactory situation.

I am delighted to take part in today’s debate because there is no doubt in my mind that this policy area is the most important of all the policy areas that Parliament has been discussing since the election. Without an education system that is properly suited to the needs of our people and our country, other policies areas are, frankly, of little consequence. Education is the foundation stone of our society, and we Scots are justifiably proud of our tradition in that area. However, it is also an area that faces many great and important challenges, particularly in today’s difficult times, as many speakers this morning have noted. I want to focus on one particular challenge, in which I have a considerable constituency interest as the member for Galloway and West Dumfries: the proposal by the University of Glasgow—which seems to be getting a bit of a rough time this morning—to terminate the teaching of liberal arts courses at the Crichton campus in Dumfries, whose potential was ably highlighted by Aileen McLeod earlier. I agreed with every word of her excellent speech. The proposal to terminate liberal arts courses will be considered by the court of the university next Wednesday, and there is every indication that it will be accepted. If it is, that will be a decision that the university will come to regret, because it is widely accepted that liberal arts provide the central ethos of that unique university campus. I suspect that Professor Muscatelli’s remarks to the minister reflect the fact that Glasgow university maintains that the ethos of liberal arts will remain, through the interdisciplinary nature of other courses. However, I cannot help but agree with the staff and students when they point out that the physical absence of liberal arts students will, in itself, hugely affect the atmosphere and ethos of the campus. The staff’s hastily constructed—I will deal with the reason for that haste shortly—response to the consultation says that, no matter what courses remain, the effect of removing the liberal arts students will be that “the student experience will likely be very different and quite probably diminished.” When that point was raised at a consultation meeting, the chair of the panel acknowledged that that was a risk that would have to be taken. That is quite an admission, because it suggests that the risk of the Crichton campus losing its distinctive liberal arts ethos is somehow worth taking, even though many who are far better qualified than I am fear that losing that distinctiveness could cost the campus its future. An e-mail from Professor Muscatelli, sent on 8 June, states: “the consultation is about how we ensure that our academic offerings in Dumfries meet the needs of the local community.” That suggests that the liberal arts courses are perceived as not meeting those needs. However, as one who has, like the cabinet secretary, applauded the growth and success of initiatives such as the spring fling—the Dumfries and Galloway arts festival—over the past decade, I could not disagree more strongly. Indeed, I contend that those courses play to the strengths of Dumfries and Galloway in terms of what the area has to offer today. I believe that it would be dreadfully short-sighted to phase those courses out.

I share the cabinet secretary’s delight in those reassurances, but I am still concerned about the moves that might be made with regard to liberal arts courses. The cabinet secretary might recall that in 2007 the Crichton Development Company commissioned a report from Cogent Strategies International in response to the University of Glasgow’s plan to withdraw undergraduate courses from the campus. That report stated: “By far the greatest economic impact of the Crichton campus will be achieved” by increasing “the number of young people recruited to courses and graduating, which entails broadening, deepening and lengthening the educational offering.” I contend that, without the liberal arts courses, the educational offering will be the polar opposite of broader, deeper and longer and has every chance of being narrower, shallower and shorter. That can have only a hugely negative impact on a region that already has the highest outmigration of 16 to 20-year-olds on mainland Scotland. I do not believe that it is the role of Government to dictate what universities offer. However, I believe that Government has a role to play in ensuring that decisions of such severity and impact are arrived at only following lengthy and meaningful consultation. There is, however, every indication that this particular consultation was anything but lengthy and meaningful and that it has, in fact, allowed too little time for considered reflection. Staff received the report on 4 May, giving them only 14 days to prepare and submit a considered response to a proposal that cast doubt on some of their futures. Further, the university has made great play of the fact that MSPs and MPs were invited to take part in the consultation. I am sorry, but I did not notice my invitation. That is, perhaps, excusable given that—as I discovered just yesterday—my invitation was issued on the first Wednesday of the short campaign for last month’s elections when, I believe, I was not even recognised as being an MSP. That cannot be right, and I do not believe that the university thinks that it is right. There are myriad reasons for calling into question the consultation process but—sadly for me, but perhaps fortunately for other members—time does not allow me to list them all. However, one thing seems to be certain: this was a consultation that definitely had a predetermined outcome. I believe that that casts doubt on the university’s long-term commitment, but I accept the cabinet secretary’s words in that regard. I hope that the Government can reassure me that representations have been made, and I urge the cabinet secretary to suggest as strongly as possible that the decision be postponed by the university court until a genuinely full and open consultation has been held.

1. To ask the Scottish Executive whether it plans to produce new guidelines for local authorities on the siting of large-scale onshore wind farms. (S4O-00032) I should probably refer members to my entry in the register of interests.

I hope that I can be excused for welcoming the minister to her post. This is the first opportunity that I have had to do so. I do not know whether the minister is aware that Dumfries and Galloway Council is consulting on the drawing up of its own guidance for the siting of wind farms to take account of the growing concern at the lack of local democracy in the planning process. Can the minister assure me that, in future, the Scottish Government will respect and adhere to local authority guidance in the event of a developer appealing to the Government following the rejection of any application by the local authority, based on its own guidance?

Of course I will, Presiding Officer. I would not dream of doing anything else, as you well know. I hesitate to correct the cabinet secretary, but the consultation has been completed. Next Wednesday, I understand that the court of the University of Glasgow will take a decision on whether to close down the Liberal Democrats—[Laughter.] That was a Freudian slip and wishful thinking, Presiding Officer. Does the cabinet secretary agree that the decision to phase out the liberal arts degree courses, if taken, can only have an adverse effect on the local economy, given the recent growth in arts-related economic activity in the region? Will he urge the court to postpone the decision until a proper, genuine and open consultation has taken place? To date, that has not happened.

On 22 June, the court of the University of Glasgow will consider a report that recommends the phasing out of the liberal arts degree that is currently taught at the Crichton campus in Dumfries. Inevitably, this throws some doubt on the university’s long-term commitment to the campus. I am sure that the First Minister will recall his Government intervening in 2007 to ensure that the University of Glasgow remained an integral part of the Crichton campus. Given the widespread concern among staff, students and others at the hurried and unsatisfactory nature of the consultation that has just taken place, and indeed, the lack of any acknowledgement by the university of the many suggestions made by staff and students to address the concerns, will the First Minister instruct again his Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning to intervene to ensure that any decision taken on this crucial matter is delayed until a proper and thorough consultation has been held, and further and full consideration of other initiatives that have been proposed to secure the future of the course has been undertaken?

I must confess that, since 5 May, I had visualised a number of scenarios as the backdrop for my first speech in more than four years from these benches but none of them featured a members’ business debate on this particular topic. First of all, then, I commend Elaine Murray for putting me in a situation that I had never envisaged being in and, secondly—and more seriously—I congratulate her on bringing the issue to the chamber. As the traffic to my inbox suggests, the subject provokes a high level of response and that level has only been heightened by the UK Government’s apparent change in position. That almost certainly and regrettably brings me to the end of the consensus that I have tried very hard to achieve over the past four years. I am not convinced that the kind of outright ban that is sought in the motion is necessarily the right way forward. I am instinctively against bans as the knee-jerk response to most given situations, but I would happily ignore my instincts if I felt that doing so would really end a situation that is in some way intolerable. However, from what I have seen and read, I am not convinced that the 20-odd wild animals kept in just three British circuses—and in saying that I accept that European and other foreign circuses add to that number—are in an intolerable situation. I speak from my own experience as a keeper of animals—not, I have to say, circus animals—which tells me that if animals are kept in conditions that are not good for or beneficial to their welfare, their keeper will not achieve the desired results from them. Keeping animals in harmful conditions does no party any good. I assure the chamber that I do not agree with the UK Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, Caroline Spelman, all the time but I have to say that I agree with her comment that “most people would prefer not to see” animals “performing in circuses.”—[Official Report, House of Commons, 13 May 2011; vol 527, c48WS.] She went on to say: “where circuses do choose to show wild animals, people expect those animals to be kept in the best possible conditions.” Again, I entirely and whole-heartedly agree with that.

I have taken it into account—I have certainly thought about it. All I can say is that, from my long experience, animals that are frightened or that have been starved or not looked after properly will not act the same as those that have been looked after. I also agree with the UK Government’s consultation on assessing each and every one of the aforementioned animals, covering factors such as transport and journey times, enclosures and living conditions and treatment by trainers and keepers, as part of the new licensing regime. That is a perfectly sensible way forward to address what is certainly an issue but has not yet, I believe, proven to be a problem. I agree 100 per cent that cases such as Anne the elephant, which was highlighted by Elaine Murray, cannot be justified or condoned in any circumstances, but I am not convinced and have not read anything that tells me that such an example is typical or is in any way the norm. I would support a ban on the introduction of any further wild animals to a circus environment. It is clear that the common practice in my younger days—I probably go back further than either of the two members who have mentioned this—of having large numbers of wild animals appearing in circuses is dying out. That is evidenced by the fact that we are not talking about large numbers of animals. It is not clear that those animals are suffering to any great extent or, indeed, to any extent. Therefore, I plead that we show a little tolerance. Let us prevent any new animals from coming into a circus environment and allow the practice to die out naturally, as long as inspectors are content that the animals involved are not suffering. Of course I would not oppose a ban if it came forward, but my suggestion seems to me to be a logical and rational way forward, and I for one—I may well be the only one—believe that it is the right way forward.

I will now call each member in turn. When a member is called, they should proceed to the well of the chamber where they will take the oath or make an affirmation. I call Alex Salmond, Aberdeenshire West.

The first meeting of the fourth session of Parliament is resumed for the election of the Presiding Officer. I have received three valid nominations for the position of Presiding Officer. I will announce the nominations and invite each candidate to make themselves known to the chamber as their names are announced. In alphabetical order, they are Christine Grahame, Hugh Henry and Tricia Marwick. [Interruption.]

Good morning. Our first item of business this morning is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader is our local parish minister, the Rev Neil Gardner, who has been a great friend to the Parliament. I am delighted to have him here on the last morning of the session to give us time for reflection.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-8197, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 3 consideration of the Forced Marriage etc (Protection and Jurisdiction) (Scotland) Bill. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that, during Stage 3 of the Forced Marriage etc (Protection and Jurisdiction) (Scotland) Bill, debate on groups of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limit indicated, that time limit being calculated from when the stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the stage being called) or otherwise not in progress: Groups 1 to 3: 10 minutes.—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to. The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-8198, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for the stage 3 consideration of the Double Jeopardy (Scotland) Bill. I ask Bruce Crawford to move the motion.

Also for the last occasion in the session, I say that as no member has asked to speak against the business motion, the question is, that motion S3M-8198, in the name of Bruce Crawford, be agreed to. Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is stage 3 proceedings on the Forced Marriage etc (Protection and Jurisdiction) (Scotland) Bill. In dealing with the amendments, members should have: the bill as amended at stage 2, which is SP bill 53A; the marshalled list of amendments, which is SP bill 53A-ML; and the groupings, which I have agreed as Presiding Officer. If there is a division, the division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for five minutes for the first division. The period of voting for the first division will be 30 seconds. Thereafter, we will have a voting period of one minute for the first division after a debate, with all other divisions being 30 seconds. Section 7—Variation and recall of orders Amendment 1, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendments 2, 3 and 4.

Amendment 5, in the name of Alex Neil, is in a group on its own.

Amendment 6, in the name of Alex Neil, is in a group on its own.

Remarkably, no one has asked to add further comment to that. Amendment 6 agreed to. Her Majesty will be greatly relieved.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-8157, in the name of Alex Neil, on the Forced Marriage etc (Protection and Jurisdiction) (Scotland) Bill.

I call Johann Lamont, who has about six minutes.

We have a little time in hand, so there is a bit of flexibility, if anyone needs it.

I call Johann Lamont to close on behalf of the Scottish Labour Party. You have quite an amount of flexibility, Ms Lamont.

We come to the minister to wind up the debate. Minister, I can offer you your second 15-minute slot in a row. You have until 10.30 should you choose to use the time.

I call Margo MacDonald.

Just come to a question, please.

Before First Minister’s question time, I know that members will wish to join me in welcoming three visitors to the gallery: the chairman of the Council of Federation of the Russian Federation, Mr Sergy Mironov; the ambassador of the Russian Federation to the UK, His Excellency Alexander Yakovenko; and the Austrian ambassador to the UK, His Excellency Dr Emil Brix. [Applause.]

Order.

There is a supplementary question from Jack McConnell.

Order. Please come to a question, Mr Gibson.

Before I come to Liam McArthur’s point of order, I will deal with the point of order that Jeremy Purvis made earlier, when the Deputy Presiding Officer was in the chair. I have previously made it clear that, essentially, the matter that he raised is one for the convener of the Finance Committee, but I will reflect further on the point of order and, if I have anything further to add, I will come back to the member in writing.

I have made it abundantly clear over the past four years that the matter of veracity is not a point of order for me; it is a matter for those who speak on the subject.

So, we come to the close of the third session of the Scottish Parliament. Like all of you, I am sure, I find myself wondering where on earth the past four years have gone—but gone they most certainly have. I thank those who have just spoken for their remarks, which are infinitely more than I deserve, and I thank you all for the trust that you put in me when you elected me to this position at the start of this session. At that time we were embarking on our first session with a minority Government. As you will recall, many experts predicted an early election, but we have arrived, relatively intact, at the end of our allotted four-year term. For that, I give credit to the Government and the Opposition parties alike, and I want to thank those who have served so responsibly on the Parliamentary Bureau for the parts that they have all played in ensuring that a full four-year term has been served. I also thank colleagues on the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body, membership of which can be a pretty thankless task at times—but it is nevertheless vitally important. This past session has involved the SPCB in a number of difficult processes, reviews and decisions, but I can say without fear of contradiction that its members always kept the best interests of the Parliament at the top of the decision-making process. For that they deserve the thanks of us all. However, none of the work of the Parliamentary Bureau, the SPCB or any other work within or beyond our parliamentary campus would be possible without the dedicated efforts of the parliamentary staff. I therefore want to record my thanks to Paul Grice and his team, who have continued with that necessary level of commitment and dedication, despite the considerable restructuring that has been taking place around them. I thank the two Deputy Presiding Officers, who merit every one of the compliments that have been paid to them today and in the previous days and weeks. Alasdair Morgan’s parliamentary experience at Westminster and Holyrood, combined with an encyclopaedic knowledge of standing orders, and Trish Godman’s experience as a Deputy Presiding Officer in the second session of our Parliament has meant—I hope—that the sum of the whole has been more effective than the three individual parts. I have greatly valued their support, advice and guidance, and I join every member here in wishing them every happiness and success in whatever the future may hold for them. [Applause.] While I am on the subject of support, advice and guidance, I want to thank my private office. I was a complete rookie—and a slightly reluctant one, as was pointed out—to this post in 2007, but the help I received was quite outstanding. In Jane McEwan I have been blessed to have a principal private secretary who is quite simply second to none. I would literally not have got through the past four years without that support, and I will be forever grateful for it, as I will to my constituency staff Gill and Susan, and of course to the effervescent Gillian Gillies, who has always been on hand to help me with constituency issues here at Holyrood. My dear wife deserves more than a passing mention for her unflagging support. She tells me that she is looking forward to seeing more of me, although whether she will appreciate the reality of that situation remains to be seen. These past four years have been the most privileged of my life, whether it has been in chairing the Parliament, receiving many of our numerous visitors from home and abroad, representing the Parliament in the USA and Canada, Australia, New Zealand and Malawi, meeting the extraordinary people of Scotland during my summer work programmes or in the many other activities and responsibilities that make this such a wonderful role. I have simply endeavoured always to carry out my duties to the best of my ability. Unlike the two Deputy Presiding Officers, and unlike my two predecessors, I will be seeking a return to Parliament, as has been mentioned. However—lest there is any doubt—I will not, should I be successful, seek a second term in this truly privileged office. That I have done so at all is more than I ever sought or dreamed, and I thank you all for the opportunity that you gave me. Thank you very much. I now close the third session of Parliament. [Applause.] Meeting closed at 13:12.

Good morning. The first item of business this morning is a Labour Party debate on motion S3M-8177, in the name of Charlie Gordon, on transport.

Order. A question, please, Lord Foulkes.

Come to a question, please.

Can we have a relatively brief answer, please, cabinet secretary?

Question 3 is from Mike Pringle, who I do not think is in the chamber, which is unfortunate.

That is a matter of judgment for the chair, Mr Hepburn.

Before we come to questions to the First Minister, I am sure that members will wish to join me in welcoming to the gallery the high commissioner of Tanzania, His Excellency Peter Kallaghe. [Applause.]

Order—let us hear the question.

Order.

Order, order. This set of questions is taking too long. I need shorter questions and shorter answers, please.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Order, Mr Purvis.

Order.

Given Patricia Ferguson’s earlier warning about what Alex Neil is capable of doing in an empty house, I am a little bit loth to let him loose on a fairly empty chamber. Nonetheless, as Mary Mulligan has just said, we are on fairly consensual ground, so I am happy to call the minister to wind up the debate.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-8145, in the name of Michael Russell, on a legislative consent motion on the Education Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Education Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 26 January 2011, in consequence of the abolition of the Young People’s Learning Agency, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament or the executive competence of the Scottish Ministers, should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[Michael Russell.] The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-8125, in the name of John Swinney, on a legislative consent motion on the Public Bodies Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Public Bodies Bill, introduced in the House of Lords on 28 October 2010, that relate to certain public bodies and offices, to the extent that these bodies and office holders exercise functions in Scotland that would be within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament or in respect of which the Scottish Ministers exercise executive powers, and the power of consent for the Scottish Parliament, should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[John Swinney.] The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-8196, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.

There are seven questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that, in relation to the debate on transport, if the amendment in the name of Keith Brown is agreed, the amendments in the name of Jackson Carlaw and Alison McInnes will fall. Similarly, if the amendment in the name of Jackson Carlaw is agreed, the amendment in the name of Alison McInnes will fall. The first question is, that amendment S3M-8177.1, in the name of Keith Brown, which seeks to amend motion S3M-8177, in the name of Charlie Gordon, on transport, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 47, Against 73, Abstentions 0. Amendment disagreed to. The second question is, that amendment S3M-8177.3, in the name of Jackson Carlaw, which seeks to amend motion S3M-8177, in the name of Charlie Gordon, on transport, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 16, Against 104, Abstentions 0. Amendment disagreed to. The third question is, that amendment S3M-8177.2, in the name of Alison McInnes, which seeks to amend motion S3M-8177, in the name of Charlie Gordon, on transport, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 14, Against 106, Abstentions 0. Amendment disagreed to. The fourth question is, that motion S3M-8177, in the name of Charlie Gordon, on transport, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 40, Against 80, Abstentions 0. Motion disagreed to. The fifth question is, that motion S3M-8128, in the name of Alex Neil, on the Private Rented Housing (Scotland) Bill be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the Private Rented Housing (Scotland) Bill be passed. The sixth question is, that motion S3M-8145, in the name of Michael Russell, on the Education Bill, United Kingdom legislation, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Education Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 26 January 2011, in consequence of the abolition of the Young People’s Learning Agency, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament or the executive competence of the Scottish Ministers, should be considered by the UK Parliament. The seventh question is, that motion S3M-8125, in the name of John Swinney, on the Public Bodies Bill, United Kingdom legislation, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Public Bodies Bill, introduced in the House of Lords on 28 October 2010, that relate to certain public bodies and offices, to the extent that these bodies and office holders exercise functions in Scotland that would be within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament or in respect of which the Scottish Ministers exercise executive powers, and the power of consent for the Scottish Parliament, should be considered by the UK Parliament.

Good morning. Our first item of business is time for reflection, and our time for reflection leader is the Rev Tom Nelson from Netherlee parish church in Glasgow.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-8161, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to the business programme for this week.

The next item is consideration of another business motion—S3M-8162—also in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on the referral of an order to the Parliament. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Amendment (No 2) Order 2011 be considered by the Parliament.—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to. We have a third business motion—S3M-8176—in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 3 consideration of the Domestic Abuse (Scotland) Bill. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that, during Stage 3 of the Domestic Abuse (Scotland) Bill, debate on groups of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limit indicated, that time limit being calculated from when the stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the stage being called) or otherwise not in progress: Groups 1 and 2: 20 minutes.—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

We come to stage 3 proceedings on the Local Electoral Administration (Scotland) Bill. Members should have before them the bill as amended at stage 2 and the marshalled list. If the division bell sounds, proceedings will be suspended for five minutes, and the period of voting thereafter will be 30 seconds. Section 10—Reports on elections Amendment 1 is in the name of the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism.

There being only one amendment to the bill, that ends consideration of amendments.

The next item of business is the stage 3 debate on the Local Electoral Administration (Scotland) Bill.

You asked for it, Mr Johnstone.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is a statement by Michael Russell on higher education funding. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement; therefore there should be no interruptions or interventions during the 10-minute statement.

The cabinet secretary will take questions on issues raised in his statement. We have just under 20 minutes for questions, after which we must move on to the next item of business. All business is tight this afternoon, so it would be helpful if questions and answers were kept relatively brief.

Order. I call Claire Baker.

We move to the next item of business. While members are changing places, I inform them that they should have before them the Domestic Abuse (Scotland) Bill as amended at stage 2; the marshalled list; and the groupings, which I have agreed. The division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for five minutes for the first division on proceedings this afternoon. The period of voting for the first division will be 30 seconds. Thereafter, I will allow a voting period of one minute for the first division after a debate. All other divisions will be 30 seconds. Section 1—Amendment of the Protection from Harassment Act 1997 Amendment 1, in the name of Rhoda Grant, is in a group on its own.

Amendment 2, in the name of Rhoda Grant, is grouped with amendments 3 and 4.

That ends consideration of amendments.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-8136, in the name of Rhoda Grant, on the Domestic Abuse (Scotland) Bill. I repeat that we are very tight for time, so I ask members to stick pretty strictly to the times that they have been allocated.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-8179, in the name of Tom McCabe, on behalf of the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body, on the reimbursement of members’ expenses scheme. Motion moved, That the Parliament, in exercise of the powers conferred by section 81(2) and 83(5) of the Scotland Act 1998 determines that for the period 1 April 2011 to 31 March 2013 paragraph 1.2.4 of the Reimbursement of Members’ Expenses Scheme agreed to by resolution of the Parliament on 12 June 2008 (“the Resolution”), (as amended by resolution of the Parliament on 24 March 2010) and annexed as Annex 1 to the Resolution shall not have effect.—[Tom McCabe.] The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-8167, on the approval of the Equality Act 2010 (Specification of Public Authorities) (Scotland) Order 2011. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Equality Act 2010 (Specification of Public Authorities) (Scotland) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved.—[Bruce Crawford.] The question on the motion will be put at decision time. The next item of business is consideration of 11 Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motions S3M-8163 to S3M-8166 and S3M-8168 to S3M-8174, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments, en bloc. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Advice and Assistance (Assistance by Way of Representation) (Scotland) Amendment (No. 2) Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Advice and Assistance and Civil Legal Aid (Financial Conditions and Contributions) (Scotland) Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Cross-Border Mediation (Scotland) Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Debt Arrangement Scheme (Interest, Fees, Penalties and Other Charges) (Scotland) Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Fundable Bodies (Royal Conservatoire of Scotland) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Fundable Bodies (University of the Highlands and Islands) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Legal Profession and Legal Aid (Scotland) Act 2007 (Modification and Consequential Provisions) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 Amendment (Scotland) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Public Services Reform (Agricultural Holdings) (Scotland) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Scottish Charitable Incorporated Organisations (Removal from Register and Dissolution) Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Sexual Offences Act 2003 (Remedial) (Scotland) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/45) be approved.—[Bruce Crawford.] The questions on the motions will be put at decision time.

There are nine questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S3M-8127, in the name of Jim Mather, on the Local Electoral Administration (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the Local Electoral Administration (Scotland) Bill be passed. The Local Electoral Administration (Scotland) Bill is therefore passed. [Applause.] The next question is, that motion S3M-8126, in the name of Shona Robison, on the Certification of Death (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the Certification of Death (Scotland) Bill be passed. The Certification of Death (Scotland) Bill is therefore passed. [Applause.] The next question is, that motion S3M-8129, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the Public Records (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the Public Records (Scotland) Bill be passed. The Public Records (Scotland) Bill is therefore passed. [Applause.] The next question is, that motion S3M-8136, in the name of Rhoda Grant, on the Domestic Abuse (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the Domestic Abuse (Scotland) Bill be passed. The Domestic Abuse (Scotland) Bill is therefore passed. [Applause.] The next question is, that motion S3M-8130, in the name of John Swinney, on the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Amendment Order 2011, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 102, Against 0, Abstentions 15. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Amendment Order 2011 be approved. The next question is, that motion S3M-8140, in the name of John Swinney, on the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Amendment (No 2) Order 2011, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Amendment (No. 2) Order 2011 be approved. The next question is, that motion S3M-8179, in the name of Tom McCabe, on behalf of the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body, on the reimbursement of members’ expenses scheme, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament, in exercise of the powers conferred by section 81(2) and 83(5) of the Scotland Act 1998 determines that for the period 1 April 2011 to 31 March 2013 paragraph 1.2.4 of the Reimbursement of Members’ Expenses Scheme agreed to by resolution of the Parliament on 12 June 2008 (“the Resolution”), (as amended by resolution of the Parliament on 24 March 2010) and annexed as Annex 1 to the Resolution shall not have effect. The next question is, that motion S3M-8167, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the Equality Act 2010 (Specification of Public Authorities) (Scotland) Order 2011, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the Equality Act 2010 (Specification of Public Authorities) (Scotland) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. If no member disagrees, I propose to ask a single question on motions S3M-8163 to S3M-8166 and S3M-8168 to S3M-8174, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments. The question is, that motions S3M-8163 to S3M-8166 and S3M-8168 to S3M-8174 be agreed to. Motions agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the Advice and Assistance (Assistance by Way of Representation) (Scotland) Amendment (No. 2) Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Advice and Assistance and Civil Legal Aid (Financial Conditions and Contributions) (Scotland) Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Cross-Border Mediation (Scotland) Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Debt Arrangement Scheme (Interest, Fees, Penalties and Other Charges) (Scotland) Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Fundable Bodies (Royal Conservatoire of Scotland) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Fundable Bodies (University of the Highlands and Islands) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Legal Profession and Legal Aid (Scotland) Act 2007 (Modification and Consequential Provisions) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 Amendment (Scotland) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Public Services Reform (Agricultural Holdings) (Scotland) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Scottish Charitable Incorporated Organisations (Removal from Register and Dissolution) Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Sexual Offences Act 2003 (Remedial) (Scotland) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/45) be approved. That concludes decision time. Meeting closed at 17:28.

Good morning. The first item of business is a Scottish Liberal Democrat Party debate on local services.

You can have five more minutes, Mr Brown.

We come to the open debate. I ask for speeches of seven minutes, please.

Question 4 was not lodged.

I am sorry, but that has absolutely nothing to do with the Scottish Government’s remit, so I will not call the minister to respond.

Briefly repeat your question, please, Mrs Scanlon.

It is because questions must be within the general responsibility of the minister to whom they are posed, Mr Wilson

Order.

Order.

Order.

Question 2 was to be from Elizabeth Smith, who I think must have failed to notice the change of starting time.

Question 5 was not lodged.

Question 7 was not lodged.

Question 10 was from Rhona Brankin, who I think has also failed to make it to the chamber. I have to say that it is regrettable that one person did not note the change of time and another simply has not turned up. That is disrespectful to the chamber and is greatly to be regretted, particularly as I know that Stewart Maxwell had a supplementary question to one of the questions. I do not know whether anybody had one for Rhona Brankin’s. However, I am left with no choice other than to move to the next set of questions.

Question 8 is from Andy Kerr, but I am afraid that he is not in the chamber; I simply refer to my earlier comments in that regard. Question 9 was not lodged.

I am afraid that I must conclude themed questions at that point. We need to leave a little time for people to change places, and the next debate is extremely tight.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-8114, in the name of Iain Gray, on the Scotland Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation. I invite members who wish to speak in the debate to press their request-to-speak buttons. I repeat that time is extremely tight and therefore ask members to be punctilious in their timekeeping.

Order.

Order. There is too much noise.

Before we come to the next item of business, a commitment was made to come back to the chamber on the point that Mike Rumbles raised about the order of speakers in the Scotland Bill debate and the time allotted to them. I can only say that, as is set out in standing orders, the selection of speakers and the allocation of speaking times in any debate is a matter for the Presiding Officer alone.

There are six questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that, in relation to the debate on local services, if the amendment in the name of Kenny MacAskill is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Michael McMahon will fall and that, in relation to the debate that we have just had on the Scotland Bill, if the amendment in the name of Fiona Hyslop is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Margaret Mitchell will fall. The first question is, that amendment S3M-8120.2, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, which seeks to amend motion S3M-8120, in the name of Robert Brown, on local services, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 62, Against 18, Abstentions 45. Amendment agreed to. Therefore, the amendment in the name of Michael McMahon falls. The next question is, that motion S3M-8120, in the name of Robert Brown, on local services, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 106, Against 18, Abstentions 1. Motion, as amended, agreed to, That the Parliament notes that Scotland and policing have changed significantly since the existing structure of policing was introduced over 35 years ago; notes the Scottish Government’s consultation papers on police and fire services reform and agrees that, given the significant financial challenges, such reform is necessary to protect and improve local services and to strengthen and improve local accountability and engagement; agrees that reform can only happen if it gives local communities and local elected members a greater say on local priorities and services, and notes that the expectations and requirements of health and social care have similarly changed significantly since existing structures were introduced and that reform is needed to deliver integrated services that are sustainable and appropriate and that make best use of resources focussed on the needs of local populations. The next question is, that amendment S3M-8114.1, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, which seeks to amend motion S3M-8114, in the name of Iain Gray, on the Scotland Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 46, Against 78, Abstentions 1. Amendment disagreed to. The next question is, that amendment S3M-8114.2, in the name of Margaret Mitchell, which seeks to amend motion S3M-8114, in the name of Iain Gray, on the Scotland Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 47, Against 77, Abstentions 1. Amendment disagreed to. The next question is, that motion S3M-8114, in the name of Iain Gray, on the Scotland Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 121, Against 3, Abstentions 1. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that, further to motion S3M-7550 passed on 9 December 2010 supporting the general principles of the Scotland Bill as introduced in the House of Commons on 30 November 2010, the Bill be considered by the UK Parliament; invites the UK Government and the UK Parliament to consider the amendments and proposals made in the report of the Scotland Bill Committee, and looks forward to considering any amendments made to the Bill with a view to debating them in a further legislative consent motion before the Bill is passed for Royal Assent.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection, as always. Our time for reflection leader today is Father Willy Slavin from St Peter’s and St Simon’s parishes in Glasgow.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-8115, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a revision to today’s business programme.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-8118, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a timetable for stage 3 consideration of the Reservoirs (Scotland) Bill. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that, during Stage 3 of the Reservoirs (Scotland) Bill, debate on groups of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limit indicated, that time limit being calculated from when the Stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the Stage being called) or otherwise not in progress: Groups 1 to 6: 15 minutes.—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

We come to a members’ business debate on motion S3M-7806, in the name of Sarah Boyack, on Edinburgh employment services facing a funding cut. The debate will be concluded without any question being put. We have a little flexibility on time. Motion debated, That the Parliament notes with surprise and concern the unexpected decision by the Minister for Housing and Communities to cut support for highly-regarded specialist programmes, valued this year at £2.238 million, to the Capital City Partnership; understands that this support assists 3,500 unemployed people per year; notes that this cut will hit what it sees as the most disadvantaged communities in the city, including unemployed school-leavers and priority groups such as people recovering from addiction and homeless people; notes also that it will impact on the Joined Up For Jobs strategy, which, it considers, has a strong record of partner agencies working together for maximum effectiveness; believes that Edinburgh is the only city in Scotland to have suffered such a cut and that there is no justification for singling out one city for this unfair treatment; would welcome, particularly at a time of recession, responsive local services for the unemployed being sustained, and believes that this funding should continue.

The debate must conclude by 5 minutes past 2.

I call Margo MacDonald, after which I will ask the minister to wind up the debate.

You can take just about as long as you like.

You have up to five minutes, Ms MacDonald.

We come to closing speeches. I can offer each speaker exactly one extra minute and would be very grateful if they took it. You have up to five minutes, Mr McArthur.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-8063, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Health and Social Care Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Health and Social Care Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 19 January 2011, in respect of the establishment of the NHS Commissioning Board and GP commissioning consortia, abolition of the Health Protection Agency, duty of co-operation in relation to health protection functions, amendment of the Mental Health Act 1983, the Health and Social Care Information Centre, regulation of healthcare professions and health and social care workers, the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence and National Health Service/Health and Social Services contracts, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Parliament, or alter the executive competence of the Scottish Ministers, should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[Nicola Sturgeon.] The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-8116, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees— (a) the following programme of business— Wednesday 16 March 2011 9.15 am Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Certification of Death (Scotland) Bill followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Public Records (Scotland) Bill followed by Members’ Business 2.35 pm Ministerial Statement: Higher Education Funding followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Domestic Abuse (Scotland) Bill followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Local Electoral Administration (Scotland) Bill followed by Ministerial Statement: Report on Proposals and Policies on Climate Change Targets followed by Scottish Government Debate: Local Government Finance (Scotland) Amendment Order 2011 followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 6.45 pm Decision Time Thursday 17 March 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Private Rented Housing (Scotland) Bill followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Public Bodies Bill - UK Legislation followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Tuesday 22 March 2011 9.15 am Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Forced Marriage etc (Protection and Jurisdiction) (Scotland) Bill followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Double Jeopardy (Scotland) Bill 12.20 pm General Question Time 12.40 pm First Minister’s Question Time 1.10 pm Motion of Thanks to the Presiding Officer 1.25 pm Decision Time (b) that, for the purposes of First Minister’s Question Time on Tuesday 22 March 2011, the period for members to lodge questions for selection begins at the completion of First Minister’s Question Time on Thursday 17 March 2011 and ends at 4.00 pm on that day; and (c) that, for the purposes of General Question Time on Tuesday 22 March 2011, members should (i) submit their names for selection by no later than 12.00 pm on Thursday 10 March 2011 and (ii) lodge their questions by no later than 12.00 pm on Tuesday 15 March 2011.—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of 19 Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-8117, on the referral of the Local Government Finance (Scotland) (Amendment) Order 2011, and motions S3M-8091 to S3M-8108, on the approval of various statutory instruments, en bloc. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Amendment Order 2011 be considered by the Parliament. That the Parliament agrees that the Antisocial Behaviour Notices (Houses Used for Holiday Purposes) (Scotland) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Budget (Scotland) Act 2010 Amendment Order 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Community Care (Personal Care and Nursing Care) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Energy Act 2008 (Storage of Carbon Dioxide) (Scotland) Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Housing Support Grant (Scotland) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Interpretation and Legislative Reform (Scotland) Act 2010 (Consequential Provisions) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Marine (Scotland) Act 2010 (Transitional and Consequential Provisions) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Marine Licensing (Exempted Activities) (Scottish Inshore Region) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Marine Licensing Appeals (Scotland) Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Public Services Reform (General Teaching Council for Scotland) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Act 2010 (Consequential Modifications) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Radioactive Substances Act 1993 Amendment (Scotland) Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Renewables Obligation (Scotland) Amendment Order 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Social Care and Social Work Improvement Scotland (Requirements for Care Services) Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Scottish Statutory Instruments Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Waste (Scotland) Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Waste Management Licensing (Scotland) Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Water Environment (Controlled Activities) (Scotland) Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved.—[Bruce Crawford.] The questions on those motions will be put at decision time.

We have eight questions as a result of today’s business. The first is, that motion S3M-7994, in the name of Andrew Welsh, on the Finance Committee’s report on preventative spending, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Finance Committee’s 1st Report, 2011 (Session 3): Report on preventative spending (SP Paper 555). The next question is, that motion S3M-8080, in the name of Gil Paterson, on the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee’s report on financial resolutions and scrutiny of revised financial memoranda, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament notes the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee’s 1st Report 2011 (Session 3), Financial Resolutions and scrutiny of revised Financial Memoranda (SP Paper 565), and agrees that the changes to Standing Orders set out in Annexe A to the report be made with effect from 1 April 2011. The next question is, that motion S3M-8081, in the name of Gil Paterson, on the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee’s scrutiny of Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body supported bodies, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament notes the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee’s 2nd Report 2011 (Session 3), Scrutiny of SPCB supported bodies (SP Paper 566), and agrees that the changes to Standing Orders set out in Annexe A to the report be made with effect from 1 April 2011. The next question is, that motion S3M-8088, in the name of Gil Paterson, on the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee’s report on changes to the standing orders, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that, in giving effect to the standing order rule changes set out in Annexe A of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee’s 10th Report 2010 (Session 3), Minor changes to Standing Orders (SP Paper 552), and 2nd Report 2011 (Session 3), Scrutiny of SPCB supported bodies (SP Paper 566), the words “the 2010 Act” be deleted where they first appear in chapter 3A and any other occurrences of the words “the 2010 Act” in that chapter be replaced with “the Scottish Parliamentary Commissions and Commissioners etc. Act 2010”. The next question is, that motion S3M-8110, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the Reservoirs (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the Reservoirs (Scotland) Bill be passed. The next question is, that motion S3M-8063, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Health and Social Care Bill, United Kingdom legislation, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Health and Social Care Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 19 January 2011, in respect of the establishment of the NHS Commissioning Board and GP commissioning consortia, abolition of the Health Protection Agency, duty of co-operation in relation to health protection functions, amendment of the Mental Health Act 1983, the Health and Social Care Information Centre, regulation of healthcare professions and health and social care workers, the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence and National Health Service/Health and Social Services contracts, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Parliament, or alter the executive competence of the Scottish Ministers, should be considered by the UK Parliament. The next question is, that motion S3M-8117, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the referral of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Amendment Order 2011 be considered by the Parliament. I propose to ask a single question on motions S3M-8091 to S3M-8108, on the approval of SSIs. The question is, that motions S3M-8091 to S3M-8108, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of SSIs, be agreed to. Motions agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the Antisocial Behaviour Notices (Houses Used for Holiday Purposes) (Scotland) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Budget (Scotland) Act 2010 Amendment Order 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Community Care (Personal Care and Nursing Care) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Energy Act 2008 (Storage of Carbon Dioxide) (Scotland) Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Housing Support Grant (Scotland) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Interpretation and Legislative Reform (Scotland) Act 2010 (Consequential Provisions) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Marine (Scotland) Act 2010 (Transitional and Consequential Provisions) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Marine Licensing (Exempted Activities) (Scottish Inshore Region) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Marine Licensing Appeals (Scotland) Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Public Services Reform (General Teaching Council for Scotland) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Act 2010 (Consequential Modifications) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Radioactive Substances Act 1993 Amendment (Scotland) Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Renewables Obligation (Scotland) Amendment Order 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Social Care and Social Work Improvement Scotland (Requirements for Care Services) Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Scottish Statutory Instruments Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Waste (Scotland) Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Waste Management Licensing (Scotland) Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Water Environment (Controlled Activities) (Scotland) Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. Meeting closed at 18:18.

Good morning. The first item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-8053, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 3 consideration of the Damages (Scotland) Bill. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that, during Stage 3 of the Damages (Scotland) Bill, debate on groups of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limit indicated, that time limit being calculated from when the Stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the Stage being called) or otherwise not in progress: Groups 1 to 3: 15 minutes.—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to. The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-8054, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 3 consideration of the Property Factors (Scotland) Bill. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that, during Stage 3 of the Property Factors (Scotland) Bill, debate on groups of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limit indicated, that time limit being calculated from when the Stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the Stage being called) or otherwise not in progress: Groups 1 to 4: 15 minutes Groups 5 to 9: 30 minutes.—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-8058, in the name of Alex Salmond, on the 2015 election. Time for speeches is tight.

I call Stewart Stevenson. You may make speech number 401, but you have only three minutes, Mr Stevenson.

That concludes the debate on the 2015 election. We must now move to the next item of business, which we will do speedily because time is tight for that debate.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-8005, in the name of Hugh Henry, on “Session 3 reports of the Public Audit Committee—key themes”.

Question 4 was not lodged.

Question 6 was not lodged.

Before we come to First Minister’s question time, members will wish to join me in welcoming to the gallery Estonia’s ambassador to the United Kingdom, Her Excellency Aino Lepik von Wirén. [Applause.]

Order. Mr Gray is entitled to ask about whatever subject he wishes to ask about.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Order. Be fairly brief please, First Minister.

Order.

Order. The chamber will come to order.

Group 8 is on the relationship between the bill and the Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003. Amendment 23, in the name of Patricia Ferguson, is grouped with amendments 27 to 29.

Group 9 is on commencement. Amendment 30, in the name of Patricia Ferguson, is the only amendment in the group.

That ends consideration of amendments.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-8029, in the name of Patricia Ferguson, on the Property Factors (Scotland) Bill.

I must hurry you, minister.

Due to the rapid consideration of amendments earlier, I am pleased that we now have room for two speakers in open debate. I call Bob Doris, to be followed by Malcolm Chisholm.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S3M-8058, in the name of Alex Salmond, on the 2015 election, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament notes the potential clash of UK and Scottish general election dates in 2015; invites the UK Government to set the next Scottish general election after 5 May 2011 for Thursday 5 May 2016, and looks forward to UK Government consultation on a legislative provision that would set apart UK and Scottish general election dates on a permanent basis. The next question is, that motion S3M-8005, in the name of Hugh Henry, on “Session 3 reports of the Public Audit Committee—key themes”, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Public Audit Committee’s 1st Report, 2011 (Session 3): Session 3 reports of the Public Audit Committee–key themes (SP Paper 559). The next question is, that motion S3M-8028, in the name of Bill Butler, on the Damages (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the Damages (Scotland) Bill be passed. The Damages (Scotland) Bill is therefore passed. [Applause.] The next question is, that motion S3M-8029, in the name of Patricia Ferguson, on the Property Factors (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the Property Factors (Scotland) Bill be passed. The Property Factors (Scotland) Bill is therefore passed. [Applause.] In passing those two bills, I think that it is only right to draw attention to what I think must be a unique circumstance in any Parliament, that is, that a husband and wife team have successfully taken charge of two members’ bills and had them passed on the same day. [Applause.] On that happy note, we conclude decision time.

Good afternoon. The first item this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Pastor Duncan Strathdee Jr of the Dunblane Christian Fellowship.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-8038, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 3 consideration of the Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Bill. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that, during Stage 3 of the Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Bill, debate on groups of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limit indicated, that time limit being calculated from when the Stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the Stage being called) or otherwise not in progress: Groups 1 to 3: 40 minutes Groups 4 and 5: 1 hour 25 minutes Groups 6 to 8: 1 hour 45 minutes Groups 9 and 10: 2 hours 5 minutes Groups 11 to 13: 2 hours 35 minutes Groups 14 and 15: 2 hours 55 minutes.—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is, slightly unusually, a members’ business debate on motion S3M-7361, in the name of Kenneth Gibson, on epilepsy awareness training. Motion debated, That the Parliament believes that there would be merit in epilepsy training becoming an integral part of the student teacher training course curriculum so that teaching staff are equipped to detect potential seizures in children and young people and can be proactive in providing appropriate support to pupils with epilepsy and agrees that this could boost teacher confidence in handling as many as 7,000 children in Scotland with active epilepsy, enable early detection of seizures in over 800 children each year, provide more tailored learning and emotional support to normalise the condition and reduce classroom stigma for children in North Ayrshire and across Scotland.

The next item of business is stage 3 proceedings on the Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Bill. Members should have the bill as amended at stage 2, which is SP bill 52A; the marshalled list, which is SP bill 52A-ML; and the groupings, which I have agreed. The division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for five minutes for the first division of the afternoon. The period of voting for the first division will be 30 seconds. Thereafter, I will allow a voting period of one minute for the first division after a debate. All other divisions will be 30 seconds. Section 3—Protection of game birds etc and prevention of poaching I refer members to the marshalled list of amendments. We come to group 1. Amendment 39, in the name of John Scott, is grouped with amendments 40 to 42 and 46 to 50.

We come to group 2. Amendment 61, in the name of Peter Peacock, is grouped with amendments 52, 54 and 55.

The question is, that amendment 61 be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No. There will be a division. As this is the first division, I will suspend the meeting for five minutes. 14:04 Meeting suspended. 14:09 On resuming— We now come to the division on amendment 61.

The result of the division is: For 45, Against 78, Abstentions 0. Amendment 61 disagreed to. After section 4 Amendment 43, in the name of Peter Peacock, is grouped with amendments 44 and 45.

The question is, that amendment 43 be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 46, Against 76, Abstentions 1. Amendment 43 disagreed to. Amendments 44 and 45 not moved. Section 5—Sale of live or dead wild birds, their eggs etc Amendments 46 to 50 moved—[John Scott]—and agreed to. Section 13—Snares We come to group 4. I draw members’ attention to the pre-emption information that is shown on the list of groupings. Amendment 5, in the name of Irene Oldfather, is grouped with amendments 14 to 18, 51, 20 to 24, 1, 1A, 1B, 1C and 2 to 4.

I must hurry you to close, Mr Stewart.

I advise members that there is absolutely no extra time available, so speeches must be dead on the time limits that have been given.

This should be very quick, because the member is in his last minute.

Dave Thompson, you have 15 seconds left.

I am sorry, Mr Thompson, but you are out of time. I must move on—

Mr Thompson! I call Liam McArthur to close on behalf of the Scottish Liberal Democrats.

In that case, I call Keith Brown to wind up the debate on behalf of the Government.

I remind members that telephones should not be used in the chamber.

Order. There is too much noise.

That concludes the debate on fuel duty.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-8049, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to the business programme for Thursday 3 March 2011. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 3 March 2011— delete 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Public Audit Committee Debate: Session 3 reports of the Public Audit Committee – key themes and insert 9.10 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Debate: 2015 Elections followed by Public Audit Committee Debate: Session 3 reports of the Public Audit Committee – key themes—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to. The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-8050, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees— (a) the following programme of business— Wednesday 9 March 2011 1.15 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Members’ Business followed by Ministerial Statement: Scottish Government’s Response to Teaching Scotland’s Future followed by Finance Committee Debate: Preventative Spending followed by Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee Debate: Standing Orders - Financial Resolutions followed by Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee Debate: Standing Orders - Scrutiny of SPCB Supported Bodies followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Reservoirs (Scotland) Bill followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Health and Social Care Bill - UK Legislation followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 7.00 pm Decision Time Thursday 10 March 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Liberal Democrat Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.00 pm Themed Question Time Europe, External Affairs and Culture; Education and Lifelong Learning 2.40 pm Legislative Consent Motion: Scotland Bill - UK Legislation followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 16 March 2011 9.15 am Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Public Records (Scotland) Bill followed by Members’ Business 2.35 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Domestic Abuse (Scotland) Bill followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Local Electoral Administration (Scotland) Bill followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Certification of Death (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 7.00 pm Decision Time Thursday 17 March 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Stage 3 Proceedings: Private Rented Housing (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business (b) that, for the purposes of Members’ Business on Wednesday 9 March 2011, “after Time for Reflection and Parliamentary Bureau Motions” be substituted for “at the end of the meeting following Decision Time” in Rule 5.6.1(c) of Standing Orders; (c) that, for the purposes of Members’ Business on Thursday 10 March 2011, “at the end of First Minister’s Question Time and at the end of the meeting following Decision Time” be substituted for “at the end of the meeting following Decision Time” in Rule 5.6.1(c) of Standing Orders; (d) that, for the purposes of Members’ Business on Wednesday 16 March 2011, “after Stage 3 Proceedings: Public Records (Scotland) Bill” be substituted for “at the end of the meeting following Decision Time” in Rule 5.6.1(c) of Standing Orders; (e) that, for the purposes of Members’ Business on Thursday 17 March 2011, “at the end of First Minister’s Question Time and at the end of the meeting following Decision Time” be substituted for “at the end of the meeting following Decision Time” in Rule 5.6.1(c) of Standing Orders.—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of 10 Parliamentary Bureau motions, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-8039, on the approval of an SSI regarding the M8. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the M8 (Baillieston to Newhouse) Special Road Scheme 2011 (SSI 2011/10) be approved.—[Bruce Crawford.] I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-8040, on the approval of an SSI regarding the A8. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the A8 Trunk Road (Baillieston to Newhouse) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/11) be approved.—[Bruce Crawford.] I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-8041, on the approval of an SSI regarding the A725. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that the A725 Trunk Road (Baillieston to Newhouse) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/12) be approved.—[Bruce Crawford.] I ask Bruce Crawford to move motions S3M-8042 to S3M-8048, on various other SSIs, en bloc. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Healthcare Improvement Scotland (Requirements as to Independent Health Care Services) Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Healthcare Improvement Scotland (Inspections) Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Public Services Reform (Joint Inspections) (Scotland) Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Public Services Reform (Social Services Inspections) (Scotland) Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Children’s Hearings (Scotland) Act 2011 (Consequential Provision) and Public Appointments and Public Bodies etc. (Scotland) Act 2003 (Amendment of Specified Authorities) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Muntjac Keeping (Scotland) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/made) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Tenancy Deposit Schemes (Scotland) Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved.—[Bruce Crawford.] The questions on those motions will be put at decision time.

There are seven questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S3M-8020, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on the Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Bill be passed. The next question is, that amendment S3M-8032.1, in the name of Charlie Gordon, which seeks to amend motion S3M-8032, in the name of Keith Brown, on fuel duty, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 44, Against 78, Abstentions 0. Amendment disagreed to. The next question is, that motion S3M-8032, in the name of Keith Brown, on fuel duty, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 75, Against 3, Abstentions 43. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament notes that petrol and diesel prices in Scotland are among the highest in Europe and have reached record levels and that the planned rise in fuel duty by the UK Government in April 2011 could increase prices by a further 4p per litre; recognises that such increases impose an additional burden on households and businesses at a time of rising living costs and could undermine the economic recovery; notes the UK Government's proposal to introduce a 5p-per-litre fuel discount scheme for island communities, and calls on the UK Government to cancel the rise in fuel duty planned for April and implement a fuel duty regulator that would ensure that some of the additional revenue that the UK Government will receive from increased revenues due to recent increases in oil prices is used to reduce fuel duty to help support Scottish households and businesses. The next question is, that motion S3M-8039, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument regarding the M8, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 120, Against 2, Abstentions 0. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the M8 (Baillieston to Newhouse) Special Road Scheme 2011 (SSI 2011/10) be approved. The next question is, that motion S3M-8040, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of an SSI regarding the A8, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 119, Against 2, Abstentions 0. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the A8 Trunk Road (Baillieston to Newhouse) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/11) be approved. The next question is, that motion S3M-8041, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of an SSI regarding the A725, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 120, Against 2, Abstentions 0. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the A725 Trunk Road (Baillieston to Newhouse) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/12) be approved. I propose to put a single question on motions S3M-8042 to S3M-8048, on approval of SSIs. If anyone objects, please say so now. No one objects, so the final question is, that motions S3M-8042 to S3M-8048, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of SSIs, be agreed to. Motions agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the Healthcare Improvement Scotland (Requirements as to Independent Health Care Services) Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Healthcare Improvement Scotland (Inspections) Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Public Services Reform (Joint Inspections) (Scotland) Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Public Services Reform (Social Services Inspections) (Scotland) Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Children’s Hearings (Scotland) Act 2011 (Consequential Provision) and Public Appointments and Public Bodies etc. (Scotland) Act 2003 (Amendment of Specified Authorities) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Muntjac Keeping (Scotland) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/made) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Tenancy Deposit Schemes (Scotland) Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. Meeting closed at 19:05.

Good morning. The first item of business this morning is consideration of business motion S3M-7990, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a timetable for stage 3 of the Patient Rights (Scotland) Bill. If any member wishes to speak against the motion, they should press their request-to-speak button now. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that, during Stage 3 of the Patient Rights (Scotland) Bill, debate on groups of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limit indicated, that time limit being calculated from when the Stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the Stage being called) or otherwise not in progress: Groups 1 and 2: 20 minutes Groups 3 to 6: 40 minutes Groups 7 and 8: 1 hour 5 minutes.—[Bruce Crawford.] Mr Kelly has pressed his button, but I assume that he does not wish to speak against the motion.

That was just pre-empting the next item of business, I think. The question is, that motion S3M-7990, in the name of Bruce Crawford, be agreed to. Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-7992, in the name of Johann Lamont, on regeneration. Mr Kelly and others who wish to speak in the debate are now welcome to press their request-to-speak buttons.

No, the minister is winding up.

The intervention will have to be brief.

Mr Purvis.

We come to the open debate. Speeches of around six minutes, please. I call Duncan McNeil. [Interruption.]

Order.

You must close, please.

Very quickly, please.

That concludes this morning’s debate on regeneration.

Quickly, please, Ms Whitefield.

Before we come to the next item of business, I think that members will wish to know that I have written to the speaker of the New Zealand Parliament on behalf of the Scottish Parliament to offer our sincere condolences to the people of New Zealand following the horrific earthquake in Christchurch. [Applause.]

Order.

I will take a supplementary from Jamie Stone.

I will take a further supplementary from Robert Brown.

We started a little late, so I will take a final supplementary from Lewis Macdonald.

With respect, the two matters to which Mr Harvie refers are matters for the relevant committees. If he has concerns about the way in which they have conducted their business, he should take them up with their conveners.

The answer to that is no. That is a matter for the committee’s convener in the first instance. If Mr Harvie has further concerns, he should take them up with the convener. If that does not satisfy him, he should then write to me. 12:35 Meeting suspended until 14:15. 14:15 On resuming—

Sorry, but could whoever has the electronic instrument that is making that noise please turn it off?

Quiet, please. There is far too much noise in the chamber.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-8007, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a revision to the business programme for Wednesday 9 March. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 9 March 2011— delete 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Private Rented Housing (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business and insert 1.15 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Members’ Business followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Reservoirs (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 7.00 pm Decision Time—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-8008, on committee membership, and motion S3M-8009, on substitution on committee. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that John Lamont be appointed to replace Bill Aitken as a member of the Justice Committee. That the Parliament agrees that David McLetchie be appointed to replace John Lamont as the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party substitute on the Justice Committee.—[Bruce Crawford.] The question on the motions will be put at decision time.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-7992.1, in the name of Alex Neil, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7992, in the name of Johann Lamont, on regeneration, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 61, Against 57, Abstentions 0. Amendment agreed to. The next question is, that motion S3M-7992, in the name of Johann Lamont, on regeneration, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 81, Against 40, Abstentions 0. Motion, as amended, agreed to, That the Parliament recognises the importance of continued support from the Scottish Government for regeneration initiatives, particularly in the current economic climate; believes that it is essential for effective regeneration activity to be co-ordinated across the Scottish Government and local government and in communities; welcomes the many regeneration initiatives supporting local communities and sustained by local involvement across Scotland; recognises in particular the work of the Coalfields Regeneration Trust in Scotland as an organisation that has played a central role in supporting vital projects that have improved the quality of life for thousands of people living in former mining communities, has helped over 20,000 young people, supported over 2,000 people back into work and supported over 3,000 community initiatives and highlights the fact that every £1 spent by the Coalfields Regeneration Trust generates £1.37 of matched funding to support these important projects, and calls on the Scottish Government to ensure that funding for the Coalfields Regeneration Trust is focused on job-creation activities that can contribute to the economic revival of these communities. The next question is, that motion S3M-7978, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Patient Rights (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the Patient Rights (Scotland) Bill be passed. The next question is, that motion S3M-8008, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on committee membership, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that John Lamont be appointed to replace Bill Aitken as a member of the Justice Committee. The final question is, that motion S3M-8009, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on substitution on committee, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that David McLetchie be appointed to replace John Lamont as the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party substitute on the Justice Committee.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-7945, in the name of Alex Neil, on the Energy Bill, which is proposed United Kingdom legislation.

I must hurry you, Mr Harvie—we have little time.

You must close now.

I am sorry to hurry members, but there is no time available.

You should close, Mr McArthur.

I am afraid that contributions must now be limited to three minutes.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7983, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees— (a) the following programme of business— Wednesday 2 March 2011 1.15 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Members’ Business followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Bill followed by Scottish Government Debate: Fuel Duty followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 8.00 pm Decision Time Thursday 3 March 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Public Audit Committee Debate: Session 3 reports of the Public Audit Committee - key themes 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 12.30 pm Members’ Business 2.00 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.40 pm Stage 3 Proceedings: Damages (Scotland) Bill followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Property Factors (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 9 March 2011 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Private Rented Housing (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 10 March 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Europe, External Affairs and Culture; Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business and (b) that, for the purposes of Members’ Business on Wednesday 2 March, “after Time for Reflection and Parliamentary Bureau Motions” be substituted for “at the end of the meeting following Decision Time” in Rule 5.6.1(c) of Standing Orders.—[Paul Martin.] Motion agreed to. The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7985, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 2 of the Public Records (Scotland) Bill. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Public Records (Scotland) Bill at Stage 2 be completed by 4 March 2011.—[Paul Martin.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of three Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Paul Martin to move motions S3M-7987 to S3M-7989, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Public Appointments and Public Bodies etc. (Scotland) Act 2003 (Amendment of Specified Authorities) (No.2) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Retention of Samples etc. (Children’s Hearings) (Scotland) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman Act 2002 Amendment Order 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved.—[Paul Martin.] The question on those motions will be put at decision time. The next item of business is consideration of a further Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Paul Martin to move motion S3M-7986, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the suspension of standing orders for the purpose of stage 2 consideration of the Public Records (Scotland) Bill. For clarification, members should note that the rule to be suspended is rule 9.5.3A. I am sure that that clarifies it all. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that Rule 9.5.3A of Standing Orders be suspended for the purpose of Stage 2 consideration of the Public Records (Scotland) Bill.—[Paul Martin.] The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S3M-7968, in the name of Rhona Brankin, on the work of the Public Petitions Committee, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament notes the continued evolution of its public petitions process; applauds the work of petitioners who have engaged with their parliament through this process by highlighting issues of concern and importance that led to examination by the Public Petitions Committee and key policy makers; believes the process to be a positive demonstration of the Parliament’s founding principles, and supports the work of the committee and petitioners in bringing further improvements to the policies that affect the day-to-day lives of the people of Scotland. The next question is, that motion S3M-7950, in the name of Margaret Mitchell, on the Equal Opportunities Committee report on migration and trafficking, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Equal Opportunities Committee’s 5th Report 2010 (Session 3): Inquiry into Migration and Trafficking (SP Paper 543). The next question is, that motion S3M-7945, in the name of Alex Neil, on the Energy Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 70, Against 42, Abstentions 0. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Energy Bill introduced in the House of Lords on 8 December 2010 relating to the creation of powers to develop a new Green Deal for energy efficiency measures, the repeal of the Home Energy Conservation Act 1995, enabling the Coal Authority to charge for services and to implement additional measures to make improvements to regulatory frameworks for the energy markets, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, or alter the executive competence of the Scottish Ministers, should be considered by the UK Parliament. The next question is, that motions S3M-7987 to S3M-7989, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments, be agreed to. Motions agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the Public Appointments and Public Bodies etc. (Scotland) Act 2003 (Amendment of Specified Authorities) (No.2) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Retention of Samples etc. (Children’s Hearings) (Scotland) Order 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman Act 2002 Amendment Order 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. The next question is, that motion S3M-7986, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the suspension of standing orders, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that Rule 9.5.3A of Standing Orders be suspended for the purpose of Stage 2 consideration of the Public Records (Scotland) Bill.

You must close, please.

I believe that the Deputy Presiding Officer intimated that members could have about an extra half a minute each. I would be grateful if they could stick to that.

Quickly please. It is a supplementary question, Mr Harper, not a speech.

Question, please.

That question has absolutely nothing to do with Kintore station.

Order. Order.

Order.

Order, order. First Minister, your microphone is off. I am sorry, but it is entirely up to Mr Gray what he asks about.

Order.

I will take a supplementary from Richard Baker.

Mr Baker, at this stage, a supplementary really should just stick to the question.

Order.

That is not a point of order for me, and whom I decide to meet is a matter entirely for me. I suspend the meeting until 14:15. 12:34 Meeting suspended until 14:00. 14:00 On resuming—

Question 3 is from Dr Richard Simpson—[Interruption.]. He is not here, I am afraid to say.

Question 8 is withdrawn.

Question 15 should have been from Willie Coffey, but I understand that he is stuck in traffic. Perhaps he could have left home earlier.

That concludes questions on health and wellbeing.

I will not take directions from members from a sedentary position. I recently reminded members that they are expected to be in their places by the start of the item. I am concerned about the number of members who do not turn up for questions at all. I will make an excuse on this occasion because I believe that, when I suspended the meeting just after 12.30 pm, I said that it would resume at 2.15 pm. Nonetheless, members should be guided by what is in the Business Bulletin. I accept that I made an error today, but Mr Gibson is not wrong in what he said and I have recently reminded members of it. I hope that, as we draw towards the close of this parliamentary session, members will respect the Parliament to that degree.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-7900, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the Public Records (Scotland) Bill.

I call Karen Whitefield to speak on behalf of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee.

I ask for a bit of quiet in the chamber, please—other than from the cabinet secretary.

Could we have a question, please?

I must press you for a question, please.

It is not a point of order for me, but you asked me what action you might take. I suggest that you go and have a word with the other member and see whether you can come to any form of agreement.

That is not a point of order for me, Mr Gibson. [Interruption.] Mr FitzPatrick! Members will be well aware of what I have said before about veracity in the chamber and they do themselves no favours by continuing to raise that same old chestnut.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-7736, in the name of Mike Pringle, on behalf of the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body, on technical changes to the Scottish Parliamentary Pensions Act 2009. Motion moved, That the Parliament— (a) in exercise of the powers conferred by section 3 of the Scottish Parliamentary Pensions Act 2009 (asp 1) (the “2009 Act”) determines that with effect from the day after the day this resolution is made the Scottish Parliamentary Pension Scheme (within the meaning of section 4 of the 2009 Act) is modified in accordance with Annex 1 to this resolution, and (b) notes that the Parliamentary corporation has, in accordance with Rule 8.11A.5 of the Parliament’s Standing Orders, consulted with relevant individuals whose interests may be affected by the modifications. ANNEX 1 TO THE RESOLUTION Paragraph (a) MODIFICATIONS TO SCOTTISH PARLIAMENTARY PENSION SCHEME 1. Rule 13 (member-nominated trustees) of schedule 1 to the 2009 Act is omitted. 2. In rule 49 (deferred pensioner’s ill-health pension) of schedule 1 to the 2009 Act, for “4 and 5” substitute “5 and 6”. 3. In rule 85 (buying added years by instalments) of schedule 1 to the 2009 Act, in sub-paragraph (2) for “irrevocable” substitute “revocable by the member giving notice to the Fund trustees”. 4. After rule 85, insert— “Revocation of accepted application 85A (1) This rule applies— (a) where an MSP member buying added years by monthly instalments revokes the application before paying the last instalment, and (b) where an office-holder member (who is not an MSP) buying added years by monthly instalments revokes the application before paying the last instalment. (2) Where this rule applies no more instalments are payable and the individual’s reckonable service as an MSP or, as the case may be, office-holder is increased by a number of added years calculated as follows— B A x — C where— “A” is the number of added years the individual applied to buy; “B” is the period (in days) in respect of which instalments have been paid; and “C” is the period (in days) for which instalments would have been paid had the individual remained in the scheme continuously and not revoked the application.”. 5. In paragraph 18 (added years) of schedule 3 to the 2009 Act— (a) in sub-paragraph (2)(a), after “effect” insert “, subject to the modifications in sub-paragraph (2A),”, and (b) after sub-paragraph (2) insert— “(2A) (a) in paragraph 3 of Schedule 5 to the 1999 scheme rules for “irrevocable on and from the date when the Parliamentary corporation accepts it” substitute “revocable by the member giving notice in writing to the Fund trustees”, and (b) after paragraph 3, insert— “3A. Where a participating member buying added years by periodical contributions revokes the application before paying the last instalment— (a) no more instalments are payable; and (b) the Fund trustees must calculate the number of added years in respect of which the periodical contributions have been paid as follows— B A x — C where— “A” is the number of added years the individual applied to buy; “B” is the period (in days) in respect of which instalments have been paid; and “C” is the period (in days) for which instalments would have been paid in accordance with paragraph 4(a) had the individual not revoked the application.”.—[Mike Pringle.]

There are a lot of questions to put as a result of today’s business. I remind members, in relation to the debate on early intervention in health and education, that, if the amendment in the name of Shona Robison is agreed to, the amendments in the names of Des McNulty and Ross Finnie will fall. If the amendment in the name of Des McNulty is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Ross Finnie will fall. The first question is, that motion S3M-7904, in the name of Mike Pringle, on the reappointment of the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No. Did I hear a no? I did not hear a no. That motion is therefore agreed to.

Make it obvious, please. I put the question again. The first question is, that motion S3M-7904, in the name of Mike Pringle, on the reappointment of the SPSO, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

We are not agreed. Thank you, Mr Neil. There will therefore be a division.

The result of the division is: For 98, Against 8, Abstentions 9. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament nominates Jim Martin to Her Majesty The Queen for reappointment for a second term as the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman from 1 May 2011. The next question is, that motion S3M-7905, in the name of Mike Pringle, on the reappointment of the Scottish Parliamentary Standards Commissioner, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees with the recommendation of the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body under Rule 3A.1.2 of Standing Orders that Stuart Allan be reappointed for a second term as the Scottish Parliamentary Standards Commissioner from 31 March 2011. The next question is, that motion S3M-7906, in the name of Mike Pringle, on the reappointment of the Commissioner for Children and Young People in Scotland, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament nominates Tam Baillie to Her Majesty The Queen for re-appointment for a second term as the Commissioner for Children and Young People in Scotland from 18 May 2011. The next question is, that amendment S3M-7923.3, in the name of Shona Robison, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7923, in the name of Murdo Fraser, on early intervention in health and education, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 46, Against 68, Abstentions 1. Amendment disagreed to. The next question is, that amendment S3M-7923.2, in the name of Des McNulty, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7923, in the name of Murdo Fraser, on early intervention in health and education, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 41, Against 73, Abstentions 1. Amendment disagreed to. The next question is, that amendment S3M-7923.1, in the name of Ross Finnie, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7923, in the name of Murdo Fraser, on early intervention in health and education, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 99, Against 15, Abstentions 1. Amendment agreed to. The next question is, that motion S3M-7923, in the name of Murdo Fraser, on early intervention in health and education, as amended, be agreed to. Motion, as amended, agreed to, That the Parliament recognises the importance of early childhood development and the impact of early intervention in determining future health, social wellbeing and educational achievement of individuals; notes the large and growing body of evidence that highlights the importance of child and parental interaction in the early years of life; recognises the vital role performed by health visitors in supporting families in the early years; notes with concern that, in seven NHS board areas, there was a fall in health visitor numbers between 2009 and 2010; agrees with the conclusions of the Finance Committee’s recent inquiry into preventative spending that the current balance of government spending is skewed too much in favour of reactive, rather than preventative, spending; recognises that early intervention has proven benefits not only in health and education but also in other areas such as crime reduction measures, support for carers and services for older people, and supports a long-term shift to sustained investment in a high-quality, preventative approach to the growing social and economic challenges faced by public services. The next question is, that motion S3M-7900, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the Public Records (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Public Records (Scotland) Bill. The next question is, that motion S3M-7840, in the name of John Swinney, on the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Order 2011, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 101, Against 3, Abstentions 11. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Order 2011 be approved. The final question is, that motion S3M-7736, in the name of Mike Pringle, on technical changes to the Scottish Parliamentary Pensions Act 2009, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament— (a) in exercise of the powers conferred by section 3 of the Scottish Parliamentary Pensions Act 2009 (asp 1) (the “2009 Act”) determines that with effect from the day after the day this resolution is made the Scottish Parliamentary Pension Scheme (within the meaning of section 4 of the 2009 Act) is modified in accordance with Annex 1 to this resolution, and (b) notes that the Parliamentary corporation has, in accordance with Rule 8.11A.5 of the Parliament’s Standing Orders, consulted with relevant individuals whose interests may be affected by the modifications. ANNEX 1 TO THE RESOLUTION Paragraph (a) MODIFICATIONS TO SCOTTISH PARLIAMENTARY PENSION SCHEME 1. Rule 13 (member-nominated trustees) of schedule 1 to the 2009 Act is omitted. 2. In rule 49 (deferred pensioner’s ill-health pension) of schedule 1 to the 2009 Act, for “4 and 5” substitute “5 and 6”. 3. In rule 85 (buying added years by instalments) of schedule 1 to the 2009 Act, in sub-paragraph (2) for “irrevocable” substitute “revocable by the member giving notice to the Fund trustees”. 4. After rule 85, insert— “Revocation of accepted application 85A (1) This rule applies— (a) where an MSP member buying added years by monthly instalments revokes the application before paying the last instalment, and (b) where an office-holder member (who is not an MSP) buying added years by monthly instalments revokes the application before paying the last instalment. (2) Where this rule applies no more instalments are payable and the individual’s reckonable service as an MSP or, as the case may be, office-holder is increased by a number of added years calculated as follows— B A x — C where— “A” is the number of added years the individual applied to buy; “B” is the period (in days) in respect of which instalments have been paid; and “C” is the period (in days) for which instalments would have been paid had the individual remained in the scheme continuously and not revoked the application.”. 5. In paragraph 18 (added years) of schedule 3 to the 2009 Act— (a) in sub-paragraph (2)(a), after “effect” insert “, subject to the modifications in sub-paragraph (2A),”, and (b) after sub-paragraph (2) insert— “(2A) (a) in paragraph 3 of Schedule 5 to the 1999 scheme rules for “irrevocable on and from the date when the Parliamentary corporation accepts it” substitute “revocable by the member giving notice in writing to the Fund trustees”, and (b) after paragraph 3, insert— “3A. Where a participating member buying added years by periodical contributions revokes the application before paying the last instalment— (a) no more instalments are payable; and (b) the Fund trustees must calculate the number of added years in respect of which the periodical contributions have been paid as follows— B A x — C where— “A” is the number of added years the individual applied to buy; “B” is the period (in days) in respect of which instalments have been paid; and “C” is the period (in days) for which instalments would have been paid in accordance with paragraph 4(a) had the individual not revoked the application.”.

Good afternoon. Our first item of business is time for reflection, and our time for reflection leader today is His Eminence Keith Patrick Cardinal O’Brien, archbishop of St Andrews and Edinburgh.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-7899, in the name of John Swinney, on the Budget (Scotland) (No 5) Bill. I advise members that time is pretty tight this afternoon—you all know what that means. I call John Swinney to speak to and move the motion. Cabinet secretary, you have 13 minutes.

Order. I am sorry, but since the cabinet secretary began speaking, I have heard an almost non-stop running commentary from some members on my right, particularly Johann Lamont. I would be grateful if that would stop. If members wish to comment, they should do so through an intervention.

One moment, Mr Kerr. You have made your point. The cabinet secretary was heard in relative silence and I ask that Mr Kerr receive the same treatment.

Order.

Order.

Order. There is still too much background noise on a continual basis from members right across the chamber. Let us hear one speech at a time.

We come to the open debate. Speeches should be of six minutes, please, and no longer.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7913, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to business tomorrow, 10 February 2011.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7914, in the name of Bruce Crawford, also on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees— (a) the following programme of business— Wednesday 23 February 2011 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.05 pm SPCB Question Time 2.20 pm Equal Opportunities Committee Debate: Inquiry into Migration and Trafficking followed by Public Petitions Committee Debate: Work of the Public Petitions Committee followed by Legislative Consent Motion: UK Energy Bill (UK Legislation) followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 6.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 24 February 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Justice and Law Officers; Rural Affairs and the Environment 2.55 pm Stage 3 Proceedings: Patient Rights (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 2 March 2011 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 6.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 3 March 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time followed by Members’ Business 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Stage 3 Proceedings: Damages (Scotland) Bill followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Property Factors (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business and (b) that, for the purposes of Members’ Business on Thursday 3 March 2011, “at the end of First Minister’s Question Time and at the end of the meeting following Decision Time” be substituted for “at the end of the meeting following Decision Time” in Rule 5.6.1(c) of Standing Orders.—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to. The next item of business is consideration of business motions S3M-7915 to S3M-7918, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out stage 2 timetables for various bills. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Certification of Death (Scotland) Bill at Stage 2 be completed by 4 March 2011. That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Double Jeopardy (Scotland) Bill at Stage 2 be completed by 4 March 2011. That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Forced Marriage etc. (Protection and Jurisdiction) (Scotland) Bill at Stage 2 be completed by 4 March 2011. That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Local Electoral Administration (Scotland) Bill at Stage 2 be completed by 4 March 2011.—[Bruce Crawford.] Motions agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I draw members’ attention to the fact that the motions have been revised to correct the titles of the instrument and code of practice to which they refer—it is just a technical amendment. Copies of the revised motions are available at the back of the chamber. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Prohibited Procedures on Protected Animals (Exemptions) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Scottish Government Code of Practice for the Welfare of Gamebirds Reared for Sporting Purposes (SG 2010/275) be approved.—[Bruce Crawford.] The questions on the motions will be put at decision time.

The first question is, that motion S3M-7899, in the name of John Swinney, on the Budget (Scotland) (No 5) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 79, Against 48, Abstentions 0. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the Budget (Scotland) (No.5) Bill be passed. The next question is, that motion S3M-7919, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the Prohibited Procedures on Protected Animals (Exemptions) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2011 (SSI 2011/draft) be approved. The next question is, that motion S3M-7920, in the name of Bruce Crawford, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the Scottish Government Code of Practice for the Welfare of Gamebirds Reared for Sporting Purposes (SG 2010/275) be approved.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-7819, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Double Jeopardy (Scotland) Bill. We have a fair amount of time in hand, so I will not be stopping members unless we are in extreme circumstances. I call Kenny MacAskill to speak to and move the motion.

I must ask you to close, minister. I did not think that I would have to say that in this debate.

Please be fairly quick because we are encroaching on the next item of business.

Questions 4 and 5 have been withdrawn.

Can we just have a question please, Mrs Craigie?

That concludes general question time. Before we move to the next item of business, I invite members to join me in welcoming to the gallery the Canadian high commissioner to the United Kingdom, His Excellency Mr James Wright. [Applause.]

We do not take points of order during questions.

Order.

It is a convention, Ms MacDonald. 12:31 Meeting suspended until 14:15. 14:15 On resuming—

I call Dr Richard Simpson. Dr Simpson, you have quite a long time.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-7822, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution for the Certification of Death (Scotland) Bill. Motion moved, That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Certification of Death (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any increase in expenditure payable out of the Scottish Consolidated Fund arising in consequence of the Act.—[Shona Robison.] The question on the motion will be put at decision time, which will be at 5 o’clock. 16:48 Meeting suspended. 16:58 On resuming—

Come to the point of order please.

I can confirm two things. First, your question was admissible. Secondly, there was no breach of standing orders in the way in which the First Minister responded to it.

The first question is, that motion S3M-7819, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Double Jeopardy (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 114, Against 2, Abstentions 0. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Double Jeopardy (Scotland) Bill. The next question is, that motion S3M-7821, in the name of Shona Robison, on the Certification of Death (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Certification of Death (Scotland) Bill. The next question is, that motion S3M-7822, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution on the Certification of Death (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Certification of Death (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any increase in expenditure payable out of the Scottish Consolidated Fund arising in consequence of the Act.

Good afternoon. Our first item of business is time for reflection, and our time for reflection leader today is Janet Fenton from the Edinburgh peace and justice resource centre.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7849, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a suspension of standing orders.

The next item of business is consideration of another business motion, motion S3M-7846, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to today’s business.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-7820, in the name of Alex Neil, on the Forced Marriage etc (Protection and Jurisdiction) (Scotland) Bill. I call on Alex Neil to speak to and move the motion. Time is very tight this afternoon. You have seven minutes, minister.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Order.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S3M-7820, in the name of Alex Neil, on the Forced Marriage etc (Protection and Jurisdiction) (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Forced Marriage etc. (Protection and Jurisdiction) (Scotland) Bill. The second question is, that motion S3M-7818, in the name of Jim Mather, on the Local Electoral Administration (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Local Electoral Administration (Scotland) Bill. The next question is, that motion S3M-7841, in the name of Mike Rumbles, on the Non-Domestic Rates (Levying) (Scotland) (No 3) Regulations 2010, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 68, Against 46, Abstentions 0. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that nothing further be done under the Non-Domestic Rates (Levying) (Scotland) (No.3) Regulations 2010 (SSI 2010/441).

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-7769, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the Reservoirs (Scotland) Bill.

At this stage, I advise members that I am in a generous mood and can offer all speakers an extra minute. I call John Scott to speak on behalf of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee.

I am happy for you to have another minute, Mr Peacock.

Question 4 was lodged by Brian Adam, who is not in the chamber. This is the second week in a row that he has not been in the chamber.

Maybe we can get back to Aberdeen. I call Iain Gray.

First Minister, I must ask you to be relatively brief, please. Time is marching on rather too quickly. [Interruption.]

Order. The chamber will come to order.

Order. I am sorry, First Minister. If members at the back of the chamber wish to have debates among themselves, could they do so outside?

No. The member is just about to wind up.

Just before we come to decision time, I draw members’ attention to what seems to me to be a growing tendency for members not to be present in the chamber to ask their questions at question time. I consider that to be a gross discourtesy to other members. In particular, it is discourteous to those members who want to ask a supplementary, and it is even more discourteous to ministers who are present to answer those questions. I do not think that it is good enough for members to attempt to anticipate when their question might be called and arrive in the chamber accordingly. I expect all members who are due to ask a question to be in the chamber from the start of the relevant question time. We have only six more of them—let us try to get it right.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S3M-7769, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the Reservoirs (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Reservoirs (Scotland) Bill. The second question is, that motion S3M-7704, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution for the Reservoirs (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Reservoirs (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any expenditure of a kind referred to in paragraph 3(b)(iii) of Rule 9.12 of the Parliament’s Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act. The third question is, that amendment S3M-7793.1, in the name of Dr Richard Simpson, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7793, in the name of Shona Robison, on the dementia strategy, be agreed to. Amendment agreed to. The fourth question is, that motion S3M-7793, in the name of Shona Robison, on the dementia strategy, as amended, be agreed to. Motion, as amended, agreed to, That the Parliament welcomes the progress being made by the NHS, local government, scrutiny bodies and partners in the voluntary and private sectors, including Alzheimer Scotland and the Scottish Dementia Working Group, in delivering the commitments set out in Scotland’s first dementia strategy, building on the Scottish Government’s establishment of dementia as a national priority and on the Parliament’s Cross-Party Group on Alzheimer’s Charter of Rights for People with Dementia and their Carers in Scotland; recognises the crucial role played by carers both paid and unpaid; notes also the challenge of ensuring good quality palliative care for people with dementia, and further welcomes the Big Lottery Fund’s investment in support for people with dementia and their carers after their diagnosis. The final question is, that motion S3M-7770, in the name of Alex Neil, on the Private Rented Housing (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Private Rented Housing (Scotland) Bill.

Good afternoon. As always, the first item of business is time for reflection. I am delighted that our time for reflection leader today is the Right Rev John Christie, Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7789, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a revision to the business programme for this week.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-7771, in the name of John Swinney, on the Budget (Scotland) (No 5) Bill.

No. I am afraid that the cabinet secretary is in the last minutes of his speech.

Order.

That item will be on the agenda for next Tuesday’s bureau meeting and it will be duly discussed then. I call Andrew Welsh to speak on behalf of the Finance Committee, as the committee’s convener.

Order.

Order. Can we have slightly better order, please, from the party in government?

Order.

The member must wind up.

Order. That is quite enough sedentary interventions, thank you.

The member is in his final minute.

Yes.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7790, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 2 February 2011 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 1 Debate: Forced Marriage etc. (Protection and Jurisdiction) (Scotland) Bill followed by Stage 1 Debate: Local Electoral Administration (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 3 February 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 1 Debate: Double Jeopardy (Scotland) Bill 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning; Europe, External Affairs and Culture 2.55 pm Stage 1 Debate: Certification of Death (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution: Certification of Death (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 9 February 2011 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Debate: Budget (Scotland) (No.5) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 10 February 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

There is just one question to be put as a result of today’s business. The question is, that motion S3M-7771, in the name of John Swinney, on the Budget (Scotland) (No 5) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 62, Against 2, Abstentions 56. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Budget (Scotland) (No.5) Bill and, in doing so, notes the Finance Committee’s 2nd Report, 2011 (Session 3): Report on Scotland’s Spending Plans and Draft Budget 2011-12.

Order.

I refer you to the answer that I gave the first time. The matter will be on the agenda for the next bureau meeting and we shall discuss it there.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-7735, in the name of Patrick Harvie, on protecting public services.

I call Linda Fabiani.

I call Mary Mulligan, if she is ready to be called.

We have some flexibility on time, Mr Stevenson.

Mr Harper, I must ask you to close.

Question 4 is from Linda Fabiani.

You are down to ask question 4.

So question 4 is withdrawn, I think. I will therefore call question 5, from Peter Peacock.

Right—Linda Fabiani, then. 4.

Question 6 is from Joe FitzPatrick. It appears that Mr FitzPatrick is not in the chamber, which I think is very regrettable. I will therefore call question 7, from Ken Macintosh.

I will take a supplementary question from Frank McAveety.

Question 1 is from Brian Adam. Question 2 is from Karen Gillon. It is a gross discourtesy that neither member is in the chamber. I will move on to question 3 from James Kelly. I see that Mr Adam has joined us. Mr Adam, I am afraid that you are too late.

There are 14 questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members that, in relation to the debate on protecting public services, if the amendment in the name of John Swinney is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Michael McMahon falls, and that, if the amendment in the name of Derek Brownlee is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Jeremy Purvis falls. The first question is, that amendment S3M-7735.2, in the name of John Swinney, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7735, in the name of Patrick Harvie, on protecting public services, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 74, Against 43, Abstentions 0. Amendment agreed to. Amendment S3M-7735.4, in the name of Michael McMahon, is pre-empted. The next question is, that amendment S3M-7735.3, in the name of Derek Brownlee, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7735, in the name of Patrick Harvie, on protecting public services, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 16, Against 100, Abstentions 0. Amendment disagreed to. The next question is, that amendment S3M-7735.1, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7735, in the name of Patrick Harvie, on protecting public services, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 31, Against 86, Abstentions 0. Amendment disagreed to. The next question is, that motion S3M-7735, in the name of Patrick Harvie, on protecting public services, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed? Members: No. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 74, Against 43, Abstentions 0. Motion, as amended, agreed to, That the Parliament calls on all parties in the Parliament to work together to deliver a balanced budget that will safeguard services and strengthen economic growth for Scotland. The next question is, that amendment S3M-7737.1, in the name of Jim Mather, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7737, in the name of Robin Harper, on opportunities for young people, be agreed to. Amendment agreed to. The next question is, that amendment S3M-7737.2, in the name of David Whitton, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7737, in the name of Robin Harper, on opportunities for young people, be agreed to. Amendment agreed to. The question is, that motion S3M-7737, in the name of Robin Harper, on opportunities for young people, as amended, be agreed to. Motion, as amended, agreed to, Accordingly, the Parliament resolved—That the Parliament commends the work of Nobel Prize winner Muhammad Yunus in founding, in 1976, the Grameen Bank, which provides microfinance for people living in poverty in Bangladesh; recognises that, since its beginnings in Bangladesh, there are now Grameen-type programmes tackling poverty across 38 countries around the world and that Grameen America is now branching out to many new locations in New York, Nebraska, Washington DC and California; believes that there is an opportunity to tackle the growing problem of unemployment among 16 to 19-year-olds with the establishment of a microcredit scheme for young people in Scotland; notes that this scheme could offer loans for small business ventures to young people who are not in education, employment or training and be supported by an entrepreneurial mentoring scheme; further believes that such a scheme would build on the contribution made by Scotland’s social enterprise sector and draw on Scotland’s long history of entrepreneurial achievement, and calls on the Scottish Government to explore ways to establish a Scottish youth microcredit scheme building on the excellent work by the Prince’s Scottish Youth Business Trust in providing microfinance for business start-ups to 18 to 25-year-olds, the work of Glasgow Caledonian University in establishing a partnership with the Grameen Bank to develop the Grameen Caledonian Creative Lab and a Grameen Bank in Scotland and other organisations making a proactive effort and their own contributions in common cause by discussing this idea with the Scottish League of Credit Unions and the Prince’s Scottish Youth Business Trust. The next question is, that motion S3M-7710, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the Historic Environment (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that the Historic Environment (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill be passed. The next question is, that motion S3M-7733, in the name of Gil Paterson, on “The Interpretation and Legislative Reform (Scotland) Act 2010 and other subordinate legislation Standing Order rule changes”, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament notes the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee’s 3rd Report 2010 (Session 3), The Interpretation and Legislative Reform (Scotland) Act 2010 and other subordinate legislation Standing Order rule changes (SP Paper 465), and agrees that changes to Standing Orders set out in Annexe A to the report be made with effect from 6 April 2011. The next question is, that motion S3M-7724, in the name of Gil Paterson, on the schedule to the Interests of Members of the Scottish Parliament Act 2006, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament, considering that it is expedient to make certain modifications to the Schedule to the Interests of Members of the Scottish Parliament Act 2006 (asp 12), in exercise of the powers conferred by paragraph 10(1) of that Schedule— makes the modifications to that Schedule that are contained in the Annexe to this resolution; and provides that those modifications shall come into force on the date after the date of the first dissolution of the Parliament following the date on which this resolution is passed. ANNEXE MODIFICATIONS TO THE SCHEDULE TO THE INTERESTS OF MEMBERS OF THE SCOTTISH PARLIAMENT ACT 2006 Remuneration 1 (1) In the heading to paragraph 2 (Remuneration) of the Schedule, after “Remuneration” insert “and Related undertaking”. (2) Paragraph 2 is amended as follows. (3) At the beginning of that paragraph, insert— “(A1) Where the circumstances are as described in sub-paragraph (1) or (1A).” (4) In sub-paragraph (1)(f), delete the words “or any other work”. (5) After sub-paragraph (1), insert “(1A) Where a member is, or was— (a) a director in a related undertaking; or (b) a partner in a firm, but does, or did, not receive remuneration by virtue of being such a director or partner.” (6) In sub-paragraph (2), insert after “corporation” the words “or of Convener, deputy Convener or member of a Committee of the Parliament”. (7) After sub-paragraph (2), insert— “(3) Sub-paragraph (1) does not apply where the remuneration received from a person on a single, or on more than one, occasion during the current parliamentary session consists solely of expenses unless those expenses amount, or amount in aggregate, to more than the specified limit. (4) The exception in sub-paragraph (3) applies even although the remuneration received from that person on another occasion, or on other occasions, during that session does not consist solely of expenses. (5) In this paragraph— “current parliamentary session” means the parliamentary session which begins immediately after, or in which, the member is returned; “a related undertaking” is a parent or subsidiary undertaking of an undertaking of which the member is a director and receives remuneration as a director as mentioned in sub-paragraph (1)(d); and “specified limit” means 1% of a member’s salary (rounded down to the nearest £10) at the beginning of the current parliamentary session.” Related undertaking, Election Expenses and Sponsorship 2 Paragraphs 3 (Related Undertaking), 4 (Election expenses) and 5 (Sponsorship) of the Schedule are deleted. Gifts 3 (1) Paragraph 6 (Gifts) of the Schedule is amended as follows. (2) In sub-paragraph (1), delete sub-paragraph (a) and the words “(b) that gift meets” and insert— “(a) in the case where the gift was received from a person on a single occasion, the value of that gift, at the date on which it was received, exceeds the specified limit; or (b) in the case where gifts were received from that person on more than one occasion during the current parliamentary session, the aggregate value of those gifts, at the dates on which they were received, exceeds the specified limit and, in either case, (c) that gift or those gifts meet” (3) In sub-paragraph (2), (a) after “to” insert “(a)”; (b) delete “(a)” (where it occurs for the second time) and insert “(i)”; (c) delete “(b)” and insert “(ii)”; and (d) after “the case may be” delete the full stop and insert— “; (b) any support (of any kind) provided by the services of a volunteer which are provided in that volunteer’s own time and free of charge; or (c) a donation (of any kind) which is intended by the donor to be used for the purpose of meeting (i) any campaign expenditure incurred in connection with the member’s campaign for election to a party office; (ii) the election expenses of the member in relation to the election at which that member was returned as a member of the Scottish Parliament; or (iii) the election expenses of the member in relation to any UK parliamentary election at which that member stands as a candidate, but this exemption ceases to apply if the donation is not used for its intended purpose by the expiry of the 35th day after the election result is declared.” (4) In sub-paragraph (3), (a) delete “sub-paragraph (1)” and insert “this paragraph— “candidate” has the same meaning as in section 118A, as read with section 90ZA(5) of the Representation of the People Act 1983;1 “campaign expenditure” includes expenditure incurred, whether before or after the member’s candidacy for election to the party office is announced or after the date on which the result of that election is declared, which can reasonably be described as being for the purposes of that campaign;” and (b) in the end of the definition of “controlling interest” delete the fullstop and insert— “; “current parliamentary session” means the parliamentary session which begins immediately after, or in which, the member is returned; “election expenses”, in relation to a member, has the same meaning for the purposes of (i) sub-paragraph (2)(c) (ii) as “election expenses” has in relation to a candidate in the order under section 12 of the 1998 Act which is in force for the purposes of the election at which the member was returned; and (ii) sub-paragraph (2)(c)(iii) as “election expenses” has in section 90ZA of the Representation of the People Act 1983;2 “party office” means an office in a registered political party with which that member is connected; “registered political party” means a political party registered under Part II of the Political Parties, Elections and Referendums Act 20006 and a member is “connected with” a registered political party if the member was returned at the election after contesting it as a candidate (whether for return as a constituency member or as a regional member) of that party; and “specified limit” means 1% of a member’s salary (rounded down to the nearest £10) at the beginning of the current parliamentary session.“ Heritable Property 4 (1) Paragraph 8 (Heritable property) of the Schedule is amended as follows. (2) In sub-paragraph (2)(a), delete the words “50 per cent of a member’s salary on that date (rounded down to the nearest £10)” and insert “the specified limit”. (3) Delete sub-paragraph (2)(b) and insert— “(b) any income is received from the heritable property during the twelve months prior to the relevant date.” (4) In sub-paragraph (3)(a), delete “his or her own” and insert “ the member’s”. (5) After sub-paragraph (7) insert— “ (8) In this paragraph— “current parliamentary session” means the parliamentary session which begins immediately after, or in which, the member is returned; and “specified limit” means 50% of a member’s salary (rounded down to the nearest £10) at the beginning of the current parliamentary session.” Interest in shares 5 (1) Paragraph 9 (Interest in shares) of the Schedule is amended as follows. (2) In sub-paragraph (2)(b), delete the words “50 per cent of a member’s salary on that date (rounded down to the nearest £10)” and insert “the specified limit”. (3) In sub-paragraph (3), delete “apply”. (4) In sub-paragraph (3)(a), delete “his or her own name” and insert “ the name of the member (or relevant person)”. (5) In sub-paragraph (8), (a) insert after “paragraph”— ““current parliamentary session” means the parliamentary session which begins immediately after, or in which, the member is returned;” (b) delete the words “(a)” and “and (b)”; and (c) at the end of that sub-paragraph, delete the full stop and insert— “ ; “specified limit” means 50% of a member’s salary (rounded down to the nearest £10) at the beginning of the current parliamentary session.” 1 1983 c 1 2 1983 c. 1 The next question is, that motion S3M-7725, in the name of Gil Paterson, on determinations to the Interests of Members of the Scottish Parliament Act 2006, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament, in exercise of the powers conferred by sections 4(1) and 4(2) of the Interests of Members of the Scottish Parliament Act 2006 (asp 12)— makes the Interests of Members of the Scottish Parliament Act 2006 (Form and Content of Written Statement) Determination 2011 as set out in Annexe E of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee’s 9th Report 2010 (Session 3), MSPs’ Registrable Interests: Proposed Changes to the Code of Conduct with effect from the date after the date of the first dissolution of the Parliament following the date on which this resolution is passed; revokes the Interests of Members of the Scottish Parliament Act 2006 (Form and Content of Written Statement) Determination 2007 with effect from the date after the date of the first dissolution of the Parliament following the date on which this resolution is passed; and revokes the Interests of Members of the Scottish Parliament Act 2006 (Gross Income from Heritable Property) Determination 2007 with effect from the date after the date of the first dissolution of the Parliament following the date on which this resolution is passed. The next question is, that motion S3M-7726, in the name of Gil Paterson, on the code of conduct for members of the Scottish Parliament, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees to amend the Code of Conduct for Members of the Scottish Parliament by replacing Volumes 1 and 2 with Volumes 1 and 2 as set out in Annexe D of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee's 9th Report 2010 (Session 3), MSPs’ Registrable Interests: Proposed Changes to the Code of Conduct, with effect from the date after the date of the first dissolution of the Parliament following the date on which this resolution is passed. The next question is, that motion S3M-7734, in the name of Gil Paterson, on minor changes to standing orders, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament notes the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee’s 10th Report 2010 (Session 3), Minor changes to Standing Orders (SP Paper 552), and agrees that changes to Standing Orders set out in Annexe A to the report be made with effect from 1 April 2011.

Good afternoon. Our first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leaders today are Mimi Evans-Agnew and James Clements, pupil and former pupil of Hyndland secondary school in Glasgow.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-7719, in the name of Rhoda Grant, on the Domestic Abuse (Scotland) Bill. The debate is oversubscribed. If all members stick strictly to the time that they are allocated, we will manage to fit everybody in.

You must close, please.

I must stop you there, I am afraid. I am sorry to have to do so, but as you said, I am somewhat constrained in my actions.

We come to closing speeches, but members still have only four minutes. I call Mike Pringle to be followed by Bill Aitken.

I apologise. I was misinformed that Mr Aitken would be closing for the Conservatives. It will, in fact, be John Lamont—although you still have only four minutes, Mr Lamont.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-7660, in the name of Tom McCabe, on behalf of the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body, on membership of the Scottish Commission for Public Audit. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees to the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body’s proposal to appoint Stewart Stevenson MSP as a member of the Scottish Commission for Public Audit.—[Tom McCabe.] The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7728, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to the business programme for Thursday 20 January. If anyone wants to speak against the motion, they should press their request-to-speak button.

They must do, because no one has asked to speak against the motion. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 20 January 2011— after 2.55 pm Stage 3 Proceedings: Historic Environment (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill insert followed by Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee debate: 3rd Report 2010: The Interpretation and Legislative Reform (Scotland) Act 2010 and other subordinate legislation Standing Order rule changes followed by Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee debate: 9th Report 2010: MSPs Registrable Interests: Proposed Changes to the Code of Conduct followed by Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee debate: 10th Report 2010: Minor changes to Standing Orders—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to. The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7729, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 26 January 2011 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 1 Debate: Budget (Scotland) (No.5) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 27 January 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 1 Debate: Reservoirs (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution: Reservoirs (Scotland) Bill 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Stage 1 Debate: Private Rented Housing (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Wednesday 2 February 2011 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business Thursday 3 February 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister’s Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning; Europe, External Affairs and Culture 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members’ Business—[Bruce Crawford.] Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motion S3M-7730, on committee membership. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that Jim Hume be appointed to replace Robert Brown as a member of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee.—[Bruce Crawford.] The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that motion S3M-7719, in the name of Rhoda Grant, on the Domestic Abuse (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Domestic Abuse (Scotland) Bill. The second question is, that motion S3M-7716, in the name of Iain Smith, on the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee’s report on the public sector’s support for exporters, international trade and the attraction of inward investment, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee’s 8th Report, 2010 (Session 3): Report on the public sector’s support for exporters, international trade and the attraction of inward investment (SP Paper 485). The third question is, that motion S3M-7660, in the name of Tom McCabe, on membership of the Scottish Commission for Public Audit, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees to the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body’s proposal to appoint Stewart Stevenson MSP as a member of the Scottish Commission for Public Audit. The final question is, that motion S3M-7730, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on committee membership, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that Jim Hume be appointed to replace Robert Brown as a member of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee.

There are eight questions to be put as a result of today's business. I remind members that, in relation to the debate on education, if the amendment in the name of Michael Russell is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Elizabeth Smith will fall, and that, in relation to the debate on electricity market reform, if the amendment in the name of Lewis Macdonald is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Gavin Brown will fall. The first question is, that amendment S3M-7692.3, in the name of Michael Russell, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7692, in the name of Des McNulty, on education, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 47, Against 78, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-7692.1, in the name of Elizabeth Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7692, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 18, Against 107, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-7692.2, in the name of Margaret Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7692, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 77, Against 46, Abstentions 2.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-7692, in the name of Des McNulty, on education, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 60, Against 48, Abstentions 17.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament condemns the reduction in the number of teachers under the SNP by almost 3,000 since 2007 and the sharp rise in the proportion of recently qualified teachers who cannot obtain permanent or even temporary employment; notes that the percentage of newly qualified staff who have obtained full-time permanent posts has fallen to just 16.1%, a record low; expresses concern that pupil/teacher ratios are rising across Scotland and many colleges have insufficient bursary funds to meet demand, and calls on the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning to apologise for getting involved in local authority decisions outwith his regional constituency instead of tackling the impact that fewer teachers, more unemployed recently qualified teachers, higher pupil/teacher ratios and a shortfall in bursary funding will have on education in Scotland; notes the inconsistent comments of the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning in relation to his role in local school closures, and calls on the Scottish Government to clarify the rules governing the involvement of the cabinet secretary in decisions to close local schools.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-7693.3, in the name of Lewis Macdonald, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7693, in the name of Jim Mather, on electricity market reform, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 44, Against 80, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-7693.1, in the name of Gavin Brown, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7693, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 16, Against 64, Abstentions 45.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-7693.2, in the name of Liam McArthur, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7693, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-7693, in the name of Jim Mather, on electricity market reform, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 108, Against 16, Abstentions 1.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the UK Government's electricity market reform proposals and their importance to the delivery of the Parliament's climate change and low-carbon energy objectives for Scotland; agrees that the  related UK review of Ofgem and the transmission charging regime is an opportunity to deliver a more equitable system that is fit to help deliver Scotland's massive low-carbon energy potential that will bring economic and other benefits to communities across Scotland; further notes the Parliament's existing powers with regard to renewables and carbon capture and storage (CCS), which it believes should, at a minimum, be left intact; believes that the Parliament should continue to use these powers in support of the development of Scotland's low-carbon energy potential; urges the UK Government to work closely with the Scottish Government to ensure that reforms further incentivise clean energy and incentivise energy demand reduction, as set out in the Draft Electricity Generation Policy Statement 2010; calls on the UK Government and Scottish Government to work together to help fulfil Scotland's low-carbon potential, and further urges the UK Government to ensure full and immediate consultation with the Parliament on these proposals and supports Longannet to become the UK's first demonstration facility for CCS with up to £1 billion of UK Government funding.

Before we come to decision time, I would like to make the following brief statement. Further to my ruling this morning on Lord Foulkes's interventions during general questions, I inform the chamber that I have written to the member stating that I consider such behaviour to be disrespectful and discourteous, and that any future repetition will result in expulsion from the chamber. I take this opportunity to remind all members that, although I fully appreciate that in the run-up to an election exchanges may become heated, I will not tolerate members behaving in a disrespectful and discourteous manner in the chamber.

That is not a point of order.

I have no need to explain my decision, but I will do so. As has happened previously in the chamber, I find discourteous not the word that was used but the manner in which it was used. That is the way in which I have ruled.

Order. There is too much background noise in the chamber.

I call Jim Mather to wind up on behalf of the Government. Minister, you have free range up until 5 o'clock.

Order.

Order. Lord Foulkes, I will not have that sort of personal intervention across the chamber from a sedentary position.

I warn Lord Foulkes that if he continues with that he will force me into  taking an action that I am very reluctant to take, which might include exclusion from the chamber. I call Alasdair Allan.

Question 5 should be from Nicol Stephen, but unfortunately he is not in the chamber.

Question 7 was not lodged.

Order.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-7692, in the name of Des McNulty, on education. The debate is heavily subscribed, and there is very little time in hand.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7684, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 19 January 2011 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 1 Debate: Domestic Abuse (Scotland) Bill followed by Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee Debate: The public sector's support for exporters, international trade and the attraction of inward investment.  followed by SPCB Motion on membership of the Scottish Commission for Public Audit followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 20 January 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Green Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and Law Officers 2.55 pm Stage 3 Proceedings: Historic Environment (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 26 January 2011 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 27 January 2011  9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of five Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move en bloc motions S3M-7685 to S3M-7689, on approval of Scottish statutory instruments. Motions moved, That the Parliament agrees that the Advice and Assistance (Assistance by Way of Representation) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2011 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Crime (International Co-operation) Act 2003 (Designation of Participating Countries) (Scotland) Order 2011 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Act 2010 (Consequential and Supplementary Provisions) Order 2011 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Public Appointments and Public Bodies etc. (Scotland) Act 2003 (Amendment of Specified Authorities) Order 2011 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman draft Statement of Complaints Handling Principles be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The questions on the motions will be put at decision time.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-7676, in the name of Hugh O'Donnell, on the Autism (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 5, Against 109, Abstentions 2.  Motion disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-7677, in the name of Patrick Harvie, on the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee's "Report on Low Carbon Scotland: The Draft Report on Proposals and Policies", be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 56, Against 0, Abstentions 61.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament endorses the recommendations contained in the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee's 9th Report, 2010 (Session 3): Report on Low Carbon Scotland: The Draft Report on Proposals and Policies (SP Paper 554) and agrees that this report, together with the Official Report of the Parliament's debate  on the report, should form the Parliament's response to the Scottish Government on the Draft Report on Proposals and Policies.

The final question is, that motions S3M-7685 to S3M-7689, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of Scottish statutory instruments, be agreed to.  Motions agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Advice and Assistance (Assistance by Way of Representation) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2011 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Crime (International Co-operation) Act 2003 (Designation of Participating Countries) (Scotland) Order 2011 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Act 2010 (Consequential and Supplementary Provisions) Order 2011 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Public Appointments and Public Bodies etc. (Scotland) Act 2003 (Amendment of Specified Authorities) Order 2011 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman draft Statement of Complaints Handling Principles be approved.

Order. There should be no interruptions or interventions.

The cabinet secretary will now take questions on issues that were raised in the statement. We have until 6 o'clock, when we will move to decision time. It would be helpful if members who would like to ask questions would press their request-to-speak buttons.

Order.

Order.

You must finish, please.

Order.

That concludes the ministerial statement and questions on the proposed school closures in Argyll and Bute, and I have no choice other than to suspend until 6 o'clock.

The next item of business is a 10-minute statement by Michael Russell on proposed school closures in Argyll. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions.

You must close, please.

All speeches should now be of four minutes' duration.

The cabinet secretary will now take questions on issues that were raised in his statement. I have exactly 20 minutes for questions, after which I must move to the next item of business.

Quickly, please.

We come to open questions. Many members wish to ask a question of the cabinet secretary. If questions and answers are kept succinct, I will do my best to get everyone in.

I ask members to ask questions that relate directly to the cabinet secretary's statement.

Cabinet secretary, I must ask you to keep it as brief as possible, please.

Margo MacDonald—very briefly.

That concludes the statement and questions on reform of the police and fire and rescue services. I apologise to the two members whom I was unable to call.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-7676, in the name of Hugh O'Donnell, on the Autism (Scotland) Bill. We are very tight for time, so I ask that times be adhered to.

The next item of business is a statement by Kenny MacAskill on the reform of the police and fire and rescue services. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his 10-minute statement and therefore there should be no interventions or interruptions during it.

Good afternoon and welcome back. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Larry Blance, of the Kagyu Samye Dzong.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7683, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to the business programme for today.

We come to decision time. The first question is, that motion S3M-7644, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on committee membership, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that— Stewart Stevenson be appointed to replace Aileen Campbell as a member of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee; Stewart Stevenson be appointed to replace Angela Constance as a member of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee.

The second question is, that motion S3M-7646, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on substitution on committees be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that— Michael Matheson be appointed as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Scotland Bill Committee.

I wish everyone a happy recess.  Meeting closed at 12:30.

Order.

Order! The chamber will come to order.

Ms Cunningham! Order!

Order.

Order.

That was a little too brief, minister. [ Laughter .]

I appreciate your gesture and your honesty, Mr Purvis. Thank you for that.

Question 2 is not lodged.

Question 9 is withdrawn.

In an effort to help with the timing of speeches, I advise members that we can have, on average, one minute extra per member. It might be helpful if members take that as a guideline.

Good morning. The first item of business this morning is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I invite Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-7644, on committee membership, and motion S3M-7646, on substitution on committees.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that— Stewart Stevenson be appointed to replace Aileen Campbell as a member of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee; Stewart Stevenson be appointed to replace Angela Constance as a member of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee. That the Parliament agrees that— Michael Matheson be appointed as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Scotland Bill Committee.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The next item of business is a statement by Angela Constance on Skills Development Scotland. The minister will take questions at the end of her 10-minute statement and there should therefore be no interventions or interruptions during it.

The minister will now take questions on the issues raised in her statement. We have around 20 minutes for questions.

Order.

Order.

Order.

We come to open questions. If questions and answers are fairly brief, we will manage to get everyone in.

That concludes the statement and questions on Skills Development Scotland.

The fact that there is a statement and questions this morning is purely a matter for the Parliamentary Bureau. Whether or not members choose to attend is a matter for them.

The next item of business is a debate on violence against women. We have a little leeway on timing, so members should feel free to take interventions, despite the fact that a speaking time of four minutes is advised. I call on Alex Neil to open the debate. You have roundabout seven minutes, minister.

The next item of business is consideration of four Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motions S3M-7645, on committee membership, S3M-7647, on substitution on committees, S3M-7648, on a change to a committee remit, and S3M-7649, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that— Alex Johnstone be appointed to replace David McLetchie as a member of the Local Government and Communities Committee. That the Parliament agrees that— David McLetchie be appointed to replace Alex Johnstone as the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party substitute on the Local Government and Communities Committee. That the Parliament agrees that the remit of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee be amended to— To consider and report on agriculture, fisheries and rural development and other matters (other than climate change) falling within the remit of the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment. That the Parliament agrees that the Sale of Tobacco (Registration of Moveable Structures and Fixed Penalty Notices) (Scotland) Regulations 2010 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The questions on those motions will be put at decision time.

There are six questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-7534, in the name of Margaret Mitchell, on the Equal Opportunities Committee's report on post-legislative scrutiny of the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Equal Opportunities Committee's 4th Report 2010 (Session 3): Report on post-legislative scrutiny: the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003 (SP Paper 468).

The next question is, that motion S3M-7592, in the name of Hugh Henry, on the Protection of Workers (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 42, Against 75, Abstentions 0.  Motion disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-7645, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on committee membership, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that— Alex Johnstone be appointed to replace David McLetchie as a member of the Local Government and Communities Committee.

The next question is, that motion S3M-7647, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on substitution on committees, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that— David McLetchie be appointed to replace Alex Johnstone as the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party substitute on the Local Government and Communities Committee.

The next question is, that motion S3M-7648, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on a committee remit, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the remit of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee be amended to— To consider and report on agriculture, fisheries and rural development and other matters (other than climate change) falling within the remit of the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment.

The next question is, that motion S3M-7649, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Sale of Tobacco (Registration of Moveable Structures and Fixed Penalty Notices) (Scotland) Regulations 2010 be approved.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7642, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a revision to the business programme for tomorrow.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 23 December 2010— delete 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Violence against Women and insert 9.00 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Skills Development Scotland followed by Scottish Government Debate: Violence against Women—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7643, in the name of Bruce Crawford, which sets out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 12 January 2011 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Reform of the  Police and Fire Rescue Services followed by Stage 1 Debate: Autism (Scotland) Bill followed by Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee Debate: Committee's consideration of the Scottish Government's Draft Report on Proposals and Policies on meeting its climate change targets followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.30 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 13 January 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Electricity Market Reform followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 19 January 2011 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 20 January 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and Law Officers 2.55 pm Stage 3 Proceedings: Historic Environment (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7641, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a change to standing orders to allow business to start at 9 o'clock tomorrow morning, Thursday 23 December 2010.

We come to the open debate. As members will have realised, speeches must be no longer than four minutes.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader is the Rev Ross Mitchell, who is a retired Church of Scotland minister.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-7534, in the name of Margaret Mitchell, on the Equal Opportunities Committee's "Report on post-legislative scrutiny: the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003".

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motion S3M-7611, amending the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee's remit.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the remit of the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee be amended to— To consider and report on (a) matters relating to transport and infrastructure falling within the remit of the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth and (b) matters relating to climate change falling within the remit of the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

We come to decision time. There are nine questions to be put as a result of today's business. Members will wish to know that, in relation to the debate on the antisocial behaviour framework, if the amendment in the name of James Kelly is agreed to, the amendment in the name of John Lamont will fall. The first question is, that amendment S3M-7604.2, in the name of John Swinney, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7604, in the name of Andy Kerr, on winter resilience, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-7604.1, in the name of Jackson Carlaw, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7604, in the name of Andy Kerr, on winter resilience, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-7604.3, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7604, in the name of Andy Kerr, on winter resilience, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 9, Against 62, Abstentions 44.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-7604, in the name of Andy Kerr, on winter resilience, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament acknowledges that lessons have to be learned about how the Scottish Government and its agencies react to exceptional weather conditions; considers that MSPs must now look ahead and work together to ensure that all possible measures are taken to prevent the experience of recent weeks, which saw older people trapped in their homes, schools shut, people stranded on roads, businesses losing money, diesel and food supplies running low, mail undelivered and bins not collected; calls on the Scottish Government to improve communications, ensure closer and effective liaison with all appropriate organisations and consider more robust planning exercises, and, while acknowledging that severe weather will cause disruption and delays, believes that Scotland needs to keep moving regardless of the weather conditions; acknowledges the significant efforts made by a wide range of public service workers, voluntary organisations and people across Scotland to maintain essential services, support their neighbours and keep communities moving through the extreme conditions, and further calls on the Scottish Government to give consideration to a traffic-light style graded system of severe weather warnings.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-7605.3, in the name of James Kelly, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7605, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the antisocial behaviour framework, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 42, Against 73, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-7605.1, in the name of John Lamont, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7605, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the antisocial behaviour framework, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 71, Against 42, Abstentions 2.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-7605.2, in the name of Robert Brown, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7605, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the antisocial behaviour framework, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 11, Against 104, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-7605, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the antisocial behaviour framework, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 73, Against 42, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the publication of the first annual report of progress made in implementing the antisocial behaviour framework, Promoting Positive Outcomes: Working Together to Prevent Antisocial Behaviour in Scotland , which shifts the emphasis onto prevention and early, effective intervention while recognising that enforcement measures are appropriate in some circumstances; welcomes the support for this approach from the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities (COSLA), the Society of Local Authority Chief Executives (SOLACE), the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland (ACPOS), the Chief Fire Officers Association in Scotland (CFOAS), the Scottish Children's Reporter Administration (SCRA), the Association of Directors of Social Work (ADSW), the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service (COPFS), Youthlink, the Judicial Studies Committee, Victim Support Scotland, Safeguarding Communities Reducing Offending (SACRO), the Scottish Youth Parliament, academia and the third sector; further welcomes the £20 million being invested in Scotland's communities through the Cashback for Communities initiative, which provides free activities for young people, and further notes that, while progress is being made across a range of areas in improving community safety, the public must continue to be encouraged to report antisocial behaviour and that where examples of good practice exist these should be replicated as widely as possible.

The final question is, that motion S3M-7611, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on a committee remit, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the remit of the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee be amended to— To consider and report on (a) matters relating to transport and infrastructure falling within the remit of the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth and (b) matters relating to climate change falling within the remit of the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment.

No, he has to close.

Question 5 has been withdrawn.

I am not aware of timber travelling on any ferries, but the minister may proceed.

I remind members that supplementary questions should have some tie-in to the original question that was answered. We are getting a little away from that.

Order. You have asked your question; an answer is coming.

Questions 14 and 15 have been withdrawn.

Order. There is too much noise around the chamber.

I will take a supplementary question from Duncan McNeil.

That concludes questions to the First Minister. I remind members that we are moving to members' business, so they should leave the chamber quietly.

A few seconds early, we come to the next item of business, which is general question time. Question 1 has not been lodged.

Order.

Order. Can we have a bit less silence—[ Laughter .] I mean, a bit more silence, please.

We come to the open debate. Members will appreciate that there is no time to spare. Speeches of six minutes only, please.

Good morning. The first item of business is a Labour Party debate on motion S3M-7604, in the name of Andy Kerr, on winter resilience. As the debate is very heavily subscribed, I ask members to stick rigidly to the timings given.

There are two questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-7566, in the name of Bill Butler, on the Damages (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Damages (Scotland) Bill.

The next question is, that motion S3M-07593, in the name of John Swinney, on the Forth Crossing Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 108, Against 3, Abstentions 0.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Forth Crossing Bill be passed.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7598, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 22 December 2010 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Equal Opportunities Committee Debate: Report on post-legislative scrutiny: the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003 followed by Stage One Debate: Protection of Workers (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 23 December 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Violence against Women 11.00 am Themed Question Time Europe, External Affairs and Culture;  Education and Lifelong Learning 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister's Question Time 12.30 pm Decision Time Wednesday 12 January 2011 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 13 January 2011 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing  2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

You must close, please.

I must ask that future contributions to the debate be limited to four minutes, please.

I must hurry you.

I call Bill Aitken to speak on behalf of the Justice Committee.

That concludes the debate on the appointment of a junior Scottish minister. The question is, that motion S3M-7603, in the name of Alex Salmond, on the appointment of a junior Scottish minister, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that Angela Constance be appointed as a junior Scottish Minister.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-7566, in the name of Bill Butler, on the Damages (Scotland) Bill. We are very tight for time today, so timeous speeches are called for.

Order.

The next item is consideration of business motion S3M-7600, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 3 consideration of the Forth Crossing Bill.

Under rule 4.8.2 of the standing orders, I wish to formally notify members of the resignation of Stewart Stevenson as a junior Scottish minister. The next item of debate is, therefore, a debate on motion S3M-7603, in the name of Alex Salmond, on the appointment of a junior Scottish minister. Members should note that the question on the motion will be put immediately after the debate and not at decision time.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Canon Ian Paton of Old St Paul's episcopal church here in Edinburgh.

Thank you.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7606, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out revisions to the business programme for today.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today’s business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-7550.1, in the name of Alex Salmond, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7550, in the name of Iain Gray, on the Scotland Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division. For Adam, Brian (Aberdeen North) (SNP) Allan, Alasdair (Western Isles) (SNP) Brown, Keith (Ochil) (SNP) Coffey, Willie (Kilmarnock and Loudoun) (SNP) Constance, Angela (Livingston) (SNP) Crawford, Bruce (Stirling) (SNP) Cunningham, Roseanna (Perth) (SNP) Don, Nigel (North Eas0t Scotland) (SNP) Doris, Bob (Glasgow) (SNP) Ewing, Fergus (Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber) (SNP) Fabiani, Linda (Central Scotland) (SNP) FitzPatrick, Joe (Dundee West) (SNP) Gibson, Rob (Highlands and Islands) (SNP) Grahame, Christine (South of Scotland) (SNP) Harvie, Christopher (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP) Hepburn, Jamie (Central Scotland) (SNP) Hyslop, Fiona (Lothians) (SNP) Ingram, Adam (South of Scotland) (SNP) Kidd, Bill (Glasgow) (SNP) MacAskill, Kenny (Edinburgh East and Musselburgh) (SNP) Marwick, Tricia (Central Fife) (SNP) Matheson, Michael (Falkirk West) (SNP) Maxwell, Stewart (West of Scotland) (SNP) McKee, Ian (Lothians) (SNP) McKelvie, Christina (Central Scotland) (SNP) McLaughlin, Anne (Glasgow) (SNP) McMillan, Stuart (West of Scotland) (SNP) Morgan, Alasdair (South of Scotland) (SNP) Neil, Alex (Central Scotland) (SNP) Paterson, Gil (West of Scotland) (SNP) Robison, Shona (Dundee East) (SNP) Russell, Michael (South of Scotland) (SNP) Salmond, Alex (Gordon) (SNP) Stevenson, Stewart (Banff and Buchan) (SNP) Sturgeon, Nicola (Glasgow Govan) (SNP) Swinney, John (North Tayside) (SNP) Thompson, Dave (Highlands and Islands) (SNP) Watt, Maureen (North East Scotland) (SNP) Welsh, Andrew (Angus) (SNP) White, Sandra (Glasgow) (SNP) Wilson, Bill (West of Scotland) (SNP) Wilson, John (Central Scotland) (SNP) Against Aitken, Bill (Glasgow) (Con) Alexander, Ms Wendy (Paisley North) (Lab) Baillie, Jackie (Dumbarton) (Lab) Baker, Claire (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Lab) Boyack, Sarah (Edinburgh Central) (Lab) Brocklebank, Ted (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con) Brown, Gavin (Lothians) (Con) Brown, Robert (Glasgow) (LD)  Brownlee, Derek (South of Scotland) (Con) Butler, Bill (Glasgow Anniesland) (Lab) Carlaw, Jackson (West of Scotland) (Con) Chisholm, Malcolm (Edinburgh North and Leith) (Lab) Eadie, Helen (Dunfermline East) (Lab) Ferguson, Patricia (Glasgow Maryhill) (Lab) Finnie, Ross (West of Scotland) (LD) Foulkes, George (Lothians) (Lab) Fraser, Murdo (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con) Gillon, Karen (Clydesdale) (Lab) Godman, Trish (West Renfrewshire) (Lab) Goldie, Annabel (West of Scotland) (Con) Gordon, Charlie (Glasgow Cathcart) (Lab) Gray, Iain (East Lothian) (Lab) Harper, Robin (Lothians) (Green) Harvie, Patrick (Glasgow) (Green) Hume, Jim (South of Scotland) (LD) Johnstone, Alex (North East Scotland) (Con) Kelly, James (Glasgow Rutherglen) (Lab) Lamont, Johann (Glasgow Pollok) (Lab) Lamont, John (Roxburgh and Berwickshire) (Con) Macintosh, Ken (Eastwood) (Lab) Martin, Paul (Glasgow Springburn) (Lab) McAveety, Mr Frank (Glasgow Shettleston) (Lab) McCabe, Tom (Hamilton South) (Lab) McInnes, Alison (North East Scotland) (LD) McLetchie, David (Edinburgh Pentlands) (Con) McMahon, Michael (Hamilton North and Bellshill) (Lab) McNeil, Duncan (Greenock and Inverclyde) (Lab) McNeill, Pauline (Glasgow Kelvin) (Lab) McNulty, Des (Clydebank and Milngavie) (Lab) Milne, Nanette (North East Scotland) (Con) Mitchell, Margaret (Central Scotland) (Con) Mulligan, Mary (Linlithgow) (Lab) Murray, Elaine (Dumfries) (Lab) O’Donnell, Hugh (Central Scotland) (LD) Oldfather, Irene (Cunninghame South) (Lab) Park, John (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Lab) Peacock, Peter (Highlands and Islands) (Lab) Peattie, Cathy (Falkirk East) (Lab) Pringle, Mike (Edinburgh South) (LD) Purvis, Jeremy (Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale) (LD) Scanlon, Mary (Highlands and Islands) (Con) Scott, John (Ayr) (Con) Scott, Tavish (Shetland) (LD) Simpson, Dr Richard (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Lab) Smith, Elaine (Coatbridge and Chryston) (Lab) Smith, Elizabeth (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con) Smith, Iain (North East Fife) (LD) Smith, Margaret (Edinburgh West) (LD) Stephen, Nicol (Aberdeen South) (LD) Tolson, Jim (Dunfermline West) (LD) Whitefield, Karen (Airdrie and Shotts) (Lab) Whitton, David (Strathkelvin and Bearsden) (Lab)

The result of the division is: For 42, Against 62, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-7550, in the name of Iain Gray, on the Scotland Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division. For Aitken, Bill (Glasgow) (Con) Alexander, Ms Wendy (Paisley North) (Lab) Baillie, Jackie (Dumbarton) (Lab) Baker, Claire (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Lab)  Boyack, Sarah (Edinburgh Central) (Lab) Brocklebank, Ted (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con) Brown, Gavin (Lothians) (Con) Brown, Robert (Glasgow) (LD) Brownlee, Derek (South of Scotland) (Con) Butler, Bill (Glasgow Anniesland) (Lab) Carlaw, Jackson (West of Scotland) (Con) Chisholm, Malcolm (Edinburgh North and Leith) (Lab) Eadie, Helen (Dunfermline East) (Lab) Ferguson, Patricia (Glasgow Maryhill) (Lab) Finnie, Ross (West of Scotland) (LD) Foulkes, George (Lothians) (Lab) Fraser, Murdo (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con) Gillon, Karen (Clydesdale) (Lab) Godman, Trish (West Renfrewshire) (Lab) Goldie, Annabel (West of Scotland) (Con) Gordon, Charlie (Glasgow Cathcart) (Lab) Gray, Iain (East Lothian) (Lab) Hume, Jim (South of Scotland) (LD) Johnstone, Alex (North East Scotland) (Con) Kelly, James (Glasgow Rutherglen) (Lab) Lamont, Johann (Glasgow Pollok) (Lab) Lamont, John (Roxburgh and Berwickshire) (Con) Macintosh, Ken (Eastwood) (Lab) Martin, Paul (Glasgow Springburn) (Lab) McAveety, Mr Frank (Glasgow Shettleston) (Lab) McCabe, Tom (Hamilton South) (Lab) McInnes, Alison (North East Scotland) (LD) McLetchie, David (Edinburgh Pentlands) (Con) McMahon, Michael (Hamilton North and Bellshill) (Lab) McNeil, Duncan (Greenock and Inverclyde) (Lab) McNeill, Pauline (Glasgow Kelvin) (Lab) McNulty, Des (Clydebank and Milngavie) (Lab) Milne, Nanette (North East Scotland) (Con) Mulligan, Mary (Linlithgow) (Lab) Murray, Elaine (Dumfries) (Lab) O’Donnell, Hugh (Central Scotland) (LD) Oldfather, Irene (Cunninghame South) (Lab) Park, John (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Lab) Peacock, Peter (Highlands and Islands) (Lab) Peattie, Cathy (Falkirk East) (Lab) Pringle, Mike (Edinburgh South) (LD) Purvis, Jeremy (Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale) (LD) Scanlon, Mary (Highlands and Islands) (Con) Scott, John (Ayr) (Con) Scott, Tavish (Shetland) (LD) Simpson, Dr Richard (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Lab) Smith, Elaine (Coatbridge and Chryston) (Lab) Smith, Elizabeth (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Con) Smith, Iain (North East Fife) (LD) Smith, Margaret (Edinburgh West) (LD) Stephen, Nicol (Aberdeen South) (LD) Tolson, Jim (Dunfermline West) (LD) Whitefield, Karen (Airdrie and Shotts) (Lab) Whitton, David (Strathkelvin and Bearsden) (Lab) Against Adam, Brian (Aberdeen North) (SNP) Allan, Alasdair (Western Isles) (SNP) Brown, Keith (Ochil) (SNP) Coffey, Willie (Kilmarnock and Loudoun) (SNP) Constance, Angela (Livingston) (SNP) Crawford, Bruce (Stirling) (SNP) Cunningham, Roseanna (Perth) (SNP) Don, Nigel (North East Scotland) (SNP) Doris, Bob (Glasgow) (SNP) Ewing, Fergus (Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber) (SNP) Fabiani, Linda (Central Scotland) (SNP) FitzPatrick, Joe (Dundee West) (SNP) Gibson, Rob (Highlands and Islands) (SNP) Grahame, Christine (South of Scotland) (SNP) Harper, Robin (Lothians) (Green)  Harvie, Christopher (Mid Scotland and Fife) (SNP) Harvie, Patrick (Glasgow) (Green) Hepburn, Jamie (Central Scotland) (SNP) Hyslop, Fiona (Lothians) (SNP) Ingram, Adam (South of Scotland) (SNP) Kidd, Bill (Glasgow) (SNP) MacAskill, Kenny (Edinburgh East and Musselburgh) (SNP) Marwick, Tricia (Central Fife) (SNP) Matheson, Michael (Falkirk West) (SNP) Maxwell, Stewart (West of Scotland) (SNP) McKee, Ian (Lothians) (SNP) McKelvie, Christina (Central Scotland) (SNP) McLaughlin, Anne (Glasgow) (SNP) McMillan, Stuart (West of Scotland) (SNP) Morgan, Alasdair (South of Scotland) (SNP) Neil, Alex (Central Scotland) (SNP) Paterson, Gil (West of Scotland) (SNP) Robison, Shona (Dundee East) (SNP) Russell, Michael (South of Scotland) (SNP) Salmond, Alex (Gordon) (SNP) Stevenson, Stewart (Banff and Buchan) (SNP) Sturgeon, Nicola (Glasgow Govan) (SNP) Swinney, John (North Tayside) (SNP) Thompson, Dave (Highlands and Islands) (SNP) Watt, Maureen (North East Scotland) (SNP) Welsh, Andrew (Angus) (SNP) White, Sandra (Glasgow) (SNP) Wilson, Bill (West of Scotland) (SNP) Wilson, John (Central Scotland) (SNP) Abstentions Mitchell, Margaret (Central Scotland) (Con)

The result of the division is: For 59, Against 44, Abstentions 1.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament welcomes the introduction of the Scotland Bill in the House of Commons on 30 November 2010; notes that it is based on the recommendations of the Calman Commission on Scottish Devolution, which were warmly welcomed by the Parliament on 25 June 2009; supports the general principles of the Bill, which will give the Parliament substantial new taxation, spending and other powers, strengthen its relationship with the rest of the United Kingdom and enable it to serve the people of Scotland better, and calls on the Scottish Government to respond positively and timeously to any requests for assistance or analysis from Scottish Government officials from the committee considering the Bill.

The next question is, that motion S3M-7496, in the name of Irene Oldfather, on the European and External Relations Committee’s report on its inquiry into the impact of the Treaty of Lisbon on Scotland, be agreed to. Motion agreed to, That the Parliament notes the European and External Relations Committee’s 4th Report 2010 (Session 3), Inquiry into the Impact of the Treaty of Lisbon on Scotland (SP Paper 469)and agrees to the introduction of a Parliament-wide strategy for European Union engagement and scrutiny, including the introduction on a pilot basis, and, if successful, permanently, of an early warning system for EU legislative proposals, as outlined in Annexe B to the Report.

The cabinet secretary will now take questions on the issues that were raised in his statement. We have until exactly 5 o’clock for those questions, after which we will come to decision time.

Order.

The next item of business is a ministerial statement by John Swinney, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth, on the local government finance settlement 2011-12. As always, the cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions during it.

A few seconds early, we come to questions to the First Minister.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Order, Mr Brown.

Order.

That concludes the debate on the Scotland Bill.

It is for the Presiding Officer to adjudicate on the speaking order in a debate, and that is how the matter was adjudicated today.

The next item of business is general questions. I advise members that, due to travel difficulties, half of today’s questions have been withdrawn, so for once I am happy to encourage regular supplementaries. Question 1 has been withdrawn.

Question 3 has been withdrawn.

Question 6 was withdrawn.

That is about as tenuous as it gets.

Questions 8 and 9 were not lodged.

Order.

Order.

Order.

The first item of business this morning is a debate on motion S3M-7550, in the name of Iain Gray, on the Scotland Bill. Time is fairly tight for this debate. I call Iain Gray to speak to and move the motion in 11 minutes.

Order.

No more sedentary interventions from fairly senior members of this Parliament, please.

Order.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-7564, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft National Scenic Areas (Consequential Modifications) (Scotland) Order 2010 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question will be put at decision time.

There are two questions as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-7531, in the name of Patricia Ferguson, on the Property Factors (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Property Factors (Scotland) Bill.

The second question is, that motion S3M-7564, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft National Scenic Areas (Consequential Modifications) (Scotland) Order 2010 be approved.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7561, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 15 December 2010 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 1 Debate: Damages (Scotland) Bill followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Forth Crossing Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 16 December 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister's Question Time followed by Members' Business  2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Ministerial Statement: The Future of Scottish Higher Education followed by Scottish Government Debate: Antisocial Behaviour Framework followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 22 December 2010 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 23 December 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business  11.00 am Themed Question Time Europe, External Affairs and Culture; Education and Lifelong Learning 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister's Question Time 12.30 pm Decision Time—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item is consideration of business motion S3M-7562, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a stage 2 deadline for the Patient Rights (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Patient Rights (Scotland) Bill at Stage 2 be completed by 17 December 2010.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item is consideration of business motion S3M-7563, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a stage 2 deadline for the Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Bill at Stage 2 be completed by 28 January 2011.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

We have 20 minutes in which the cabinet secretary will take questions.

Order, Mr Scott.

Order! If members on one side wish to have conversations with members on the other, they should do so outwith the chamber.

Let us move on, cabinet secretary.

We come to open questions. If any member has still to press their request-to-speak button, I encourage them to do so.

Order. There is too much noise.

The minister will now take questions on the issues that have been raised in his statement. We have approximately 20 minutes and certainly no longer, after which we will move to the next item of business, so brevity would be appreciated.

We move to open questions. I do not have a hope of fitting in everybody but, if questions are brief and answers mirror that, we will do what we can.

Order.

Order.

I apologise to the eight members whom I have been unable to call.

The next item of business is a statement by John Swinney on future budget planning assumptions. As always, the cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of the statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions during it.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7573, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme for today.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7559, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, recommending that motion S3M-7550, on the Scotland Bill, be taken by Parliament tomorrow.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees under Rule 8.2.7 that motion S3M-7550 be taken by the Parliament on Thursday 9 December 2010.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a 10-minute statement by Stewart Stevenson on severe weather. As the minister will take questions at the end of the statement, there should be no interruptions or interventions during it.

Before a statement is made, it is expected that non-Government members will have an opportunity to study it. In this case, for whatever reason, it has been impossible to provide a lengthy opportunity for that, and I therefore propose to suspend business for 30 minutes. I suggest that we start business again at 25 to 3.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is, as always, time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Dr Alasdair Black, senior pastor at Stirling Baptist church.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-7519.2.1, in the name of Gavin Brown, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-7519.2, in the name of Jim Mather, on the Scottish economy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 63, Against 28, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-7519.2, in the name of Jim Mather, as amended, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7519, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, on the Scottish economy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 51, Against 40, Abstentions 0.  Amendment, as amended, agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-7519.1, in the name of David Whitton, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7519, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, on the Scottish economy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 28, Against 63, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-7519, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, on the Scottish economy, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 51, Against 39, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament believes that creating jobs and strengthening the economy is central to Scotland's future prosperity; further believes that for Scotland to meet a goal of being one of the most innovative and entrepreneurial economies in the world it needs to build sustainable economic recovery; notes the work already undertaken by the Scottish Government on reforming the Enterprise networks and decluttering the delivery landscape, reducing duplication and driving up effectiveness and efficiency; further notes the ongoing Inquiry by the Economy, Enterprise and Tourism Committee on the Enterprise Network and the contribution it is making, and calls on the Scottish Government to consider its conclusions; calls on the Scottish Government to pay particular focus to improving Scotland's record on exporting and internationalisation of businesses, and also calls on the Scottish Government to focus on improving the business start-up rate.

The next question is, that motion S3M-7484, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Bill.

That concludes decision time.  Meeting closed at 17:05.

Order. The only person I really want to hear is the minister. I can hear far too many other people.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7533, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to today's business to cancel members' business this evening.

I must hurry you, I am afraid.

Order.

Order.

Question 4 was not lodged.

Question, please.

We come to the open debate. We have a little time—actually, quite a lot of time—in hand this morning.

I am sorry, but I must ask Mr Brown to conclude now.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-7159, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, on the Scottish economy.

The next item of business is consideration of three Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Paul Martin to move motions S3M-7515, S3M-7516 and S3M-7517, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Budget (Scotland) Act 2010 Amendment (No 2) Order be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Fishing Boats (EU Electronic Reporting) (Scotland) Scheme 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Official Statistics (Scotland) Amendment Order 2010 be approved.—[ Paul Martin .]

The question on those motions will be put at decision time. A further item of business is consideration of another Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Paul Martin to move motion S3M-7518, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the establishment of a committee.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees to establish a committee of the Parliament as follows— Name of Committee: Scotland Bill Committee; Remit: To consider the Scotland Bill and report to the Parliament on any relevant Legislative Consent Memorandum; Duration: Until the Scotland Bill has received Royal Assent, falls or is withdrawn; Number of members: 6; Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish Labour Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party; Membership: Wendy Alexander, Peter Peacock, Tricia Marwick, Brian Adam, David McLetchie, Robert Brown.—[ Paul Martin .]

That was very nicely done, Mr Martin—thank you. The question on that motion will also be put at decision time.

There are seven questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-7498.3, in the name of Karen Gillon, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7498, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the annual fisheries negotiations, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-7498.1, in the name of John Scott, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7498, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the annual fisheries negotiations, as amended, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-7498.2, in the name of Liam McArthur, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7498, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the annual fisheries negotiations, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 63, Against 0, Abstentions 39.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-7498, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the annual fisheries negotiations, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 63, Against 0, Abstentions 39.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament notes efforts to secure a fair outcome in the forthcoming EU fisheries negotiations; believes that any deal must respect the need to harvest fish stocks sustainably in the interests of Scotland's fishermen and coastal communities and recognise Scotland's fishing industry's contribution to fisheries conservation; expresses concern at the significant cuts to effort and quotas for key stocks being proposed by the European Commission; urges the Scottish Government to take forward its catch quota proposals only with the full and active involvement of the Scottish fishing industry at every stage, and calls on the European Commission to support these efforts to reduce wasteful discards.

The next question is, that motion S3M-7438, in the name of Margo MacDonald, on the End of Life Assistance (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 16, Against 85, Abstentions 2.  Motion disagreed to.

I propose to put a single question on motions S3M-7515, S3M-7516 and S3M-7517. The question is, that motions S3M-7515, S3M-7516 and S3M-7517, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments, be agreed to.  Motions agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Budget (Scotland) Act 2010 Amendment (No 2) Order be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Fishing Boats (EU Electronic Reporting) (Scotland) Scheme 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Official Statistics (Scotland) Amendment Order 2010 be approved.

The final question is, that motion S3M-7518, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the establishment of a committee, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to establish a committee of the Parliament as follows— Name of Committee: Scotland Bill Committee; Remit: To consider the Scotland Bill and report to the Parliament on any relevant Legislative Consent Memorandum; Duration: Until the Scotland Bill has received Royal Assent, falls or is withdrawn; Number of members: 6; Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish Labour Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party; Membership: Wendy Alexander, Peter Peacock, Tricia Marwick, Brian Adam, David McLetchie, Robert Brown.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7514, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees— (a) the following programme of business— Wednesday 8 December 2010 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Future Budget Planning Assumptions followed by Equal Opportunities Committee Debate: Scrutiny of the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003 followed by Stage 1 Debate: Property Factors (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motions followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 6.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 9 December 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Debate: Scotland Bill 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time followed by Members' Business 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Justice and Law Officers; Rural Affairs and the Environment 2.55 pm European and External Relations Committee Debate: Report on the Impact of the Treaty of Lisbon on Scotland followed by Ministerial Statement: Local Government Finance Settlement 2011-12 followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.05 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 15 December 2010 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Forth Crossing Bill followed by Business Motion  followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 16 December 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business and (b) that, for the purposes of Members' Business on Thursday 9 December 2010, "at the end of First Minister's Question Time and at the end of the meeting following Decision Time" be substituted for "at the end of the meeting following Decision Time" in Rule 5.6.1(c) of Standing Orders. —[Paul Martin.]  Motion agreed to.

I must hurry you.

I apologise; I got your timing slightly wrong. However, it is quite handy to have a little extra time. I am sorry about that. I call John Scott to speak to and move amendment S3M-7498.1. Mr Scott, you have four minutes.

The minister will take questions on issues that were raised in the statement. We have around 20 minutes for such questions.

Order. We do not need to hear other conversations, particularly from the front bench, if I may say so.

We come to open questions. We have less than 10 minutes, so please keep questions and answers short.

I must hurry you.

I apologise to the member whom I was unable to call, but we must move to the next item of business.

We come to the next item of business, which is a debate on motion S3M-7498, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the annual fisheries negotiations.

Our next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7513, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to business for today.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 1 December 2010— delete followed by Scottish Government Debate: Annual Fisheries Negotiations and insert followed by Ministerial Statement: Scotland Bill followed by Scottish Government Debate: Annual Fisheries Negotiations—[ Paul Martin .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a statement by Fiona Hyslop, on the Scotland Bill. The minister will take questions at the end of her statement, therefore there should be no interventions or interruptions during it.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Marion Chatterley, spiritual and pastoral care co-ordinator at Waverley Care.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today's business. I remind members that in relation to this morning's debate on a budget for Scotland's people, if the amendment in the name of John Swinney is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Jeremy Purvis falls. The first question is, that amendment S3M-7474.3, in the name of John Swinney, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7474, in the name of Johann Lamont, on a budget for Scotland's people, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 43, Against 71, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-7474.1, in the name of Derek Brownlee, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7474, in the name of Johann Lamont, on a budget for Scotland's people, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 71, Against 43, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-7474.4, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, which seeks to amend motion  S3M-7474, in the name of Johann Lamont, on a budget for Scotland's people, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 71, Against 43, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-7474, in the name of Johann Lamont, on a budget for Scotland's people, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 71, Against 42, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament notes that the Scottish Government has been presented with its spending budgets for the four-year spending review period yet has chosen to provide local authorities, NHS boards, universities, colleges, the voluntary sector and the wider public sector with only one-year budget proposals for 2011-12; believes that such uncertainty is corrosive as it does not allow those organisations to plan effectively; believes that this inability to plan will have an adverse impact on services, individuals, families and communities, and calls on the Scottish Government to follow the example of the Welsh Assembly Government and the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body and publish longer-term figures up to 2014-15.

The next question is, that motion S3M-7399, in the name of Adam Ingram, on the Children's Hearings (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Children's Hearings (Scotland) Bill be passed.

I am afraid that we must conclude themed questions at this point. [ Laughter .] I am glad that that is amusing.

Order, Mr Purvis.

Order.

Order.

Quickly, please.

I am sorry, but I must ask the First Minister to reply. We do not have time, Mr Smith.

Order.

Question 9 has been withdrawn.

Order. If members at the back of the chamber wish to have entertaining conversations, which they appear to do, they should do so in another place.

We come to the open debate. Speeches of six minutes, please. I call Jackie Baillie.

Speak through the chair, please.

Through the chair, please.

Order.

I am afraid that we do not have time.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-7474, in the name of Johann Lamont, on a budget for Scotland's people.

I remind members to speak through the chair, please.

Order.

Order.

Order.

It is at the discretion of the Presiding Officer to take a motion without notice. I am not minded to accept it at this point in time. Please think about the matter overnight and come back to it tomorrow, Ms MacDonald.

The next item of business is consideration of three Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move en bloc S3M-7467 to S3M-7469, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Number of Inner House Judges (Variation) Order 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Scotland) Amendment Order 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Waste Information (Scotland) Regulations 2010 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The questions on the motions will be put at decision time. The next item of business is consideration of a further Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-7470, on the designation of a lead committee.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of Low Carbon Scotland: The Draft Report on Proposals and Policies: Scotland - A Low Carbon Society.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

The question is, that amendment S3M-7477.1, in the name of Iain Gray, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7477, in the name of John Swinney, on the Scottish variable rate of income tax, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 77, Against 46, Abstentions 1.  Amendment agreed to.

The question is, that motion S3M-7477, in the name of John Swinney, on the Scottish variable rate of income tax, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 76, Against 46, Abstentions 1.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,

The question is, that motions S3M-7467 to S3M-7469, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of SSIs, be agreed to.  Motions agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Number of Inner House Judges (Variation) Order 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Scotland) Amendment Order 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Waste Information (Scotland) Regulations 2010 be approved.

The question is, that motion S3M-7470, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on Designation of Lead Committee, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of Low Carbon Scotland: The Draft Report on Proposals and Policies: Scotland - A Low Carbon Society.

Before we come to consideration of business motions, I point out that consideration of amendments in the Children's Hearings (Scotland) Bill will continue at 2.55 tomorrow afternoon, beginning at group 18. Our next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7466, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 1 December 2010 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Annual Fisheries Negotiations followed by Stage 1 Debate: End of Life Assistance (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 6.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 2 December 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Liberal Democrats Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Ministerial Statement: Forensics Modernisation Programme followed by Stage 1 Debate: Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution: Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 8 December 2010 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions  5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 9 December 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Justice and Law Officers;  Rural Affairs and the Environment 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[Bruce Crawford.]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7464, also in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out an extension to the stage 1 timetable for the End of Life Assistance (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the timetable for Stage 1 consideration of the End of Life Assistance (Scotland) Bill be extended to 3 December 2010.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

We come to group 16. Amendment 144, in the name of Ken Macintosh, is grouped with amendment 145.

The question is, that amendment 144 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 60, Against 58, Abstentions 3.  Amendment 144 agreed to.

The question is, that amendment 145 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 60, Against 59, Abstentions 3.  Amendment 145 agreed to.

We come to group 17. Amendment 92, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendments 93 and 94.

That is as far as we are able to go with consideration of the bill this afternoon. Therefore, I am left with no choice but to suspend the meeting until 6 o'clock.

We now come to group 12. I am using my power under rule 9.8.4A(c) to extend the time limit for the next group to prevent the debate from being curtailed. Amendment 136, in the name of Kenneth Macintosh, is the only amendment in the group.

Order. Everyone except Mr Macintosh is making rather too much noise.

Amendment 20, in the name of Adam Ingram, is grouped amendments 63 to 68, 83, 91 and 107.

We come to group 14. Amendment 51, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendment 52.

We come to group 15. Amendment 73, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendments 74 and 75.

The question is, that amendment 133 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 39, Against 75, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 133 disagreed to.

I will reflect on that, if I may. I think that it is a matter for the parliamentary authorities rather than the minister, but I will reflect on that and come back to the chamber later. I call Mike Rumbles, to be followed by Patrick Harvie.

As Mr McCabe knows well, that is a matter for the member to correct if he wishes to do so.

Order.

Order, Lord Foulkes. The member has made it plain that he is not giving way. I am sorry.

Quickly, please.

Mr Maxwell, I am sorry, but you do not have time. We must move on.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Order.

I must ask you to close, please.

I call—[ Applause .] Order. I call Annabel Goldie.

I am sure that, like other members, Lord McConnell is aware that it is entirely for the member who has the floor to decide whether to take interventions. I have no ruling on the matter—it is not a point of order for me.

The cabinet secretary has made it clear that he is not taking interventions.

That is correct, but the cabinet secretary made it clear to you that he was not taking your intervention.

Order.

No. The cabinet secretary should be winding up.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7465, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme for today.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees— (a) the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 24 November 2010— delete followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Children's Hearings (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 6.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business and insert 2.05 pm Scottish Government Debate: Scottish Variable Rate of Income Tax followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Children's Hearings (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 6.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business (b) the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 25 November 2010— delete  2.55 pm Stage 1 Debate: End of Life Assistance (Scotland) Bill and insert 2.55 pm Continuation of Stage 3 Proceedings: Children's Hearings (Scotland) Bill—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7476, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 3 consideration of the Children's Hearings (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that, during Stage 3 of the Children's Hearings (Scotland) Bill— (a) debate on the groups of amendments specified below in relation to Wednesday 24 November 2010 and Thursday 25 November 2010 shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be  brought to a conclusion by the time limits indicated for each of those days; (b) each time limit specified in relation to Wednesday 24 November 2010 shall be calculated from the beginning of proceedings on the Bill on that day and each time limit specified in relation to Thursday 25 November 2010 shall be calculated from the beginning of proceedings on the Bill on that day; and (c) all time limits shall exclude any period when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in relation to the Bill on each day being called) or otherwise not in progress: Wednesday 24 November 2010 Groups 1 to 5: 40 minutes Groups 6 to 8: 1 hour 5 minutes Groups 9 to 12: 1 hour 35 minutes Groups 13 to 17: 2 hours 5 minutes Thursday 25 November 2010 Groups 18 to 22: 25 minutes Groups 23 to 26: 50 minutes.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-7477, in the name of John Swinney, on the Scottish variable rate of income tax. I advise members that time for the debate is very tight.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Dr Maureen Sier, vice chair of the Baha'i Council for Scotland.

There are nine questions to be put as a result of today's business. I remind members that in relation to this morning's debate on prescription charges, if the amendment in the name of Nicola Sturgeon is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Ross Finnie falls. The first question is, that amendment S3M-7422.1, in the name of Shona Robison, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7422, in the name of Mary Scanlon, on care home costs, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-7422, in the name of Mary Scanlon, on care home costs, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament recognises the changing demographics of Scotland and the increasing financial pressures on services providing care for older people; recognises the need to shift the balance of care; notes that independent and local authority-run care homes in Scotland are regulated by the Care Commission in accordance with standards set by ministers, and further recognises the opportunity through the Reshaping Care programme public engagement process to examine existing models of provision and funding across all care sectors and care settings to ensure that value for money is coupled with continuing high standards of care.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-7423.1.1, in the name of Jackie Baillie, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-7423.1, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on prescription charges, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 72, Against 45, Abstentions 2.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-7423.1, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, as amended, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7423, in the name of Derek Brownlee, on prescription charges, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 89, Against 31, Abstentions 0.  Amendment, as amended, agreed to.

Ross Finnie's amendment is pre-empted. Therefore, the next question is, that motion S3M-7423, in the name of Derek Brownlee, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 89, Against 31, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament recognises that the abolition of prescription charges will benefit all those patients with long-term conditions and the 600,000 people on low incomes who are not entitled to exemption and further recognises that total abolition is in the best tradition of the NHS and that poor people and sick people should not be made to pay the cost of the economic and financial situation that Scotland faces but regrets that free prescriptions for cancer patients in Scotland were not implemented by April 2009 in line with England.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-7427.2, in the name of David McLetchie, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7427, in the name of Jim Mather, on the alternative vote referendum and 2011 Scottish Parliament election clash, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 30, Against 89, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-7427.1, in the name of Mike Rumbles, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7427, in the name of Jim Mather, on the AV referendum and 2011 Scottish Parliament election clash, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 30, Against 89, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The final question is, that motion S3M-7427, in the name of Jim Mather, on the AV referendum and 2011 Scottish Parliament election clash, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 90, Against 30, Abstentions 0.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament notes with real concern the UK Government's intention to hold a referendum on voting reform for UK Parliament elections on the same day as elections to the Scottish Parliament and other devolved institutions in May 2011; regrets the UK Government's failure to consult the Scottish Government or the Scottish Parliament on this matter, and calls on the UK Government to work with the Scottish Government to agree a new date that will avoid a clash with elections to this parliament.

Could you make your point, Mr Tolson? This is not a speech.

Mr Tolson, you must please make a point.

Only half of it, minister.

Through the chair, please.

My beef is nothing, Mr McLetchie, other than that people do not talk through the chair.

He is in his last minute.

I remind members that they should speak through the chair at all times. There has been a great tendency not to do so this afternoon, which is regrettable.

He is in his last minute.

We come now to closing speeches. I can offer each closing speaker one minute more than they were advised—it may become mandatory later on.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Order!

Order! Sit down, please, Mr Gray. I understand the political situation in the chamber, and it is entirely understandable that members are somewhat overexcited. However, I cannot tolerate the Presiding Officer not getting order when he or she asks for it. That situation cannot remain. I ask members that, when I ask for order, it is given.

Order.

Order.

Order, Mr Swinney.

Question 2 has been withdrawn.

Question, please.

Order.

Before we hear from the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, I suggest that members who wish to have conversations might like to do so outwith the chamber—unless they are answering or asking a question.

Question, please.

Question 6 was due to be asked by Bill Kidd, but he is not in the chamber. Members are aware of my disapproval of that. In this case, it is exemplified by the fact that we are all deprived of hearing Jamie Stone's supplementary question, which I now cannot call him to ask.

Before we come to the next item of business, I know that members will wish to join me in welcoming to the gallery the ambassador of Iceland, His Excellency Benedikt Jónsson. [ Applause .]

You should close shortly, Mr McGrigor.

I am sorry, Mr McGrigor, but you must be very brief. Your time was up when you took the intervention.

Mr McGrigor.

It is fortunate for all of us that we have a little time in hand .

Good morning. The first item of business this morning is a Conservative party debate on motion S3M-7422, in the name of Mary Scanlon, on care home costs.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move en bloc motions S3M-7420 and S3M-7421, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Sexual Offences (Scotland) Act 2009 (Supplemental and Consequential Provisions) Order 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Legal Profession and Legal Aid (Scotland) Act 2007 (Membership of the Scottish Legal Complaints Commission) Amendment Order 2010 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The questions on the motions will be put at decision time.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-7400, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Patient Rights (Scotland) Bill at stage 1, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 84, Against 32, Abstentions 2.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Patient Rights (Scotland) Bill.

The next question is, that motion S3M-7391, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution to the Patient Rights (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 99, Against 16, Abstentions 2.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Patient Rights (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any increase in expenditure of a kind referred to in Rule 9.12.3(b)(iii) of the Parliament's Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.

The next question is, that motion S3M-7420, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Sexual Offences (Scotland) Act 2009 (Supplemental and Consequential Provisions) Order 2010 be approved.

The final question is, that motion S3M-7421, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of another SSI, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Legal Profession and Legal Aid (Scotland) Act 2007 (Membership of the Scottish Legal Complaints Commission) Amendment Order 2010 be approved.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-7391, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution for the Patient Rights (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Patient Rights (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any increase in expenditure of a kind referred to in Rule 9.12.3(b)(iii) of the Parliament's Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.—[ Nicola Sturgeon. ]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7417, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 24 November 2010 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Children's Hearings (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 6.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 25 November 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning Europe, External Affairs and Culture 2.55 pm Stage 1 Debate: End of Life Assistance (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 1 December 2010 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 2 December 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time: Health and Wellbeing  2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7418, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 2 consideration of the Historic Environment (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Historic Environment (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill be completed at Stage 2 by 17 December 2010.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7419, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 1 consideration of the Certification of Death (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Certification of Death (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 4 February 2011.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

Order. I asked for no interruptions; I ask for no further interruptions until the end of the statement.

Order.

We come to open questions. As is to be expected, a large number of members wish to ask questions. Brevity in both questions and responses is encouraged.

If we are going to fit in all members who want to ask a question, we need to speed up the process a little.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader this afternoon is the Rev Monsignor Denis Carlin from St Mary's rectory in Greenock.

The next item of business is a 25-minute statement by the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth, John Swinney, on the budget. As the cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, there should be no interruptions or interventions during it.

There are six questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-7379.1, in the name of Des McNulty, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7379, in the name of Michael Russell, on the curriculum for excellence, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 70, Against 42, Abstentions 2.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-7379.2, in the name of Margaret Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7379, in the name of Michael Russell, on the curriculum for excellence, as amended, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-7379, in the name of Michael Russell, on the curriculum for excellence, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 70, Against 42, Abstentions 2.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament congratulates the teaching profession and all who work in or are part of school communities on their efforts to take forward the Curriculum for Excellence; notes the ongoing concerns among teachers about the lack of clarity over assessment arrangements and, in particular, the concern among secondary teachers over the timetable for the new qualifications that have not yet been resolved; believes that further work is required on benchmarking and moderation; is gravely concerned at the impact of current and anticipated cuts in schools budgets on the resources available for implementation of the Curriculum for Excellence; recognises the need to work with, and fully support, the teaching profession and to involve parents to a greater extent, recognises the need for a long-term commitment to the Curriculum for Excellence, and confirms that commitment from this parliament, and further recognises the need for ongoing support for, and dialogue with, teachers as they continue to develop the curriculum, and calls on the Scottish Government, local authorities and education stakeholders to work constructively together to make available the best possible support for the teaching profession as the curriculum and new qualifications are implemented.

The next question is, that motion S3M-7190, in the name of Christine Grahame, on out-of-hours health care provision in rural areas, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Health and Sport Committee's 4th Report, 2010 (Session 3): Report on out-of-hours healthcare provision in rural areas (SP Paper 421).

The next question is, that motion S3M-7384, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of an Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Protected Trust Deeds (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2010 be approved.

The final question is, that motion S3M-7385, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of another Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Bankruptcy (Certificate for Sequestration) (Scotland) Regulations 2010 be approved.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motions S3M-7384 and S3M-7385, on approval of Scottish statutory instruments.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Protected Trust Deeds (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Bankruptcy (Certificate for Sequestration) (Scotland) Regulations 2010 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The questions on the motions will be put at decision time.

Order. There is far too much noise in the chamber.

Briefly, please, minister.

Thank you. I am sorry to have drawn you to a close. I call Ross Finnie to wind up on behalf of the committee.

Thank you, Ms Eadie. As a result of the extra minute that you have kindly given us, I can offer Nanette Milne and Mike Rumbles four minutes each.

Mind you, much more of that and they will not have any time left. [ Laughter .]

Order.

Order.

Mr Swinney.

Mr McNeil.

Order.

Order, Mr Scott.

We will have a very brief supplementary question from Jeremy Purvis.

Briefly please, First Minister.

Order. Members are quite entitled to raise points of order.

The member has made his point, but it is not a point of order for me to consider.

It is the First Minister who is responsible for what he says.

Question 6 was not lodged.

I am afraid that that must conclude general questions.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-7379, in the name of Michael Russell, on curriculum for excellence. Before the debate begins, I remind members that it will be paused at 11 o'clock to allow the Parliament to observe a two-minute silence, so whoever is speaking at the time will need to be ready to stop quite quickly.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-7362, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Alcohol etc. (Scotland) Bill be passed.

I can therefore say that the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill is passed. [ Applause .] The second question is, that motion S3M-7377, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the suspension of standing orders, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that, for the purposes of the Subordinate Legislation Committee's consideration of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 (Remedial) (Scotland) Order 2010, Rule 10.3.2 of Standing Orders be suspended.

The third question is, that motion S3M-7378, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Protection of Vulnerable Groups (Scotland) Act 2007 (Miscellaneous Provisions) Order 2010 be approved.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7376, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme for Thursday 11 November.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 11 November 2010— Delete 2.55 pm Health and Sport Committee Debate: Inquiry into out-of-hours healthcare provision in rural areas and insert 2.55 pm Ministerial Statement: Scottish Water Bill followed by Health and Sport Committee Debate: Inquiry into out-of-hours healthcare provision in rural areas—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7375, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 17 November 2010 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: The Budget followed by Stage 1 Debate: Patient Rights (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 18 November 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed General Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: AV Referendum and 2011 Scottish  Parliament Election Clash followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 24 November 2010 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Children's Hearings (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 6.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 25 November 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning; Europe, External Affairs and Culture 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-7377, on suspension of standing orders, and motion S3M-7378, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that, for the purposes of the Subordinate Legislation Committee's consideration of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 (Remedial) (Scotland) Order 2010, Rule 10.3.2 of Standing Orders be suspended. That the Parliament agrees that the Protection of Vulnerable Groups (Scotland) Act 2007 (Miscellaneous Provisions) Order 2010 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The questions on the motions will be put at decision time.

Order.

The question is, that amendment 1A be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division. As it is the first division of the afternoon, there will be a five-minute suspension.

I am afraid that I must ask the next four speakers to confine themselves to two minutes each.

Order.

Order.

You must close, please.

Thank you, Mrs Eadie. I must stop you, I am afraid. I am sorry to interrupt, but we are very tight for time. I apologise to the two members whom I was unable to call, but we must come now to winding-up speeches.

Order.

A number of members have asked to speak and I am keen to get them all in. If members keep their remarks to three minutes, we should do so.

Order. There is far too much noise in the chamber.

The next item of business is stage 3 proceedings on the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill. In dealing with amendments, members should have with them the bill as amended at stage 2, which is Scottish Parliament bill 34A, the marshalled list, which is SP bill 34A-ML, and the groupings, which I have agreed as Presiding Officer. The division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for five minutes before the first division. The period of voting for that first division will be 30 seconds. Thereafter, I will allow a voting period of one minute for the first division after a debate, and 30 seconds for all other divisions.

Amendment 1, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendments 1A, 2 and 3.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7380, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 3 consideration of the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that, during Stage 3 of the Alcohol etc. (Scotland) Bill, debate on groups of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limit indicated, that time limit being calculated from when the Stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the Stage being called) or otherwise not in progress: Group 1: 40 minutes Groups 2 and 3: 1 hour 15 minutes Groups 4 and 5: 1 hour 50 minutes Groups 6 to 9: 2 hours 25 minutes Groups 10 to 13: 3 hours 5 minutes—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7381, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised time for decision time today.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 10 November 2010— delete  6.00 pm Decision Time and insert  6.10 pm Decision Time—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

Good afternoon. Our first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is the Rev Brian More from Newton Mearns Baptist church.

Amendment S3M-7330.2, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, was not agreed to, so there will be a division. Please vote now—quickly!

The result of the division is: For 32, Against 85, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The fourth question is, that motion S3M-7330, in the name of Andy Kerr, on managing Scotland's finances, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 38, Against 79, Abstentions 0.  Motion disagreed to.

The fifth question is, that motion S3M-7295, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the Historic Environment (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Historic Environment (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill.

The final question is, that motion S3M-7335, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on committee membership, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that— Bill Kidd be appointed to replace Jamie Hepburn as a member of the European and External Relations Committee; Jamie Hepburn be appointed to replace Bill Kidd as a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee; Jamie Hepburn be appointed to replace Bill Kidd as a member of the Public Audit Committee.

There are six questions to be put as a result of today's business. In relation to the debate on managing Scotland's finances, if the amendment in the name of John Swinney is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Derek Brownlee falls. The first question is, that amendment S3M-7330.3, in the name of John Swinney, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7330, in the name of Andy Kerr, on managing Scotland's finances, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 45, Against 72, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-7330.1, in the name of Derek Brownlee, which also seeks to amend motion S3M-7330, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 30, Against 87, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-7330.2, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, which also seeks to amend motion S3M-7330, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division. Vote now, please. [Interruption.] I am sorry, we seem to have a technical hitch and I will have to ask for the vote to be run again. There will be a brief suspension while we sort it out.

The next item is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motion S3M-7335, on committee membership.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that— Bill Kidd be appointed to replace Jamie Hepburn as a member of the European and External Relations Committee; Jamie Hepburn be appointed to replace Bill Kidd as a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee; Jamie Hepburn be appointed to replace Bill Kidd as a member of the Public Audit Committee.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

Question 1 was not lodged.

I am tempted to say, that is if they are not attending Stranraer's game on Saturday—but I will not.

Question 7 has been withdrawn.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-7295, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the Historic Environment (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Good morning. The first item of business is a Labour Party debate on motion S3M-7330, in the name of Andy Kerr, on managing Scotland's finances. Time is tight, so I ask members to be careful about their timings.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7314, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 10 November 2010 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Alcohol etc. (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 6.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 11 November 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Curriculum for Excellence 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and Law Officers 2.55 pm Health and Sport Committee Debate: Inquiry into out-of-hours healthcare provision in rural areas followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 17 November 2010 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 18 November 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister's Question Time  2.15 pm Themed Question Time: Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motions S3M-7315 to S3M-7322, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out stage 1 deadlines for bills.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Domestic Abuse (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 21 January 2011. That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Forced Marriage etc. (Protection and Jurisdiction) (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 4 February 2011. That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Double Jeopardy (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 11 February 2011. That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Local Electoral Administration (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 4 February 2011. That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Private Rented Housing (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 28 January 2011. That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Public Records (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 11 February 2011. That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Protection of Workers (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 14 January 2011. That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Reservoirs (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 11 February 2011.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motions agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7323, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a stage 2 deadline for the Forth Crossing Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Forth Crossing Bill at Stage 2 be completed by 26 November 2010.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

There is one question to be put as a result of today's business. The question is, that motion S3M-7294, in the name of Alex Neil, on the Housing (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 104, Against 16, Abstentions 0.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Housing (Scotland) Bill be passed.

Order.

We come to group 5. Amendment 36, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendment 37.

We come to group 6. Amendment 4, in the name of David McLetchie, is grouped with amendment 6.

The question was, that amendment 45 be agreed to. We were not agreed, so there will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 61, Against 61, Abstentions 0. It therefore falls to me to use my casting vote. As always, I do so to maintain the status quo and must therefore vote against the amendment.  Amendment 45 disagreed to.

The question is, that amendment 46 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 61, Against 63, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 46 disagreed to.

The question is, that amendment 47 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 61, Against 63, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 47 disagreed to.

We come to group 4. Amendment 35, in the name of the minister, is the only amendment in the group.

I remind members to ensure that their BlackBerrys and mobile phones are switched off while they are in the chamber.

The question is, that amendment 45 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division. As it is the first division of the afternoon, there will be a five-minute suspension.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7327, the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 3 consideration of the Housing (Scotland) Bill. If any member wishes to speak against the motion, they should press their request-to-speak button now.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that, during Stage 3 of the Housing (Scotland) Bill, debate on groups of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limit indicated, that time limit being calculated from when the Stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the Stage being called) or otherwise not in progress: Groups 1 to 3: 30 minutes Groups 4 to 6: 1 hour Groups 7 to 9: 1 hour 40 minutes Groups 10 and 11: 2 hours.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is stage 3 proceedings on the Housing (Scotland) Bill. Members should have with them the bill as amended at stage 2, the revised marshalled list and the groupings, which I have agreed as Presiding Officer. The division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for five minutes before the first division. The period of voting for that first division will be 30 seconds. Thereafter, we will allow a voting period of one minute for the first division after a debate, and 30 seconds for all other divisions.

We come to group 1. Amendment 17, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendments 26 to 34.

We come to group 2. Amendment 18, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendments 19 to 25.

We come to group 3. Amendment 45, in the name of Patricia Ferguson, is grouped with amendments 46 to 51.

Good afternoon. Our first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is the Rev Ian Benzie of St Andrew's church in Irvine.

Members will recall that I wanted to look at the Official Report following today's First Minister's question time in order to reflect on some of the language that was used in exchanges. Having done so carefully, I have concerns about some of the language that was used today. I strongly remind members that they should at all times conduct themselves courteously and respectfully.

There are eight questions to be put as a result of today's business. I remind members that if the amendment in John Swinney's name, on support for business, is agreed to, the amendment in Derek Brownlee's name will fall. The question is, that amendment S3M-7273.2, in the name of John Swinney, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7273, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, on support for business, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 45, Against 43, Abstentions 18.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-7273.1, in the name of Derek Brownlee—I apologise. As I instructed members clearly earlier, Mr Brownlee's amendment has fallen. The question is, that motion S3M-7273, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, on support for business, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 60, Against 44, Abstentions 3.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament commends the vital role that small and medium-sized enterprises (SME) play in the Scottish economy and their importance in building economic recovery; recognises that the full savings due to that sector as a result of revaluation have been passed to businesses, and recognises that the general trend of the revaluation has been to reduce the tax burden for SMEs and that the total savings for the 87,500 SME properties that saw bills fall was £124 million.

The question is, that amendment S3M-7269.1.1, in the name of Lewis Macdonald, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-7269.1, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, on renewable energy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?  Amendment agreed to.

The question is, that amendment S3M-7269.1.2, in the name of Patrick Harvie, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-7269.1, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, on renewable energy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 48, Against 30, Abstentions 29.  Amendment agreed to.

The question is, that amendment S3M-7269.1, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, as amended, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7269, in the name of Liam McArthur, on renewable energy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 77, Against 30, Abstentions 0.  Amendment, as amended, agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-7269, in the name of Liam McArthur, on renewable energy, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 77, Against 30, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament notes Scotland's massive renewable energy resources and the opportunities to turn Scotland into Europe's clean green energy powerhouse; notes the UK Government's proposals that would result in Scotland's Fossil Fuel Levy fund helping to form part of a wider UK green investment bank fund that is due to be established in 2013-14; notes the lack of detail underlying that commitment and the risk that this could delay vital funding for the renewables sector in Scotland for several years; calls urgently on the UK Government to release these funds and place them in the control of the Scottish Government and Scottish Parliament in a way that can be rapidly deployed to support Scotland's renewable energy sector; believes that the green investment bank should be established as soon as possible and should be based in Edinburgh, and further believes that, by cutting the money available to the green investment bank, replacing a small proportion of this cut with money already set aside for investment in Scotland and then further cutting the Scottish block grant if this money is actually spent in Scotland, the UK Government is attempting a transparent act of sleight-of-hand that the Scottish Liberal Democrats should be ashamed to support.

The next question is, that motion S3M-7272, in the name of Shona Robison, on carers and the young carers strategy, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament welcomes the publication, in July 2010, of the carers and young carers strategy for Scotland for 2010 to 2015, Caring Together and Getting It Right For Young Carers; notes that this strategy has been produced jointly with COSLA and informed by a wide range of stakeholders; recognises the importance of providing effective and timely support to Scotland's estimated 657,000 unpaid carers in order to sustain them in their vital role in caring for relatives or friends affected by disability, illness or substance misuse, a role that benefits their families, local communities, Scottish society and the economy, and agrees that young carers should be relieved of inappropriate caring roles and supported to be children and young people first and foremost.

The cabinet secretary will now take questions on the issues raised in his statement. We have 20 minutes for those questions, after which we must move on. I will endeavour to fit in as many questions as possible.

We come to backbench questions. Nine members have indicated that they would like to ask a question, and we have the same number of minutes, so everyone should keep it short and sharp.

Question, please, Mr Thompson.

Could you please just ask a question? You are going to stop someone else being able to ask a question.

That must conclude the ministerial statement and questions on the economic and social impact of the strategic defence and security review—I apologise to the two members whom I could not call.

The next item of business is a statement by John Swinney on the economic and social impact of the strategic defence and security review. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions.

Order.

I will wish to study the Official Report of the final part of Mr McMahon's question. Members should be very careful about how they address one another in the chamber. Words such as "falsehoods" and "fibs" need to be  very carefully put in context—as do descriptions of other members as being possibly "schizophrenic".

I have already intimated that that will be the case.

I accept entirely that this is an important subject, but for a question to take that long and for an answer to be equally long is just not on. I am afraid that I am unable to allow any supplementary questions on the issue.

Question, please.

Question 3 was not lodged.

Question 9 has been withdrawn.

You have 40 seconds, Mr Smith.

Thank you, Mr Smith. Your time keeping is much better than mine.

You must close, please.

You must close, Mr Rumbles.

When I ask members to close, that does not require more harrumphing. I do so because we are running out of time.

Good morning. The first item of business is a Liberal Democrat debate on motion S3M-7273, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, on support for business.

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motions S3M-7263 to S3M-7265, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Revised Code of Conduct for Councillors for the Ethical Standards in Public Life etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Welfare of Farmed Animals (Scotland) Regulations 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Prohibited Procedures on Protected Animals (Exemptions) (Scotland) Regulations 2010 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The questions on the motions will be put at decision time, at which we have finally arrived.

The first question is, that motion S3M-7212, in the name of Gil Paterson, on the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee's report on the draft revised code of practice for ministerial appointments to public bodies, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee's 6th Report, 2010 (Session 3): Draft Revised Code of Practice for Ministerial Appointments to Public Bodies in Scotland (SP Paper 491), together with the Official Report of the Parliament's debate on the report, should form the Parliament's response to the consultation by the Office of the Commissioner for Public Appointments in Scotland.

The next question is, that motion S3M-7268, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Criminal Procedure (Legal Assistance, Detention and Appeals) (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 97, Against 18, Abstentions 0.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Criminal Procedure (Legal Assistance, Detention and Appeals) (Scotland) Bill be passed.

The final question is, that Parliamentary Bureau motions S3M-7263 to S3M-7265, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments, be agreed to.  Motions agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Revised Code of Conduct for Councillors for the Ethical Standards in Public Life etc. (Scotland) Act 2000 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Welfare of Farmed Animals (Scotland) Regulations 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Prohibited Procedures on Protected Animals (Exemptions) (Scotland) Regulations 2010 be approved.

That concludes decision time.  Meeting closed at 19:52.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7260, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 3 November 2010 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Debate: Housing (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 4 November 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing followed by Stage 1 Debate: Historic Environment (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 10 November 2010 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Alcohol etc. (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 11 November 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and Law Officers  followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7261, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out an extension to the stage 2 deadline for the Children's Hearings (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the deadline for consideration of the Children's Hearings (Scotland) Bill at Stage 2 be extended to 5 November 2010.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7262, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out an extension to the stage 1 deadline for the End of Life Assistance (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the deadline for consideration of the End of Life Assistance (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be extended to 26 November 2010.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

I am minded to take a motion without notice to take business motion S3M-7284, to remove members' business from today's business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament consider Business Motion S3M-7284.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

Accordingly, the next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7284, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which—believe it or not—revises today's business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following change to the Business programme for Wednesday 27 October 2010— delete  followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

Order, Mr McLetchie.

Order.

The next item of business is stage 2 proceedings on the Criminal Procedure (Legal Assistance, Detention and Appeals) (Scotland) Bill, which will be considered in a Committee of the Whole Parliament. The occupant of the chair is the convener. In dealing with amendments, members should have the marshalled list and the groupings that I have agreed. The division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for five minutes for the first division this afternoon—I think that it is still afternoon. The period of voting for the first division will be 30 seconds. Thereafter, I will allow a voting period of one minute for the first division after a debate. All other divisions will be 30 seconds.

We come to the closing speeches.

Order. Mr Thompson, I would be grateful if you could address more directly the general principles of the bill, which is what we are supposed to be debating at this point.

Mr Thompson, could you come now to the general principles of the bill, please?

No. Dave Thompson must close now, please.

First Minister, I am sorry, but I must ask you to speak into the microphone.

No. Mr Lamont is closing.

No, I am sorry but we do not have time.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-7267, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Criminal Procedure (Legal Assistance, Detention and Appeals) (Scotland) Bill. I warn members that time is very limited and that they should stick to the times that they are given.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7274, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme for this week.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees— (a) the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 27 October 2010— delete followed by SPCB Question Time followed by Ministerial Statement: Literacy Action Plan followed by Health and Sport Committee Debate: Report on out-of-hours healthcare provision in rural areas followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business and insert followed by Debate on a Government Motion to treat the proposed Criminal Procedure (Legal Assistance, Detention and Appeals) (Scotland) Bill as an Emergency Bill followed by Stage 1 Debate: proposed Criminal Procedure (Legal Assistance, Detention and Appeals) (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution: proposed Criminal Procedure (Legal Assistance, Detention and Appeals) (Scotland) Bill 3.20 pm SPCB Question Time followed by Ministerial Statement: Literacy Action Plan followed by Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee Debate: Report on Draft Revised Code of Practice for Ministerial Appointments to Public Bodies in Scotland followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Committee of the Whole Parliament: Stage 2 Proceedings: proposed Criminal Procedure (Legal Assistance, Detention and Appeals) (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Debate: proposed Criminal Procedure (Legal Assistance, Detention and Appeals) (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions  6.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business (b) the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 28 October 2010— delete  followed by Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee Debate: Report on Draft Revised Code of Practice for Ministerial Appointments to Public Bodies in Scotland and insert followed by Ministerial Statement: Economic and Social Impact of the Strategic Defence and Security Review—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-7266, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, to treat the Criminal Procedure (Legal Assistance, Detention and Appeals) (Scotland) Bill as an emergency bill.

Good afternoon. Our first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Laura Hemmati, a former member of the Scottish Interfaith Youth Committee, who has travelled from Brussels to be with us.

There are eight questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-7157.2, in the name of Jim Mather, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7157, in the name of Lewis Macdonald, on the future of Scotland's supported employment workplaces, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-7157.1, in the name of Gavin Brown, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7157, in the name of Lewis Macdonald, on the future of Scotland's supported employment workplaces, as amended, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The third question is, that motion S3M-7157, in the name of Lewis Macdonald, on the future of Scotland's supported employment workplaces, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the Scottish Government's policy that every public body should aim to have at least one contract with a supported factory or business, as set out in its Social Issues in Public Procurement guidance document in October 2007 and reiterated as part of the Scottish Sustainable Procurement Action Plan in October 2009; welcomes this approach as the most effective means of public policy support for the sector; regrets the lack of evidence that this policy has been effectively pursued over the last three years, and calls on the Scottish Government to set a timetable for every public body in Scotland for which it is responsible to have at least one contract with a supported factory or business; notes the recognition given to sustainability in the procurement reform programme and in particular the progress on community benefit clauses, and, in so doing, take account of the fact that there may be a small minority of public bodies that will face practical difficulties in achieving this aim, and, in addition, believes that main contractors should be actively encouraged, on a voluntary basis, to use supported employment organisations as subcontractors on public sector contracts.

The fourth question is, that amendment S3M-7164.1, in the name of David Whitton, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7164, in the name of Keith Brown, on the refresh of the skills strategy, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The fifth question is, that amendment S3M-7164.2, in the name of Elizabeth Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7164, in the name of Keith Brown, as amended, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The sixth question is, that amendment S3M-7164.3, in the name of Margaret Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7164, in the name of Keith Brown, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 14, Against 102, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The seventh question is, that motion S3M-7164, in the name of Keith Brown, on the refresh of the skills strategy, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament welcomes the publication of the refreshed Skills for Scotland skills strategy and agrees that the principles of flexibility, responsiveness and partnership working are critical to meeting Scotland's skills needs and accelerating economic recovery; calls on the Scottish Government to ensure that there is sustained investment in skills training to meet the recognised demand for a well skilled, well trained workforce, and further calls on the Scottish Government to fully engage employers in the process of ensuring that the system is more demand-led and that publicly funded training matches far more closely the needs of employers.

The eighth question is, that motion S3M-7154, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the Climate Change (Annual Targets) (Scotland) Order 2010, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 72, Against 3, Abstentions 41.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Climate Change (Annual Targets) (Scotland) Order 2010 be approved.

Order. The minister is winding up the debate. I, for one, would like to hear him.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-7154, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the Climate Change (Annual Targets) (Scotland) Order 2010.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Climate Change (Annual Targets) (Scotland) Order 2010 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

Order.

Mr Rumbles.

Mr Rumbles, I warn you.

Mr Rumbles, I am aware of your discomfort but, as the first Presiding Officer used to say, this is question time, not necessarily answer time.

Order.

Question 4 was withdrawn.

Before we come to the next item of business, I am sure that members will want to join me in welcoming to the gallery the Rwandan high commissioner to the United Kingdom, His Excellency Ernest Rwamucyo, and the deputy high commissioner, Ms Linda Kalimba. [ Applause .]

You must close, please.

Very quickly, please.

That concludes the debate on the future of Scotland's supported employment workplaces.

The member should close now.

Speak through the chair in future, please.

We have a little bit of time in hand and I am happy to offer members a minute extra to the time that they have been advised that they have.

Good morning. The first item of business today is a debate on motion S3M-7157, in the name of Lewis Macdonald, on the future of Scotland's supported employment workplaces.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-7162, on suspension of standing orders, and S3M-7161, on the designation of a lead committee.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that, for the purpose of allowing up to 20 minutes to debate motion S3M-7154 on Thursday 7 October 2010, the second and third sentences of Rule 10.6.5 of Standing Orders be suspended. That the Parliament agrees that the Equal Opportunities Committee be designated as lead Committee in consideration of the Forced Marriages etc. (Protection and Jurisdiction) (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The questions on the motions will be put at decision time.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-7105, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the Legal Services (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Legal Services (Scotland) Bill be passed.

The second question is, that motion S3M-7162, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on suspension of standing orders, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that, for the purpose of allowing up to 20 minutes to debate motion S3M-7154 on Thursday 7 October 2010, the second and third sentences of Rule 10.6.5 of Standing Orders be suspended.

The third question is, that motion S3M-7161, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the designation of a lead committee, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Equal Opportunities Committee be designated as lead Committee in consideration of the Forced Marriages etc. (Protection and Jurisdiction) (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7160, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 27 October 2010 2.00 pmTime for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by SPCB Question Time followed by Ministerial Statement: Literacy Action Plan followed by Health and Sport Committee Debate: Report on out-of-hours healthcare provision in rural areas followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pmDecision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 28 October 2010 9.15 amParliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Liberal Democrats' Business 11.40 amGeneral Question Time 12.00 pmFirst Minister's Question Time 2.15 pmThemed Question Time Europe, External Affairs and Culture; Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pmScottish Government Debate: Carers and Young Carers Strategy followed by Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee Debate: Report on Draft Revised Code of Practice for Ministerial Appointments to Public Bodies followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pmDecision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 3 November 2010 2.00 pmTime for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Housing (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pmDecision Time  followed by Members' Business Thursday 4 November 2010 9.15 amParliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 amGeneral Question Time 12.00 pmFirst Minister's Question Time 2.15 pmThemed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pmScottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pmDecision Time followed by Members' Business.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

We come to closing speeches. Decision time will be at 6 o'clock, so members can have slightly longer than was indicated. I call Mike Pringle. You have about 6 minutes, Mr Pringle.

Group 5 is on areas where the Lord President's agreement is required. Amendment 22, in the name of the minister, is grouped with the amendments 23, 24, 30, 31, 36, 37, 40 to 42, 122, 58, 60 and 117.

I call Robert Brown to speak to amendment 122 in a minute and a half, if he can.

Group 6 is on references to licensed legal services providers. Amendment 26, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendments 32, 43, 44, 47 to 49, 56, 57, 65 and 69.

The question is, that amendment 27A be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 57, Against 62, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 27A disagreed to.  Amendment 27B moved—[Robert Brown].

The question is, that amendment 27B be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 56, Against 62, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 27B disagreed to.  Amendment 27 agreed to.  Amendment 28 moved—[Fergus Ewing].  Amendment 28A moved—[Robert Brown].

The question is, that amendment 28A be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 57, Against 62, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 28A disagreed to.  Amendment 28 agreed to.  Amendment 29 moved—[Fergus Ewing]—and agreed to.

I call Robert Brown, who has two minutes.

As I explained, there is no time to allow other members to speak.  Amendment 7 agreed to.

Does any member object to the minister moving amendments 8 to 20 en bloc?

The question is, that amendment 8 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 102, Against 15, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 8 agreed to.  Amendments 9 to 16 moved—[Fergus Ewing]—and agreed to.

I am afraid that I must hurry you, minister.

Now that everyone is in the chamber, I remind all members that when we come to any vote, it is up to members to let the Presiding Officer know when they do not agree with the question that has been put. The question was that amendment 121 be agreed to. It was not agreed to, so there will be a division. Please vote now.

The result of the division is: For 89, Against 29, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 121 agreed to.

I call Mr Baker to wind up. I can give you only one minute, I am afraid.

The question is, that amendment 121 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division. As it is the first division of the afternoon, there will be a five-minute suspension.

We come now to stage 3 proceedings on the Legal Services (Scotland) Bill. Members should have the bill as amended at stage 2, the revised marshalled list and the groupings, which I have agreed as Presiding Officer. The division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for five minutes before the first division. The period of voting for that first division will be 30 seconds. Thereafter, we will allow a voting period of one minute for the first division after a debate, and 30 seconds for all other divisions.

We move to the question. I remind members that if they do not agree to an amendment they should make it very obvious that that is the case.  Amendment 1 agreed to.  Amendment 2 moved—[Fergus Ewing]—and agreed to.

Our next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7156, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme for today.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 6 October 2010— delete 5.00 pmDecision Time followed by Members' Business and insert 6.00 pmDecision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item is consideration of business motion S3M-7149, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 3 consideration of the Legal Services (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that, during Stage 3 of the Legal Services (Scotland) Bill, debate on groups of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limit indicated, that time limit being calculated from when the Stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the Stage being called) or otherwise not in progress: Groups 1 to 3: 20 minutes Groups 4 to 7: 55 minutes Groups 8 to 10: 1 hour 35 minutes Groups 11 to 14: 2 hours Groups 15 to 17: 2 hours 20 minutes Groups 18 to 22: 2 hours 55 minutes.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is May Nicholson of the Preshal Trust.

We come to decision time. There are seven questions to be put as a result of today's business. I remind members that in relation to the debate on higher education, if the amendment in the name of Michael Russell is agreed to, the amendments in the names of Claire Baker and Margaret Smith will fall. The first question is, that amendment S3M-7109.2, in the name of Michael Russell, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7109, in the name of Elizabeth Smith, on higher education, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 63, Against 58, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The next two amendments therefore fall. The next question is, that motion S3M-7109, in the name of Elizabeth Smith, on higher education, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 62, Against 17, Abstentions 42.  Motion, as amended agreed to,  That the Parliament welcomes the firm consensus against any introduction of up-front fees in Scotland; notes the ongoing Independent Review of Higher Education and Student Finance in England and Wales; recognises that the Scottish Government will need to consider any potential impact on Scottish universities, and further recognises the Scottish Government's intention to publish a green paper on higher education to explore these issues further.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-7116.2, in the name of Richard Baker, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7116, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on administrative justice and the future of tribunals, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-7116.1, in the name of John Lamont, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7116, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on administrative justice and the future of tribunals, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The final question is, that motion S3M-7116, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on administrative justice and the future of tribunals, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament believes that justice delivered by tribunals is an integral part of the Scottish justice system; welcomes the Lord Chancellor's invitation to the Scottish Ministers to consider with him proposals to devolve responsibility for tribunals operating in Scotland; further notes and welcomes moves to create an integrated Scottish tribunal service; in doing so, recognises that any forthcoming proposals from the Scottish Government for reform of the tribunals system should be consulted on widely, including with those currently involved in the operation of tribunals, as well as trade unions, Citizens Advice Scotland and other organisations that support those taking cases to tribunals, and further notes that the Lord Chancellor has emphasised that any transfer of powers should seek to preserve the benefits of existing arrangements.

Order. There are some very loud conversations taking place around the chamber. I would be grateful if they could be muted.

Disappointingly, the minister must wind up now.

I call Bill Aitken to wind up on behalf of the Scottish Conservatives. Mr Aitken, you have quite a long time.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Order. I think that the message is getting through.

Order.

No. The member is concluding.

Mr Rumbles, that is not a point of order.

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motion S3M-7117, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Public Appointments and Public Bodies etc. (Scotland) Act 2003 (Treatment of Office or Body as Specified Authority) (No.2) Order 2010 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-7056, in the name of Gil Paterson, on this afternoon's debate on the report on the Commission on Scottish Devolution, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee's 5th Report 2010 (Session 3), Report on the recommendations of the Commission on Scottish Devolution regarding Scottish Parliament procedures (SP Paper 490) and agrees to its recommendations and conclusions.

The next question is, that motion S3M-6987, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the Scottish Parliament (Disqualification) Order 2010, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Scottish Parliament (Disqualification) Order 2010 be approved.

The final question is, that motion S3M-7117, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Public Appointments and Public Bodies etc. (Scotland) Act 2003 (Treatment of Office or Body as Specified Authority) (No.2) Order 2010 be approved.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7110, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a business programme. It would be helpful if members paid attention.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees (a) the following programme of business— Wednesday 6 October 2010 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings - Legal Services (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 7 October 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Refresh of the Skills Strategy followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 27 October 2010 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 28 October 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time   Europe, External Affairs and Culture; Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business (b) that the period for members to submit their names for selection for Question Times on 28 October 2010 ends at 12 noon on Wednesday 6 October.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7111, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a timetable for stage 2 of the Housing (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Housing (Scotland) Bill at Stage 2 be completed by 8 October 2010.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7112, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out the timetable for stage 2 of the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the deadline for consideration of the Alcohol etc. (Scotland) Bill at Stage 2 be extended to 8 October 2010.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

You can do what you like, minister, as long as you speak for another minute.

I emphasise the point that the committee convener made in his speech: this debate should be confined to the findings of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee report and not expand into the wider recommendations of the Calman commission.

The minister will now take questions on the issues that have been raised in her statement. We have no more than 20 minutes for such questions, after which we must move to the next item of business.

I must hurry you.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-7056, in the name of Gil Paterson, on the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee's report "The recommendations of the Commission on Scottish Devolution regarding Scottish Parliament procedures". We are pressed for time, so I ask Gil Paterson to speak to and move the motion on behalf of the committee in no more than 11 minutes.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Father Colin Hughes of Holy Trinity and All Saints church in Coatbridge.

The next item of business is a statement on broadcasting by Fiona Hyslop. The minister will take questions at the end of her statement, so no interventions or interruptions should be made during it.

Order. I am sorry, but I cannot allow that type of interruption.

Sorry, I know that it seems harsh, but I must ask that people in the public gallery do not applaud.   Ross Finnie (West of Scotland) (LD):  >I congratulate Jackie Baillie on bringing the debate to the chamber. I have visited Leuchie house on a number of occasions and, like everyone else in the chamber, I know that MS sufferers from throughout Scotland make use of its services. It seems to me that there are a number of interrelated issues. The first is the obvious and self-evident position of the excellence of the service that is provided—I will not rehearse the many excellent points that have been made by other members. The second is the MS Society's decision that it will, maybe not now but for Scotland in December and for those in England in November next year, no longer provide that service and the question whether that is a right policy decision. A separate but obviously closely interrelated issue is how best to keep Leuchie house open. There is no dispute about the excellence of the service or about the ratings that it is given by the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care. More critically, there is no dispute about the response from those who use Leuchie house, but there is real debate about the MS Society, its decision and the basis of that decision. I will certainly not rehearse the excellent exposition of that that Jackie Baillie gave us. However, that still leaves at least two possibilities as to how we keep Leuchie house open, which of course brings into play the MS Society's claim that it is interested in that process, although I have been unable to find any evidence at all of the MS Society doing anything other than issuing disingenuous statements to that effect. Like many in the chamber, I have written to the MS Society but I am still awaiting a response from the trustees to a communication dated June. The question is this: if the MS Society is genuine about wanting Leuchie house to stay open, why does it put the staff in the position in which—as Iain Gray graphically described—they have to seek alternative employment? The critical mass of those excellent carers is to be dissipated but, somehow, the MS Society would wish to claim that it is actually really interested in keeping Leuchie house open. Open as what? Cathy Jamieson mentioned the state of the buildings but, of course, the institution is not the building; it is the people who run it, and the  nursing staff who run it have had their jobs put on the line. That is not a message from a society that is genuinely interested in keeping an operation open, and that is greatly to be deplored. Even if, at the end the day, the Leuchie house campaigners are unable to persuade the MS Society, I cannot believe that it is entirely without prospect that some other organisation might wish to fill that void. The MS Society is therefore again being obstructive by placing conditions, dates and times for closure that make that process well-nigh impossible. I find those two issues deplorable. I am not sure that I want to get into a debate with the MS Society on its particular policy, although I could no doubt do so if I had infinite time. As I said earlier, I, like Jackie Baillie, think that that policy is fatally flawed, but I am much more concerned about the society's absolute failure to facilitate conditions and circumstances under which members, the Government and other charitable organisations could have a sane, sensible and rational discussion about an alternative provision for keeping Leuchie house open. The society is to be condemned for that. I hope that it takes a different decision at its meeting. Even if it does not reverse its decision, Leuchie house should at least be given the opportunity to seek genuine alternative arrangements that will, in the best interests of its patients, keep it open.   Dr Richard Simpson (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Lab):  >I value the opportunity to participate in this debate. I will take slightly different lines to those that other members have taken. Members have covered much of the topic effectively, and it is clear that the central theme is whether the MS Society is behaving in a reasonable and rational way. There can be no doubt whatever about the massive contribution that carers make in Scotland. That has been said endlessly in the chamber, but it can never be said enough. The necessity for respite care is also fully understood. Indeed, the Government has said that it will provide an extra 10,000 weeks of respite care a year. That may or may not be being fully delivered, but it is certainly the Government's intention. The main issue for me is whether the decision in question fulfils the criteria for consultative processes that we have established in the Parliament. In the first session, I was grateful for the opportunity to undertake the Stobhill inquiry. That inquiry was undertaken because the consultation by the national health service in Scotland was very poor, and it was evident that the communities around Stobhill thought that they  had not been consulted appropriately. It was clear that the processes were inadequate. Since then, the processes have been changed radically, and there is now consultation. Things are still not perfect, and I think that we will hear about further problems in the future, but the Scottish health council analyses and advises on the efficacy of consultations. I wonder whether we should invite the Scottish health council to look at the processes for voluntary sector societies such as the MS Society. I say that because I think that the survey that was done was flawed. A report by Professor Bell, I think, suggested that that was the case. There are 26,000 MS sufferers, of whom only 514 responded to the survey. The statistical analysis may be valid and focus groups might be of some help, although focus groups are usually used to determine the questions before a survey is set up rather than afterwards, but I simply do not think that the survey is valid. If there is any question about its validity, that is answered by the fact that 11,000 petitioners have suggested that the decision is wrong. The results of the survey are analysed in its appendices. Appendix 6.3, on the perception of quality, shows that a staggering 95 per cent of those with MS and a similar percentage of their carers feel that the care that is given in the society's centres is good or very good. The results for less specialised residential or nursing homes were 65 per cent and 67 per cent, which are much lower figures. The home therefore provides an almost unparalleled level of care, in the view of the respondents. My concern is that we will lose provision that is highly valued by individuals. Therefore, there is an absolute need for the Government to consider how it can intervene. We are going into a period of austerity. It will be fundamental in tackling and managing that to have a true partnership between the public sector and voluntary sector providers. The public sector provides the overwhelming majority of the finance for the establishment that we are discussing, but it is partnership that is required. Therefore, there must be discussions with the MS Society as to how that partnership should proceed. It should proceed on the basis of good evidence, not the evidence that has been presented.

I should have said that speeches should be of four minutes' duration.   Cathy Jamieson (Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley) (Lab):  I am glad to have the opportunity to say a few words in the debate, and I congratulate Jackie Baillie on securing it. I also know how much work Iain Gray, the local member, has done, as has Fiona O'Donnell, the newly  elected MP for the area; I was pleased to sign her early day motion on the issue.  My contribution is very much a personal one. I confess that I did not know about Leuchie house until I was invited to go along on a visit in the company of Iain Gray and some other MPs. Before I got there, I did not quite know what to expect, but by the time I left—after spending an evening with the people who were there for a respite break, sharing a meal with them, getting a tour around the specialist facilities and hearing stories from people from all over Scotland about how important the centre is—I felt that I had been through a humbling experience. I left feeling that we have something of a gem in that service, and that we ought to be telling people about it.  I was not aware that, a few months on, Leuchie house would be facing potential closure. When I heard about that, I was shocked and then angry, because I could recall very clearly what the people whom I spent that evening with had said to me. The most important thing for them is that Leuchie house is a place where the family can go. There were couples there who would simply not have had the opportunity of having a holiday or respite break together in any other setting.  The idea that the service could somehow be replaced by people receiving respite care in another facility, whether a nursing home or elsewhere, was not something that those people welcomed. As far as possible, despite their complex needs and all the transport difficulties in getting there, they wanted to be somewhere where people understood the medical support that they needed and where that was available on site in case there were any problems. Most of all, they wanted things to be as normal as possible within that context.  When I toured Leuchie house, I was aware that it is an old building—we are very grateful to the owners for making it available. I could see the difficulties that there would be in ensuring that that setting enabled the provision of good-quality care simply because of the nature of the building. The fact that the care commission has given it an excellent rating is even more incredible given the circumstances in which the staff work, and that must be valued.  I do not know the internal politics of the MS Society and, in some ways, I do not think that that is my business. However, to the people who are making the decisions I say that Leuchie house means the world to the folk who use that facility. Many of those people know full well that their condition is likely to deteriorate in the not-too-distant future, and they are making the most of the lives that they have now. For many people, it is straightforward: they feel that, if Leuchie house was not there, they and their families would not be  able to cope with some of the difficult times ahead that they face.  My plea—echoing Jackie Baillie—is for the matter to be looked at again and for another way to be found. If it is about the money, surely there is some way of finding the £600,000 to make up the shortfall. Leuchie house cannot possibly be allowed to close in 10 weeks with nothing else being offered to the people who have benefited from it. I hope that the people who are here tonight will hear that plea and do something about it.   Derek Brownlee (South of Scotland) (Con):  >Jackie Baillie has done us a service by bringing the debate to Parliament tonight. She set out the case for retention in a compelling fashion, and I do not intend to rehearse the ground that she laid out so well. We have seen a sustained and effective grassroots-led campaign to save Leuchie house. As Jim Hume said, most of us in Scotland know someone who has been affected by MS—it is rare for someone not to have experience of it among their family or friends. Nevertheless, I wonder whether those of us who are not touched directly by it or who are not in a direct caring role can really appreciate the value of the service that Leuchie house provides. I suspect that it is almost impossible for those of us who do not have the same obligations as those who rely on Leuchie house to understand the value of that service to them and their families. It is unfortunate if we reduce it to a cash value because the much more important point is that this is about the quality of people's lives. It is also a national issue. I have been surprised—perhaps I should not have been—by the range of areas from which I have received representations about it. I have received representations from throughout the region that I cover, from Galloway to East Lothian. Cathy Jamieson made a pertinent point about people's awareness of the facility. I wonder how aware people across the country have been of the availability of the service and whether one of the problems has been a lack of awareness leading to a lack of use. My colleague Mary Scanlon told me earlier about a similar facility that had been available in Grantown-on-Spey, in the Highlands. When that service closed, people who had used the service were told that they would be able to use Leuchie house. Where is the alternative now? The alternative that the MS Society has offered is not seen as being adequate by most people who use the service. The big question is, what can be done? Initially, it must be a decision for the MS Society. I  sincerely hope that it listens to the debate and, more important, the campaign, those who have contributed to it and the people who use the service. If it does not, we must ask whether there is a role for the Government in this. Whether or not the Government wants it, there will be consequences for the Government if Leuchie house closes. More important, there will be consequences for the people who use the service that go way beyond the financial aspects. The situation raises a fundamental point about the accountability of certain service providers who, although not part of Government, provide services that might otherwise be provided by Government. Surely organisations such as the MS Society are under a bigger obligation to take a more holistic view of their services and their obligations to society as a whole. It is much easier to destroy a valued service such as Leuchie house than it is to rebuild it. Once it is lost, it is gone for ever and I wonder whether the society has really understood the consequences of its proposal. It is clear that those who use and depend on Leuchie house do not think so. Surely the society should reconsider its decision and, if it will not, surely the Government needs to consider what it has to do to ensure that the people who rely on the service do not find themselves in an utterly helpless and hopeless position.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-7051, on substitution on committees. Motion moved, That the Parliament agrees that Tricia Marwick be appointed to replace Bill Wilson as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Equal Opportunities Committee.—[Bruce Crawford.]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

There are 10 questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-7045.2, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7045, in the name of Richard Baker, on the future of forensics services in Scotland, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 48, Against 74, Abstentions 0. Amendment disagreed to. The next question is, that amendment S3M-7045.1, in the name of John Lamont, which also seeks to amend motion S3M-7045, in the name of Richard Baker, on the future of forensics services in Scotland, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 76, Against 1, Abstentions 45. Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-7045.3, in the name of Robert Brown, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7045, in the name of Richard Baker, on the future of forensics services in Scotland, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 76, Against 46, Abstentions 0. Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-7045, in the name of Richard Baker, on the future of forensics services in Scotland, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-7047.2, in the name of Sarah Boyack, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7047, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, on a low-carbon economy for Scotland, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-7047.1, in the name of Jackson Carlaw, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7047, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 57, Against 63, Abstentions 2.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-7047.3, in the name of Liam McArthur, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7047, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, be agreed to. Are we agreed?  We are agreed. The next question is—[Interruption.]  Do make it obvious, please. I will rerun the vote.  The question is, that amendment S3M-7047.3, in the name of Liam McArthur, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7047, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 75, Against 0, Abstentions 46.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-7047.4, in the name of Patrick Harvie, which seeks to amend motion S3M-7047, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

We are not agreed. Well done! There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 2, Against 120, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-7047, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, on a low-carbon economy for Scotland, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to, That the Parliament acknowledges that Scotland is continuing to develop a national consensus and determination to play a full role in developing the technologies, skills and expertise to build a low-carbon economy; welcomes the job opportunities associated with the further development of low-carbon technologies and acknowledges the need for skills development; notes that the net effect of these and other initiatives has been to  position Scotland as a preferred international destination for low-carbon investment; believes that the Scottish Government should use its powers to the full in support of the development of low-carbon technologies in energy, transport and housing and in the promotion of existing technologies, such as combined heat and power and microgeneration, in order to underpin Scotland's recovery from economic recession; welcomes the announcement by Ofgem of a review of the charging arrangements for gas and electricity transmission networks and hopes that this will pave the way to removing barriers to the development of Scotland's renewable energy industry, and believes that the UK Government's plans for a Green Investment Bank to fund low-carbon transport and energy schemes and a Green Deal to overhaul the energy efficiency of homes and small businesses will benefit Scotland's efforts to build a low-carbon economy.

The next question is, that motion S3M-7051, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on substitution on committees, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to, That the Parliament agrees that Tricia Marwick be appointed to replace Bill Wilson as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Equal Opportunities Committee.

The final item of business is a members' business debate on motion S3M-6753, in the name of Jackie Baillie, on keep Leuchie house. The debate will be concluded without any question being put.  Motion debated, That the Parliament regrets the decision to close Leuchie House; notes that Leuchie House is the only respite home operating in Scotland and northern England for people with multiple sclerosis (MS) and is one of only four across the United Kingdom; believes that the level of care given at Leuchie House is exceptional; notes that the facility that it offers MS patients to holiday with their carer and their children is unique; notes that it has continually achieved the maximum evaluation of excellent in every area of inspection by the Care Commission; recognises that Leuchie House is much valued by service users; believes that the closure of such a specialised facility will cause a strain on families not just in the Lothian area, but across Scotland as well as impacting on other services, such as the NHS, as they struggle to cope with the needs of MS patients, and is of the view that the facility should be retained.

Order. There is an awful lot of noise around the chamber. Minister, you should start to wind up, please.

Question 2 has been withdrawn.

I ask members who have asked a question to allow the minister responsible to give a response without interruption.

Question 12 was withdrawn.

Respond as quickly as you possibly can, please, cabinet secretary.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-7047, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, on a low-carbon economy for Scotland. Very little time is available in the debate, so I ask members to be strict in their timing.   The Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism (Jim Mather):  >I am delighted to have the opportunity to recognise the progress that is being made by the sector and to state my belief that Scotland's renewable energy potential will attract the involvement of other nations, and will generate the industrial, academic and public sector collaboration that is needed to make Scotland the green energy capital of Europe. It is a good day to do that, given that today we have reset the target for renewables to 80 per cent of consumption by 2020, which is up from the previous target of 50 per cent. That is confirmation that we have a huge multifaceted comparative advantage in the global shift to low carbon. The investment and job opportunities that are presented by low carbon in Scotland represent the best economic opportunity in recent years. Employment in the low-carbon sector is expected to grow fast: Scottish low-carbon jobs could grow from 70,000 now to 130,000 by 2020, which would represent approximately 5 per cent of the Scottish workforce. The global low-carbon economy was worth £3 trillion in 2007-08 and is forecast to grow to £4.3 trillion by 2015. That is three times the size of the global aerospace sector. Scotland can expect a disproportionate share, given that we have as much as a quarter of Europe's offshore wind and tidal energy potential and an estimated 10 per cent of its capacity for wave power. Those natural resources are significant enough to enable Scotland to become the continent's green energy powerhouse. That was reinforced in a valuation of the United Kingdom's offshore renewable energy resource that was published in May 2010 and which estimated that Scotland has 206GW of practical offshore wind, wave and tidal resource. That is almost 40 per cent of the total United Kingdom resource. Harnessing just a third of our offshore renewable energy potential could meet Scotland's electricity needs seven times over by 2050. The net value of that amount of energy, in terms of electricity sales, would be £14 billion by 2050. Consequently, there are opportunities both for growing indigenous Scottish companies and for  attracting others from overseas to locate in Scotland. We already have successful international partnerships. For example, in March 2009 the Danish company Skykon acquired the Vestas wind-tower manufacturing plant in Campbeltown. The company will invest in building towers for offshore wind and expects to add more than 200 additional jobs to the existing 100 people who work for it there. Scotland also has particular strengths in environmental and clean technologies, for instance in building technologies, environmental monitoring and sustainable transport. With 2,500 Scottish companies active in this market, it is estimated that it will grow from £8.5 billion in 2007-08 to around £12 billion by 2015-16. So, how and with whom do we work to secure our position in the new green economy? The Scottish Parliament has already played a key role through the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009, which sets world-leading targets of at least 42 per cent cuts in emissions by 2020 and 80 per cent cuts by 2050. The legislation also had strong support from business and civic society. As members know, the act provides a framework for business and the public to help Scotland move to a low-carbon future. The responses to our recent consultation—"Towards a Low Carbon Economy for Scotland"—from a wide range of Scottish industry and business confirm that we can expect substantial benefits to accrue from the greening of our economy. Our aim is to be a model of international best practice on climate change.

Mrs Craigie, stop please.

Order.

Come to a question, please, Mr Gray.

I will take a supplementary question from Jackie Baillie.

Order.

Question 5 has been withdrawn.

Quickly, please.

Before First Minister's question time, I know that members will wish to join me in welcoming to the gallery the Parliament of Sardinia's vice-president, the Honourable Michele Cossa. [Applause.]

I remind members that speeches should be no longer than six minutes.   Brian Adam (Aberdeen North) (SNP):  >I should first declare an interest, in that I worked in the field for most of my working life prior to coming to the Parliament, although I did not work for the SPSA or any of its predecessor organisations. Since we last debated the issue on 8 January last year, we have had the promised full consultation process, for which I thank the SPSA. Extensive dialogue on the future of forensic services in Scotland has taken place with staff, trade unions, the police, the Procurator Fiscal Service and other interested parties. I have met Tom Nelson and the affected staff on several occasions to discuss the consultation process and the options for the future. I have also written to Tom Nelson and Vic Emery to ask them to release whatever recommendation they make to the cabinet secretary as well as the evidence that they have collated. I express my gratitude to the staff of the Aberdeen fingerprint service and forensic laboratories who, throughout the process, have provided reasoned and well-argued responses to the SPSA's proposals and have continued to perform at their best while their jobs have been under threat. In my view, closing or downgrading the Aberdeen lab would reduce the crime-fighting ability of Grampian Police and Northern  Constabulary, which would be an unacceptable consequence for my constituents. While bearing in mind the financial implications, I have no doubt that the number 1 priority for the SPSA should be the quality of the service that is delivered to local forces and to the Procurator Fiscal Service. I believe that a national service that is delivered to international standards and delivered locally is what is needed. I have been provided with examples by the Aberdeen staff of how their work has been vital in the quick apprehension of suspects, which has taken those people off our streets and kept my constituents safe. A prime example is the recent bomb hoax directly opposite the office of the Procurator Fiscal Service in Aberdeen, which caused considerable disruption to local bus and train services and to local businesses. The fingerprint service was able to provide immediate assistance, which led to the suspect being identified. If the Aberdeen facility was to close or to be downgraded, at least an extra hour would be added to the time taken to process a product, which could result in a criminal being released back on to our streets. We know that the speed of service delivery is important for public safety, but there are other implications of a two-lab model, which could also result in higher costs for the SPSA. The increased amount of handling that would occur would increase the risk of contamination of samples. To my mind, that proposal is unacceptable. Recent examples give further cause for concern about resilience, if we move to a two-lab model. As we know, the Edinburgh lab recently had to close after being attacked. If that happened under a two-lab model, the remaining lab's staff would be swamped, because they would need to deal with all the cases in Scotland. A similar situation could arise if there was another event like Lockerbie or the Piper Alpha disaster that required one lab to work at full capacity on the incident. For the reasons mentioned above, a two-lab model is an absolute non-starter, whereas keeping four laboratories would be of continued benefit to local communities. However, the SPSA has put forward the idea that smaller labs might be left in place in Aberdeen and Edinburgh. We have yet to receive a final recommendation on how many staff might be located in the proposed satellite laboratory facilities, but we are led to believe that the number would be between two and 12. Again, I have concerns about resilience. No description is given of what cover would be available if staff were away for a length of time due to holidays or illness. I am also concerned that the staff would be required to cover multiple disciplines instead of specialising in one area. Being posted to a satellite laboratory might be seen as detrimental to an  individual's career development and would therefore have little attraction to staff. I am not against modernisation for the sake of it, and I agree with the review's proposals on the implementation of a new evidence management system, which will help to standardise methods across Scotland. There is a strong case for standardising operating procedures and equipment to provide better consistency of approach. A discipline-led rather than geography-led approach has much to commend it. From the staff analysis, there is little difference between the total five-year costs of option two and option four: the difference is extremely modest. However, if we take option four rather than option two, there will be additional risks in terms of loss of staff experience, added time for transport, additional handling and potential errors, and uncertainties about the costs of transport and other matters. Are those risks acceptable? I think not.

Before we come to the open debate, I tell members that I have received a request for a question of an urgent nature, under rule 13.8 of standing orders, on the subject of the Scottish team's participation in the Commonwealth games in Delhi, from Bill Butler MSP. I have accepted the request, and I therefore intend to alter business to allow the question to be answered by the Minister for Public Health and Sport at 11.30 this morning. I will allow 10 minutes for that item of business, and that time will have to be removed from the debate that we are currently holding. We may have to reduce the number of speakers, but we will let those members know as soon as we possibly can. We now move to the open debate.

Order.

I am afraid that you have only 45 seconds left, cabinet secretary.

Good morning. The first item of business is a Labour Party debate on motion S3M-7045, in the name of Richard Baker, on the future of forensic services in Scotland. I call Richard Baker to speak to and move the motion in 13 minutes. I advise members that time is very tight, so I ask them to stick rigidly to the advice that they are given.

The next item of business is consideration of three Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motions S3M-7042 to S3M-7044, on approval of Scottish statutory instruments on the Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park and the Cairngorms national park, en bloc.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Loch Lomond and The Trossachs National Park Designation, Transitional and Consequential Provisions (Scotland) Order 2002 Modification Order 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Cairngorms National Park Designation, Transitional and Consequential Provisions (Scotland) Order 2003 Modification Order 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Cairngorms National Park Elections (Scotland) Amendment Order 2010 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on those motions will be put at decision time.

There are two questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-7015, in the name of Christine Grahame, on the Health and Sport Committee's report on "Clinical portal and telehealth development in NHS Scotland", be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Health and Sport Committee's 3rd Report, 2010 (Session 3): Clinical portal and telehealth development in NHS Scotland (SP Paper 399) .

I propose to put a single question on motions S3M-7042 to S3M-7044. If any member objects to a single question being put, they should please say so now. As no one objects, the next question is, that motions S3M-7042 to S3M-7044, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of Scottish statutory instruments, be agreed to.  Motions agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Loch Lomond and The Trossachs National Park Designation, Transitional and Consequential Provisions (Scotland) Order 2002 Modification Order 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Cairngorms National Park Designation, Transitional and Consequential Provisions (Scotland) Order 2003 Modification Order 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Cairngorms National Park Elections (Scotland) Amendment Order 2010 be approved.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-7041, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 29 September 2010 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Broadcasting followed by Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee Debate: Commission on Scottish Devolution followed by The Scottish Parliament (Disqualification) Order 2010 followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 30 September 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Justice and Law Officers; Rural Affairs and the Environment 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Administrative Justice and The Future of Tribunals followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 6 October 2010 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Legal Services (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 7 October 2010  9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

You have a minute and a half more.

I ask members not to follow the convener's example by not using up their allocated time, because we have a little time available. I call Shona Robison, who has 11-plus minutes.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader is Tina McGeever, who is one of the featured individuals in the Parliament's travelling exhibition, which encourages people to engage with the Parliament in various ways. Tina has become a wonderful ambassador for our public petitions system, and we are delighted that she is with us today.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-7015, in the name of Christine Grahame, on the Health and Sport Committee's report, "Clinical portal and telehealth development in NHS Scotland".

I must hurry you.

You must close, please.

There are no questions to be put as a result of today's business.

I thank all members for making good use of the extra time available. They have done so to the extent that I must ask closing speakers to stick closely to the times that they were advised of. Liam McArthur has around six minutes.

Thank you, Mr Peacock. There is, after all, only so much that one can take of a good thing.

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motion S3M-6985, on substitution on committees.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that Claire Baker be appointed to replace Dr Richard Simpson as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Justice Committee; Dr Richard Simpson be appointed to replace Claire Baker as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Public Petitions Committee.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-6978.2, in the name of James Kelly, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6978, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the drugs strategy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 92, Against 0, Abstentions 18.  Amendment agreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-6978.1, in the name of John Lamont, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6978,  in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the drugs strategy, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 70, Against 40, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The third question is, that amendment S3M-6978.4, in the name of Robert Brown, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6978, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the drugs strategy, as amended, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The fourth question is, that motion S3M-6978, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the drugs strategy, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 102, Against 2, Abstentions 6.  Motion, as amended agreed to,  That the Parliament recognises the progress that has been made in Scotland with the publishing of Scotland's national drugs strategy, The Road to Recovery ; notes that, with the change in emphasis to recovery, Scotland has slowly started the journey toward battling the damaging effects that substance abuse has on society; believes that more needs to be done in identifying models that work, including those delivered by voluntary and faith groups, removing discrimination and territorial barriers and rolling out best practice to ensure that the ethos of the drugs strategy is felt in every aspect of rehabilitation; notes the significant role that substance abuse plays in criminal activity and the complex needs of those in custody with substance addictions; believes that more needs to be done to ensure that prisons are drug free and every support is made available to those prisoners who want to become free of drugs; recognises the effectiveness of drug treatment and testing orders (DTTO) in providing intensive, specialist support to individuals involved in drug-related offending,  and calls on the Scottish Government to ensure that DTTOs are available to all Scottish courts as required.

The final question is, that motion S3M-6985, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on substitution on committees, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that Claire Baker be appointed to replace Dr Richard Simpson as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Justice Committee; Dr Richard Simpson be appointed to replace Claire Baker as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Public Petitions Committee.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-6982, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 22 September 2010 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Health and Sport Committee Debate: Inquiry into Clinical Portal and Telehealth Development in NHS Scotland followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 23 September 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing followed by Scottish Government Debate: A Low Carbon Economy for Scotland followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 29 September 2010 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 30 September 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time   Justice and the Law Officers; Rural Affairs and the Environment followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item is consideration of another business motion, S3M-6983, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a stage 2 deadline for the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill at Stage 2 be completed by 1 October 2010.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item is consideration of a further business motion, S3M-6984, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a stage 2 deadline for the Children's Hearings (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Children's Hearings (Scotland) Bill at Stage 2 be completed by 29 October 2010.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The cabinet secretary will now take questions on the issues that have been raised in her statement. We have no more than 20 minutes for such questions, after which we must move to the next item of business.

We come to open questions. There are seven members and seven minutes; therefore, brevity is the watchword.

Please answer as briefly as you can.

Time is very tight this afternoon, so I must hold members strictly to the time that is at their disposal. The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-6978, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the drugs strategy.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader is the Rev Robert Allan, Falkirk Old and St Modan's parish church, Falkirk.

The next item of business is a statement by Nicola Sturgeon on Scottish Ambulance Service call handling. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of her statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions. This is a 10-minute statement.

Order.

Question 11 was not lodged and question 12 has been withdrawn.

Question 15 was not lodged.

Question 17 was not lodged.

We have a little time available. Just because I have never done it before, I call question 20.

Order.

Order.

You must wind up, please, Mr Gibson.

Thank you. That concludes this morning's part of the debate, which will continue at 5 to 3 this afternoon, after questions.

Order. One moment, Mr Kerr. I remind members that they cannot have conversations across the chamber.

Good morning. Our first item of business this morning is a debate on the independent budget review.

Order.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-6889, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a business programme for this week's business.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 8 September 2010 1.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by First Minister's Statement: Scottish Government's Programme followed by Scottish Government Debate: Scottish Government's Programme followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 9 September 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Independent Budget Review 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Continuation of Scottish Government Debate: Independent Budget Review followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 15 September 2010 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 16 September 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning; Europe, External Affairs and Culture 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a statement by Alex Salmond on the Scottish Government's programme. The First Minister's statement will be followed by a full debate, therefore there should be no interventions or interruptions. This is a half-hour statement.

Order. The statement should be made without interruption.

Order.

Order. That will do.

Order. We will hear the rest of the statement in silence, please.

We move to the next item of business, which is a debate on the Scottish Government's programme. I invite members who wish to speak in the debate to press their request-to-speak buttons, and I point out that all members who were keen to make contributions earlier have the freedom to do so now because we have some time available this afternoon. Anyone else who wishes to contribute is welcome to do so.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader is Lieutenant Colonel Alan Burns, the Scottish secretary of the Salvation Army.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-6605, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 66, Against 0, Abstentions 59.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Bill be passed.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-6670.1, in the name of David Whitton, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6670, in the name of Andrew Welsh, on the Finance Committee's report on the budget strategy phase, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 62, Against 64, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The third question is, that motion S3M-6670, in the name of Andrew Welsh, on the Finance Committee's report on the budget strategy phase, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the 4th Report, 2010 (Session 3) of the Finance Committee on the Budget Strategy Phase (SP Paper 455) and refers the report and its recommendations to the Scottish Government for consideration.

The fourth question is, that motion S3M-6693, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on committee membership, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that Bill Wilson be appointed to replace Michael Matheson as a member of the European and External Relations Committee.  Meeting closed at 17:02.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I invite Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-6693, on committee membership.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that Bill Wilson be appointed to replace Michael Matheson as a member of the European and External Relations Committee.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time, which will be in just under one minute. I suspend the meeting until then.

Apologies to David Stewart, but I am afraid that I must move on to the questions on justice and law officers.

Question 7 was not lodged.

There is a lot of déjà vu about this afternoon.

Order.

No, I must ask you to be brief, First Minister. [ Interruption .] We are running out of time.

Order.

I am aware that time is passing, but I am not prepared to have other members' questions talked out by the first three questions, so we may have to do a bit of overtime today. I will take a supplementary from Lewis Macdonald.

I will take a further supplementary from Frank McAveety.

We come to the next item of business. I would be grateful if members who are leaving the chamber would conduct their conversations elsewhere.

The cabinet secretary has asked to give the first part of his answer in Mandarin. Members will be grateful to learn that he will also provide a translation.

Quickly, please, cabinet secretary.

We now come to group 7. Amendment 53, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendments 56 and 116 to 120.

The question is, that amendment 146 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 59, Against 66, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 146 disagreed to.

The question is, that amendment 147 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 59, Against 66, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 147 disagreed to.

The question is, that amendment 148 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 59, Against 66, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 148 disagreed to.

The question is, that amendment 149 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 59, Against 66, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 149 disagreed to.

The question is, that amendment 150 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 59, Against 66, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 150 disagreed to.

The question is, that amendment 151 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 59, Against 66, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 151 disagreed to.

We come to group 5. Amendment 26, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendments 27, 29, 31, 34, 37, 52, 63, 115, 121 and 122.

Amendment 152, in the name of Peter Peacock, has already been debated with amendment 146.

We now come to group 6. Amendment 42, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendments 43 to 45, 47 and 48.

We now come to group 3. Amendment 145, in the name of Peter Peacock, is the only amendment in the group.

Order.

The question is, that amendment 145 is agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 59, Against 65, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 145 disagreed to.

We move to group 4. Amendment 146, in the name of Peter Peacock, is grouped with amendments 147 to 174, 179 to 189, 193 to 197, 93, 200, 225, 201, 226, 204 to 220, 228 and 221 to 224. I draw members' attention to the pre-emption information on the groupings paper.

I must hurry you.

We come to the division on amendment 2.

The result of the division is: For 58, Against 64, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 2 disagreed to.  Amendment 144 moved—[Karen Gillon]—and agreed to.

We come to group 2. Amendment 3, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendments 5 to 25, 28, 30, 32, 33, 35, 36, 38 to 41, 46, 49 to 51, 54, 55, 57 to 62, 64, 66, 67, 83, 85, 86, 92, 192, 94 to 98, 109 to 114, 125 to 129, 227, 130 to 134, 137, 138 and 140 to 143. I draw members' attention to the pre-emption information that is given in the list of groupings.

Good morning. The first item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-6694, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for the stage 3 consideration of the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that, during Stage 3 of the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Bill, debate on groups of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limits indicated, those time limits being calculated from when the Stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the Stage being called) or otherwise not in progress: Groups 1 and 2: 20 minutes Groups 3 and 4: 40 minutes Groups 5 to 7: 1 hour Groups 8 to 10: 1 hour 20 minutes Groups 11 to 14: 1 hour 45 minutes Groups 15 to 17: 2 hours 5 minutes Groups 18 to 21: 2 hours 25 minutes—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is stage 3 proceedings on the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Bill. In dealing with amendments, members should have the bill as amended at stage 2, the marshalled list and the groupings, which I have agreed as Presiding Officer. The first division will be a 30-second division, following a five-minute suspension. Thereafter, there will be a voting period of one minute for the first division after a debate and the voting period for all other divisions will be 30 seconds. We are incredibly tight for time, so, to begin with, I ask no speaker to speak for more than one minute.

We start with group 1. Amendment 2, in the name of Peter Peacock, is grouped with amendments 144, 4, 123 and 124.

Due to members' diligence, I can offer the minister two minutes to wind up.

I call Peter Peacock to wind up and either press or withdraw his amendment.

The question is, that amendment 2 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division. As it is the first division of the day, there will be a five-minute suspension.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-6604, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 64, Against 61, Abstentions 0.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill be passed.

The next question is, that motion S3M-6679, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, the Dormant Bank and Building Society Accounts (Scotland) Order 2010, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 65, Against 60, Abstentions 0.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Dormant Bank and Building Society Accounts (Scotland) Order 2010 be approved.

I propose to put a single question on motions S3M-6680 to S3M-6683, on approval of SSIs. If any member objects to a single question being put, they should say so now. As no one objects, the next question is, that motions S3M-6680 to S3M-6683, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of SSIs, be agreed to.  Motions agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft National Health Service (Reimbursement of the Cost of EEA Treatment) (Scotland) Regulations 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Town and Country Planning (Fees for Applications and Deemed Applications) (Scotland) Amendment (No. 2) Regulations 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Applications by Creditors (Pre-Action Requirements) (Scotland) Order 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Home Owner and Debtor Protection (Scotland) Act 2010 (Consequential Provisions) Order 2010 be approved.

The final question is, that motion S3M-6684, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on membership of the Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of Europe of the Council of Europe, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to nominate, as a representative of the Parliament, Mr Frank McAveety MSP, as the alternate member on the UK delegation to the regional chamber of the Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of Europe of the Council of Europe.

The question on the motion will be put at decision time. The next item is consideration of another Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-6684, on membership of the Congress of Local and  Regional Authorities of Europe of the Council of Europe.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees to nominate, as a representative of the Parliament, Mr Frank McAveety MSP, as the alternate member on the UK delegation to the regional chamber of the Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of Europe of the Council of Europe.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on the motion will also be put at decision time.

I am sorry, Mr Smith, but I have a point of order from Mr Gibson.

Order.

You must close, Mr Smith.

My apologies to Johann Lamont, but the standing orders are clear: only one member may speak for and one against the motion. I call the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism, Jim Mather.

The next item of business is consideration of five Parliamentary Bureau motions.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Dormant Bank and Building Society Accounts (Scotland) Order 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft National Health Service (Reimbursement of the Cost of EEA Treatment) (Scotland) Regulations 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Town and Country Planning (Fees for Applications and Deemed Applications) (Scotland) Amendment (No. 2) Regulations 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Applications by Creditors (Pre-Action Requirements) (Scotland) Order 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Home Owner and Debtor Protection (Scotland) Act 2010 (Consequential Provisions) Order 2010 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

Iain Smith has indicated that he wishes to speak against a motion.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-6674, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 8 September 2010 1.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 9 September 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 15 September 2010 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 16 September 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning; Europe, External Affairs and Culture 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business  followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of four business motions. I ask Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau to move motions S3M-6675 to 6678, setting out stage 1 timetables on various bills.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Autism (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 21 January 2011. That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Damages (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 17 December 2010. That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Palliative Care (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 10 December 2010. That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Property Factors (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 10 December 2010.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motions agreed to.

There will be no interruptions or interventions during the statement, please.

The cabinet secretary will now take questions on the issues raised in his statement. We have exactly 20 minutes for those  questions, after which we will move to the next item of business.

We come to back-bench questions. Quite a few members wish to ask questions. If we are all speedy, we can get them all in.

Quickly, please.

I ask members to keep questions and answers short and sharp from now on.

Order, Mr Purvis.

Order. That concludes the statement and questions on the gathering. I apologise to those members I was unable to call.

Order. One debate at a time, please.

The next item of business is a statement by Michael Russell, on the gathering. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions during it.

Amendment 32 is pre-empted.  Amendments 161 and 162 moved—[Kenny MacAskill]—and agreed to.

We move on to group 24. Amendment 195, in the name of John Lamont, is grouped with amendments 196 and 197.

I offer Mr Lamont the opportunity to parry some of the rapier-like arguments that have been thrust in his direction.

We come to group 25. Amendment 198, in the name of Sandra White, is the only amendment in the group.

Amendment 17, in the name of Robert Brown, has already been debated with amendment 98. I ask Robert Brown whether he will move or not move amendment 17.

We come to group 22. Amendment 111, in the name of the cabinet secretary, is grouped with amendments 113, 117 to 141, 143 to 145, 147, 149, 151, 152 and 154 to 162. I call members' attention to the pre-emption information that is shown on the list of groupings.

Amendment 128 is in the name of the cabinet secretary. If it is agreed to, I cannot call amendment 26.  Amendment 128 moved—[Kenny MacAskill]—and agreed to.  Amendments 129 and 130 moved—[Kenny MacAskill]—and agreed to.

Amendment 131 is in the name of the cabinet secretary. If it is agreed to, I cannot call amendment 27.  Amendment 131 moved—[Kenny MacAskill]—and agreed to.  Amendments 132 to 138 moved—[Kenny MacAskill]—and agreed to.

Amendment 194, in the name of Rhoda Grant, is in a group of its own.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is continuation of stage 3 proceedings on the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill. I remind members that in dealing with amendments they should have before them the bill as amended at stage 2, which is SP Bill 24A; the marshalled list, which is SP Bill 24A-ML; the correction slip to the marshalled list; and the groupings. I also remind members that, as was the case this morning, the division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for five minutes before the first division. We will have a voting period of one minute for the first division after a debate and all other divisions will be 30 seconds.

We come to group 17. Amendment 82, in the name of the cabinet secretary, is grouped with amendments 83 to 89.

We come to group 18. Amendment 90, in the name of the cabinet secretary, is grouped with amendments 91, 92 and 186.

We come to group 19. Amendment 93, in the name of the cabinet secretary, is grouped with amendments 94 and 95.

We come to group 20. Amendment 193, in the name of the cabinet secretary, is grouped with amendments 96, 97, 101, 102, 104, 107 to 110, 112, 114 to 116, 142, 146, 150 and 153.

We come to group 21. Amendment 98, in the name of the cabinet secretary, is grouped with amendments 99, 100, 17 to 19, 103, 20 to 23, 105, 106, 24 to 27, 148 and 28 to 32. I draw members' attention to the pre-emption information that is given on the list of groupings.

Order.

I must hurry you.

I can give Nigel Don one minute. I am afraid that is all.

Order.

I understand that Robert Brown does not wish to wind up, but I must ask him whether he wishes to press or withdraw amendment 61A.

The question is, that amendment 61 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 65, Against 62, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 61 agreed to.  Amendment 187 not moved.   Amendment 12 moved—[Robert Brown].

The question is, that amendment 12 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 31, Against 96, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 12 disagreed to.

The question is, that amendment 62 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 81, Against 0, Abstentions 46.  Amendment 62 agreed to.

I think that the member has finished rather taken an intervention. I call Stewart Maxwell.

Order.

A large number of members wish to speak. They will be able to do so if they stick to the times that I give them.

We will proceed with the division.

The result of the division is: For 62, Against 64, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 9 disagreed to.

Group 3 is on community payback orders—offences punishable by a fine. Amendment 33, in the name of the cabinet secretary, is grouped with amendments 34 and 35.

We move on to group 4. Amendment 36, in the name of the cabinet secretary, is grouped with amendments 37 to 44, 47 to 53, 58 to 60 and 173 to 185.

We move on to group 5. Amendment 45, in the name of the cabinet secretary, is grouped with amendments 46 and amendments 55 to 57.

We move on to group 6. Amendment 54, in the name of the cabinet secretary, is the only amendment in the group.

The question is, that amendment 54 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 81, Against 46, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 54 agreed to.  Amendments 55 to 60 moved—[Kenny MacAskill]—and agreed to.  Amendment 11 moved—[Robert Brown].

The question is, that amendment 11 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 78, Against 48, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 11 agreed to.

We come to group 7. Amendment 61, in the name of the cabinet secretary, is grouped with amendments 61A, 187, 12 and 62.

I call Robert Brown to wind up and indicate whether he will press or withdraw amendment 8.

We come to group 2. Amendment 9, in the name of Robert Brown, is grouped with amendments 10 and 11.

I must hurry you, minister.

The question is, that amendment 9 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division. As it is the first division, proceedings will be suspended for five minutes.

The next item of business is stage 3 proceedings on the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill. In dealing with amendments, members should have the bill as amended at stage 2, which is SP bill 24A, the marshalled list, which is SP bill 24A-ML, the correction slip to the marshalled list, and the groupings, which I, as Presiding Officer, have agreed. The division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for five minutes for the first division this morning. The voting period for the first division will be 30 seconds. Thereafter, the voting period will be one minute for the first division after a debate and 30 seconds for all other divisions.

Order. Mr Kidd, that is—

That is not a point of order for me, Mr Kidd.

Group 1 is on the Scottish sentencing council. Amendment 8, in the name of Robert Brown, is grouped with amendments 171 and 172.

Order. There is far too much noise in the chamber.

I commend Robert Brown's brevity and suggest that other members are similarly brief, as we have a lot to get through today.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-6671, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised time for decision time today.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-6672, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out revisions to the business programme for this week.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees— (a) the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 30 June 2010— delete followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - S3M-6377 Aileen Campbell: Perspectives of Children and Young People with a Parent in Prison and insert followed by Ministerial Statement: The Gathering followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.30 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - S3M-6377 Aileen Campbell: Perspectives of Children and Young People with a Parent in Prison and (b) the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 1 July 2010— delete 2.55 pm Finance Committee Debate: Budget Strategy Phase Report and insert 2.55 pm Continuation of Stage 3 Proceedings: Crofting Reform (Scotland) Bill followed by Finance Committee Debate: Budget  Strategy Phase Report—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-6673, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 3 consideration of the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that, during Stage 3 of the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill— (a) debate on the groups of amendments specified below in relation to the morning and afternoon shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limits indicated; (b) each time limit specified in relation to the morning shall be calculated from the beginning of proceedings in the morning and each time limit specified in relation to the afternoon shall be calculated from the beginning of proceedings in the afternoon; and (c) all time limits shall exclude any period when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in each of the morning and the afternoon being called) or otherwise not in progress: Morning Groups 1 to 6: 45 minutes Groups 7 and 8: 1 hour 35 minutes Group 9: 2 hours 20 minutes Groups 10 to 12: 3 hours 10 minutes Groups 13 to 16: 3 hours 40 minutes Afternoon Groups 17 to 19: 10 minutes Groups 20 to 23: 40 minutes Groups 24 to 27: 1 hour 10 minutes Groups 28 to 32: 1 hour 30 minutes.  followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

Good morning. The first item of business this morning is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader is the Rev Dr Angus Kerr, clerk of the presbytery of Glasgow, Church of Scotland.

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motion S3M-6645, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on committee membership.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that— Mr Frank McAveety be appointed to replace Rhona Brankin as a member of the European and External Relations Committee; Mr Frank McAveety be appointed to replace Cathie Craigie as a member of the Public Audit Committee; Cathie Craigie be appointed to replace Mr Frank McAveety as a member of the Public Petitions Committee.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

There are 11 questions to be put as a result of today's business. I remind members that, in relation to the debate on tourism, if the amendment in the name of Jim Mather is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Lewis Macdonald falls. The first question is, that amendment S3M-6635.1.1, in the name of Gavin Brown, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-6635.1, in the name of Jim Mather, on tourism, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 76, Against 41, Abstentions 2.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-6635.1, in the name of Jim Mather, as amended, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6635, in the name of Iain Smith, on tourism, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 61, Against 58, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

Amendment S3M-6635.2 is therefore pre-empted. The next question is, that motion S3M-6635, in the name of Iain Smith, on tourism, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 61, Against 58, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament notes that tourism is among the largest contributors to the Scottish economy and is defined as a key sector; believes that the industry needs clear direction and support in order to achieve sustainable, long-term growth; welcomes the initiative of the industry to establish the Tourism Leadership Group as a positive step in working collaboratively toward growth and prosperity; notes that extending the small business bonus scheme will mean that half of all businesses, including many tourism-related businesses, will receive a discounted bill this year and well over a quarter of business properties will pay no rates at all and that the introduction of a transitional relief scheme would increase taxes for small and medium-sized private companies by £77 million, meaning that eight out of 10 ratepayers, including many in the tourism and hospitality industry, would be worse or no better off, which would be extremely damaging for Scotland in this period of fragile economic recovery, and welcomes the UK Government's decision not to repeal the special tax rules for furnished holiday lettings, as had been proposed by the previous administration led by Labour.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-6633.1, in the name of Shona Robison, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6633, in the name of Ross Finnie, on free personal care for the elderly, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-6633.2, in the name of Murdo Fraser, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6633, in the name of Ross Finnie, on free personal care for the elderly, as amended, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-6633, in the name of Ross Finnie, on free personal care for the elderly, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament believes that free personal and nursing care for the elderly has widespread support and continues to deliver real benefits for tens of thousands of Scotland's most vulnerable older people, allowing them the dignity and independence of growing old in the comfort of their homes; recognises that budget constraints and demographic change present challenges for Scotland's social care and health services, but, in order to protect the elderly, reaffirms its commitment to free personal and nursing care for the long term so that Scotland's elderly population can continue to receive the care to which it is entitled; welcomes the wide-ranging Reshaping Care for Older People programme, which is developing innovative and practical ideas for change to meet the needs of Scotland's population that are sustainable, deliverable and fair; urges the Scottish Government to continue to identify savings in administrative costs that can be reinvested in frontline services, and, in this context, calls on the Scottish Government to give serious consideration to the proposal from Lord Sutherland to merge health and social care budgets.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-6636.1, in the name of John Lamont, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6636, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the "Independent Review of Sheriff and Jury Procedure", be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-6636.2, in the name of Robert Brown, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6636, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the "Independent Review of Sheriff and Jury Procedure", as amended, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-6636, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the "Independent Review of Sheriff and Jury Procedure", as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament welcomes the report on the Independent Review of Sheriff and Jury Procedure conducted by Sheriff Principal Edward F Bowen CBE TD QC and believes that the people of Scotland deserve a modernised sheriff and jury procedure that promotes the interest of justice in an efficient way, serves the interest of victims, witnesses and jurors and is fit for purpose in the 21st century; further recognises that, with constraints on the public expenditure, it is vital to ensure that justice continues to be delivered swiftly and in a cost effective manner, and calls on the Scottish Government to work with the courts and other stakeholders to implement the reforms as a matter of urgency.

The final question is, that motion S3M-6645, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on committee membership, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that— Mr Frank McAveety be appointed to replace Rhona Brankin as a member of the European and External Relations Committee; Mr Frank McAveety be appointed to replace Cathie Craigie as a member of the Public Audit Committee; Cathie Craigie be appointed to replace Mr Frank McAveety as a member of the Public Petitions Committee.

Order. I am sorry to interrupt you, minister, but there is far too much background noise. Members should keep quiet, please.

We move to the closing speeches. I point out that we have a little time in hand, so I will not be too strict about stopping members unless they go on much too long.

Order.

Tavish Scott. Try again.

Tavish Scott, you have one more chance.

Order, gentlemen.

Order.

I think that Mr Whitton knows that that is a debating point and not a point of order for me.

Question 2 was withdrawn.

Question 5 was not lodged.

Please respond as briefly as possible, cabinet secretary.

Very quickly, please.

Minister, I am afraid that I have to take a point of order from Mike Rumbles.

Your understanding of what the minister says is not my problem, Mr Rumbles.

I am slightly relaxed about time this morning, as we have a little in hand.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-6635, in the name of Iain Smith, on tourism.

Order.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-6056, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution for the Housing (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Housing (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any expenditure, charge or payment of a kind referred to in Rules 9.12.3(b)(ii) and 9.12.4 of the Parliament's Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.—[ Alex Neil. ]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-6628, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees— (a) the following programme of business— Wednesday 30 June 2010 9.15 am Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill 2.30 pm Continuation of Stage 3 Proceedings: Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 1 July 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Crofting Reform (Scotland) Bill 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time followed by Members' Business 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and Law Officers 2.55 pm Finance Committee Debate: Budget Strategy Phase Report followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Wednesday 8 September 2010 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 9 September 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business  11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business and (b) that, for the purposes of Members' Business on Thursday 1 July 2010, "at the end of First Minister's Question Time" be substituted for "at the end of the meeting following Decision Time" in Rule 5.6.1(c) of Standing Orders.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motion S3M-6629, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Budget (Scotland) Act 2010 Amendment Order 2010 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-6513, in the name of Alex Neil, on the Housing (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 96, Against 16, Abstentions 0.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Housing (Scotland) Bill.

The second question is, that motion S3M-6056, in the name of John  Swinney, on the financial resolution for the Housing (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Housing (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any expenditure, charge or payment of a kind referred to in Rules 9.12.3(b)(ii) and 9.12.4 of the Parliament's Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.

The third question is, that motion S3M-6629, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Budget (Scotland) Act 2010 Amendment Order 2010 be approved.

The cabinet secretary will now take questions on the issues raised in his statement. I will allow 30 minutes for such questions, after which we must move to the next item of business.

Order. The cabinet secretary's statement was listened to with total courtesy. I ask that the questions be treated in the same way.

No, Mr Kerr will not—Mr Kerr needs to ask a question.

I must press you for a question, please.

We come to open questions. We will get everybody in as long as questions and answers are reasonably tight and focused.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader is Frances Hume, the development and education officer of the Scottish Inter Faith Council.

The next item of business is a statement by John Swinney on the United Kingdom emergency budget and end-year flexibility. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions during it.

There are seven questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-6580.3, in the name of Michael Russell, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6580, in the name of Des McNulty, on schools, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 49, Against 74, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-6580.1, in the name of Elizabeth Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6580, in the name of Des McNulty, on schools, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 16, Against 107, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-6580.2, in the name of Margaret Smith, which also seeks to amend motion S3M-6580, in the name of Des McNulty, on schools, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 74, Against 47, Abstentions 2.  Amendment agreed to.

The question is, that motion S3M-6580, in the name of Des McNulty, on schools, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 74, Against 47, Abstentions 2.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament notes with concern the reduction in the numbers of teachers and classroom assistants since 2007 and the sharp rise in the proportion of newly qualified teachers who cannot obtain permanent or even temporary employment; further notes the widespread disquiet that exists among teachers and parents over the lack of preparedness for implementation of the Curriculum for Excellence and, in particular, the lack of clarity over new qualification arrangements; recognises that the Curriculum for Excellence is a wide-ranging reform with significant resource implications; calls on the Scottish Government to reach an early agreement with local authorities and teachers organisations that guarantees the necessary preparation time and resources for successful implementation of the Curriculum for Excellence, and notes that the Scottish Government's package of education failures includes the abandonment of SNP election commitments to reduce class sizes in P1 to P3 to 18, dump student debt and match brick for brick the previous administration's school building programme.

The fifth question is, that amendment S3M-6581.2, in the name of Johann Lamont, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6581, in the name of Alex Neil, on the poverty framework, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 45, Against 76, Abstentions 2.  Amendment disagreed to.

The sixth question is, that amendment S3M-6581.1, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6581, in the name of Alex Neil, on the poverty framework, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 59, Against 1, Abstentions 63.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-6581, in the name of Alex Neil, on the poverty framework, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 60, Against 1, Abstentions 62.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the continuing approach set out in the Scottish Government's poverty and income inequality framework, Achieving our Potential, to take long-term measures to tackle drivers of poverty and income inequality in Scotland, to maximise the potential for people to work, to make work pay for those who can and to support those who cannot work and those who are experiencing poverty now; recognises the need to focus on those people and communities who experience longer-term persistent poverty; supports the need to streamline the welfare system while ensuring that reforms provide better protection for, and do not further disadvantage, vulnerable people, particularly in these challenging times, and believes that the Scottish Government should introduce a fairer pay policy that gives a real-terms pay increase to those on the lowest wages in the public sector while paying no bonuses to higher earning staff in 2010-11 and 2011-12.

We should have a bit less noise in the chamber, other than from the minister.

You must close, please, minister. [ Applause .]

I must stop you now, Mr McNeil. I am sorry, we really have no time to spare.

You must close, please.

You were not being cut short, but you are now. I have no extra time; I am sorry, Ms White.

Order.

Order.

Question please.

Order.

For the sake of accuracy, I point out that the meeting with the Secretary of State for Scotland to which committee conveners and business managers have been invited will be hosted and chaired by my deputy, Trish Godman, not by me.

There seems to be a growing tendency for questions and answers to be taking on all the characteristics of speeches. I want members to speed up the process a bit please.

Question 4 was not lodged.

Order.

Order. I have heard enough of you today, Mr McMahon. Thank you.

Order.

Order.

Mrs Craigie.

Good morning. The first item of business today is a debate on motion S3M-6580, in the name of Des McNulty, on schools. I advise the chamber that we have a little time in hand, but it is not excessive. If members could speak roughly to the guidelines that they have been given, we will finish on time. I call Ken Macintosh to speak to and move the motion. You have about 13 minutes, Mr Macintosh.

Order.

Order.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-6512, in the name of Adam Ingram, on the Children's Hearings (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Children's Hearings (Scotland) Bill.

The second question is, that motion S3M-6161, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution to the Children's Hearings (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Children's Hearings (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any expenditure of a kind referred to in paragraph 3(b)(iii) of Rule 9.12 of the Parliament's Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.

The third question is, that motion S3M-6577, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the designation of a lead committee, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Autism (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1.

The final question is, that motion S3M-6578, also in the name of Bruce Crawford, on substitution on committees, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that— Nanette Milne be appointed to replace Jamie McGrigor as the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party substitute on the Health and Sport Committee; Alex Johnstone be appointed to replace Margaret Mitchell as the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party substitute on the Local Government and Communities Committee; Jamie McGrigor be appointed to replace Nanette Milne as the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party substitute on the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-6577, on the designation of a lead committee for the Autism (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Autism (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time. The next item of business is consideration of a further Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-6578, on substitution on committees.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that— Nanette Milne be appointed to replace Jamie McGrigor as the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party substitute on the Health and Sport Committee; Alex Johnstone be appointed to replace Margaret Mitchell as the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party substitute on the Local Government and Communities Committee; Jamie McGrigor be appointed to replace Nanette Milne as the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party substitute on the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on that motion will also be put at decision time, to which we will come at 5 o'clock. I suspend business until then.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-6161, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution in respect of the Children's Hearings (Scotland) Bill. I invite Adam Ingram to move the motion.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Children's Hearings (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any expenditure of a kind referred to in paragraph 3(b)(iii) of Rule 9.12 of the Parliament's Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.—[ Adam Ingram .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-6575, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 23 June 2010 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: UK Emergency Budget - End Year Flexibility followed by Stage 1 Debate: Housing (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution: Housing (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 24 June 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Liberal Democrats' Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: The Independent Review of Sheriff and Jury Procedures followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 30 June 2010 9.15 am Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill 2.30 pm Continuation of Stage 3 Proceedings: Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 1 July 2010  9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Crofting (Scotland) Bill 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and Law Officers 2.55 pm Finance Committee Debate: Budget Strategy Phase Report followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-6576, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 1 of the Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 3 December 2010.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

There are six questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-6511.1, in the name of Murdo Fraser, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6511, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 54, Against 49, Abstentions 13.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-6511, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 98, Against 0, Abstentions 18.  Motion, as amended agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Alcohol etc. (Scotland) Bill but, in so doing, believes that there is no evidence to support section 1, which would introduce a minimum price per unit of alcohol, and  accordingly calls on the Scottish Government to lodge and move an amendment at stage 2 to delete section 1.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5691, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution on the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Alcohol etc. (Scotland) Bill, agrees to (a) any expenditure of a kind referred to in Rule 9.12.3(b)(ii) of the Parliament's Standing Orders and (b) any charges or payments in relation to which Rule 9.12.4 of the Standing Orders applies, arising in consequence of the Act.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-6531.2, in the name of Johann Lamont, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6531, in the name of Alex Neil, on violence against men, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 85, Against 27, Abstentions 3.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-6531.1, in the name of John Lamont, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6531, in the name of Alex Neil, on violence against men, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 28, Against 42, Abstentions 46.  Amendment disagreed to.

The final question is, that motion S3M-6531, in the name of Alex Neil, on violence against men, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 85, Against 17, Abstentions 14.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament recognises that domestic abuse is a very serious and totally unacceptable problem in Scottish  society; notes in particular that all victims, whether they be women, men or children, deserve appropriate support; therefore welcomes the Scottish Government's provision of funding for a support helpline for male victims, which will provide the further information about their needs that is required before any future decisions about services are made, and reaffirms that domestic abuse is rooted in gender inequality, that overwhelmingly victims are women and that eradicating domestic abuse will only succeed where that pattern is acknowledged.

You must draw to a close, please.

I call Jeremy Purvis, but ask him to bear in mind that the question is about the west of Scotland.

He cannot really, because the question was about railway stations in the west of Scotland and I do not think that the Borders railway will have any of those.

I ask both participants to speed up a little. We are six minutes in and have got only two questions out of the way.

Order.

Order.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-5691, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution in respect of the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Alcohol etc. (Scotland) Bill, agrees to (a) any expenditure of a kind referred to in Rule 9.12.3(b)(ii) of the Parliament's Standing Orders and (b) any charges or payments in relation to which Rule 9.12.4 of the Standing Orders applies, arising in consequence of the Act.—[ Shona Robison .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

Question 6 was not lodged.

Mr Allan, I must ask you to be brief.

Please be as brief as possible, minister.

Thank you for the brevity of that answer. That concludes general questions.

I must ask you to close, minister.

I remind members that they should always speak through the chair.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-6511, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-6450, in the name of Shirley-Anne Somerville, that the William Simpson's Home (Transfer of Property etc) (Scotland) Bill be passed, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the William Simpson's Home (Transfer of Property etc.) (Scotland) Bill be passed.

The next question is, that motion S3M-6256, in the name of Trish Godman, that the Scottish Parliamentary Commissions and Commissioners etc Bill be passed, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Scottish Parliamentary Commissions and Commissioners etc. Bill be passed.

The next question is, that motion S3M-6476, in the name of Patrick Harvie, on the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee's "Report on the Inquiry into Active Travel", be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee's 4th Report, 2010 (Session 3): Report on the Inquiry into Active Travel (SP Paper 413).

I propose to put a single question on motions S3M-6524 to S3M-6528, on the designation of lead committees for members' bills. If any member objects to a single question being put, they should please say so now. As no one objects, the next question is, that motions S3M-6524 to S3M-6528, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the designation of lead committees, be agreed to.  Motions agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Justice Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Criminal Sentencing (Equity Fines) (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1. That the Parliament agrees that the Justice Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Domestic Abuse (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1. That the Parliament agrees that the Local Government and Communities Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Property Factors (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1. That the Parliament agrees that the Economy, Energy  and Tourism Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Protection of Workers (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1. That the Parliament agrees that the Justice Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Commissioner for Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1.

The next item of business is consideration of five Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motions S3M-6524 to S3M-6528, on the designation of lead committees for members' bills, en bloc.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Justice Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Criminal Sentencing (Equity Fines) (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1. That the Parliament agrees that the Justice Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Domestic Abuse (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1. That the Parliament agrees that the Local Government and Communities Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Property Factors (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1. That the Parliament agrees that the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Protection of Workers (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1. That the Parliament agrees that the Justice Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Commissioner for Victims and Witnesses (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The question on those motions will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-6523, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 16 June 2010 2.15 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by SPCB Question Time 2.35 pm Stage 1 Debate: Children's Hearings (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 17 June 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time; Europe, External Affairs and Culture Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Ministerial Statement: Supporting Young People in the Context of the Economic Climate 3.25 pm Scottish Government Debate: Poverty Framework 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 23 June 2010 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 24 June 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed b y Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

Mr Hepburn, I would be grateful if you would turn off whatever it is that is switched on.

I have just been informed of the withdrawal of a speaker, so I do not have to be quite so draconian on time, as Mr Whitton will be pleased to know.

From now on, speeches should be no more than four minutes.

The next item of business is stage 3 proceedings on the Scottish Parliamentary Commissions and Commissioners etc Bill. In dealing with amendments, members should have the bill as amended at stage 2, which is SP bill 39A, the marshalled list, which is SP bill 39A-ML, and the groupings, which I, as Presiding Officer, have agreed.

We go straight to group 1. Amendment 1, in the name of Trish Godman, is the only amendment in the group.

We come to group 2. Amendment 2, in the name of Trish Godman, is the only amendment in the group.

That concludes consideration of stage 3 amendments.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-6256, in the name of Trish Godman, on the Scottish Parliamentary Commissions and Commissioners etc Bill. We do not have a lot of time to spare in the debate.

I call on Nanette Milne to wind up on behalf of the committee.

Our next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-6517, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 3 consideration of the Scottish Parliamentary Commissions and Commissioners etc Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that, during Stage 3 of the Scottish Parliamentary Commissions and Commissioners etc. Bill, debate on groups of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limit indicated, that time limit being calculated from when the Stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the Stage being called) or otherwise not in progress: Groups 1 and 2: 10 minutes.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-6450, in the name of Shirley-Anne Somerville, on the William Simpson's Home (Transfer of Property etc) (Scotland) Bill.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader is Bob Holman, who is one of the founders of Family Action in Rogerfield and Easterhouse.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motions S3M-6481 and S3M-6482, on approval of Scottish statutory instruments on advice and assistance on civil legal aid and on the Arbitration (Scotland) Act 2010.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Advice and Assistance and Civil Legal Aid (Transfer of Tribunal Functions) (No. 2) (Scotland) Regulations 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Arbitration (Scotland) Act 2010 (Consequential Amendments) Order 2010 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The questions on those motions will be put at decision time. The next item of business is consideration of a further Parliamentary Bureau motion, S3M-6483, on substitution on committees.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that— Bill Wilson be appointed to replace Shirley-Anne Somerville as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Equal Opportunities Committee; Jamie Hepburn be appointed to replace Bill Wilson as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Public Petitions Committee.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

There are 10 questions to be put as a result of today's business. I remind members that, in relation to the debate on student fees, if the amendment in the name of Claire Baker is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Margaret Smith will fall. The first question is, that amendment S3M-6469.1.2, in the name of Murdo Fraser, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-6469.1, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the national health service, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

I say for the record that Mr Neil has pointed out that his console was not working during that division. I can tell him that it will not affect the outcome of the vote. The result of the division is: For 77, Against 48, Abstentions 1.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-6469.1.1, in the name of Ross Finnie, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-6469.1, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the NHS, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-6469.1, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, as amended, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6469, in the name of Jackie Baillie, on the NHS, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 80, Against 47, Abstentions 0.  Amendment, as amended, agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-6469, in the name of Jackie Baillie, on the NHS, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 79, Against 48, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the real-terms increase for the NHS budget in 2010-11 despite the previous UK administration cutting the Scottish Government budget by £500 million; notes the commitment by the new UK coalition government to real-terms increases in the NHS budget in future years and agrees that all resultant Barnett consequentials should be applied to the NHS in Scotland; understands that, notwithstanding the above, NHS budgets are tight as a result of Labour's economic mismanagement and that all NHS boards require to deliver services more efficiently, but welcomes the commitment that quality of patient care will be the paramount consideration, that there will be no compulsory redundancies in the NHS and that there will be more staff in the NHS at the end of this parliamentary term than there were when Labour left office in 2007; also welcomes the commitment from the UK coalition government to reverse Labour's increase in national insurance, which would have cut £40 million from the budget of the NHS in Scotland, and calls on the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing to publish immediately NHS boards' workforce projections and to carry out robust scrutiny, including risk assessment, of the impact on the safety and quality of patient care and the provision of frontline NHS services.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-6472.1, in the name of Claire Baker, which seeks to amend motion S3M-  6472, in the name of Michael Russell, on student fees, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 63, Against 64, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-6472.2, in the name of Margaret Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6472, in the name of Michael Russell, on student fees, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 65, Against 17, Abstentions 45.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-6472, in the name of Michael Russell, on student fees, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 65, Against 16, Abstentions 46.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the ongoing review of higher education and student finance in England and Wales; recognises that the Scottish Government will need to consider any outcomes of this review and the potential impact on Scottish universities; commends the National Union of Students' student fee pledge, and welcomes that, thanks to the actions of the previous and current administrations in Scotland, full-time Scottish higher education students studying in Scotland do not pay tuition fees or top-up fees.

The next question is, that motion S3M-6481, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Advice and Assistance and Civil Legal Aid (Transfer of Tribunal Functions) (No. 2) (Scotland) Regulations 2010 be approved.

The next question is, that motion S3M-6482, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of an SSI, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Arbitration (Scotland) Act 2010 (Consequential Amendments) Order 2010 be approved.

The final question is, that motion S3M-6483, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on substitution on committees, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that— Bill Wilson be appointed to replace Shirley-Anne Somerville as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Equal Opportunities Committee; Jamie Hepburn be appointed to replace Bill Wilson as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Public Petitions Committee.

Order.

Thank you for that clarification.

That is not a point of order.

That is not a point of order for me. The minister has corrected a position that had previously gone uncorrected, and I consider the matter closed.

I hope that it is one.

That is just a debating point.

I repeat, I now consider this matter closed.

Order.

Order. There is too much noise around the chamber.

I have been in the Scottish Parliament, Ms Smith. I ask you to speak through the chair.

I am sorry, but we cannot have a sedentary debate. Either we have a debate or we do not.

No. The member is in the final seconds of his speech.

We come to closing speeches. Mr O'Donnell, you may have a little more than six minutes.

Order. There have been enough individual interventions from sedentary positions for the time being.

Order, Mr Purvis.

A number of members have requested to ask questions on recent events in the middle east. I do not have time to call all of them, but I call Pauline McNeill.

Question 4 has not been lodged.

That concludes general questions. Before we come to the next item of business, all members, I know, will wish to join me in welcoming to the gallery the recently appointed Belgium ambassador to the United Kingdom, His Excellency Johan Verbeke. [ Applause .]

Please respond briefly, Mr Finnie, and you must close thereafter.

Order.

Order. Would members mind not debating among themselves across the chamber, please? The person who should be speaking is the person who is on their feet.

Order.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-6469, in the name of Jackie Baillie, on the national health service.

There is just one question to be put as a result of today's business. The question is, that motion S3M-6436, in the name of Iain Smith, on the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee's report on banking and financial services in Scotland, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee's 3rd Report 2010 (Session 3): Report on the way forward for Scotland's banking, building society and financial services sector (SP Paper 405).

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-6462, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 9 June 2010 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Final Stage Debate: William Simpson's Home (Transfer of Property etc.) (Scotland) Bill followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Scottish Parliamentary Commissions and Commissioners etc. Bill followed by Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee Debate: Report on the Inquiry into Active Travel followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 10 June 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions  followed by Stage 1 Debate: Alcohol etc. (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution: Alcohol etc. (Scotland) Bill 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Violence Against Men followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 16 June 2010 2.15 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by SPCB Question Time 2.35 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 17 June 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Europe, External Affairs and Culture; Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-6461, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a revision to the business programme for tomorrow, Thursday 3 June.

Good afternoon. The first item this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is General Sir Richard Dannatt, who was the guest speaker at this morning's national prayer breakfast.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-6436, in the name of Iain Smith, on the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee's report on banking and financial services in Scotland. We have a few minutes to spare this afternoon, but members should stick broadly to the times that they have been given.

There are 11 questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-6409.1, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6409, in the name of Annabel Goldie, on relationships between Her Majesty's Government and the Scottish Parliament and Government, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 81, Against 45, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-6409.3, in the name of Pauline McNeill, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6409, in the name of Annabel Goldie, on relationships between HM Government and the Scottish Parliament and Government, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 44, Against 80, Abstentions 2.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-6409.2, in the name of Mike Rumbles, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6409, in the name of Annabel Goldie, on relationships between HM Government and the Scottish Parliament and Government, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 32, Against 94, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-6409, in the name of Annabel Goldie, on relationships between HM Government and the Scottish Parliament and Government, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 79, Against 45, Abstentions 2.  Motion, as amended agreed to,  That the Parliament welcomes the commitment of HM Government to establish a positive and constructive working relationship with the Scottish Government and Parliament to tackle the problems facing the country and, in particular, welcomes the commitment in the Queen's Speech to introduce legislation to implement recommendations from the final report of the Commission on Scottish Devolution and the willingness to consider matters in relation to the Fossil Fuel Levy and fiscal responsibility issues.

The next question is, that motion S3M-6416, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of the Climate Change (Annual Targets) (Scotland) Order 2010, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 62, Against 64, Abstentions 0.  Motion disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-6393.3, in the name of Jackie Baillie, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6393, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on progress towards 18-week referral to treatment, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 109, Against 16, Abstentions 1.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-6393.1, in the name of Murdo Fraser, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6393, as amended, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-6393.2, in the name of Ross Finnie, which also seeks to amend motion S3M-6393, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 34, Against 91, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-6393, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on progress towards 18-week referral to treatment, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 109, Against 0, Abstentions 17.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament welcomes the progress that has been made in reducing waiting times for patients; applauds the commitment, dedication and hard work of all NHS staff who have contributed to delivering significant improvements for the people of Scotland, and acknowledges that NHSScotland is on track to deliver the Scottish Government's challenging whole-journey waiting time target of 18 weeks by the end 2011; welcomes the progress made by the previous Labour/Liberal Democrat administration in setting a new approach in Fair to All Personal to Each whereby waiting is considered in terms of the overall patient journey and further welcomes the commitment to treat inpatients within 18 weeks being achieved a year ahead of schedule, paving the way for Labour and SNP 2007 manifesto commitments of an 18-week referral to treatment target and notes that this compares with a waiting time target of 18 months set by the last Conservative administration, and urges the Scottish Government to ensure that such progress is not compromised by either reductions in its budget or by efficiency savings within NHS boards.

The next question is, that motion S3M-6417, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of the Climate Change (International Aviation and Shipping) (Scotland) Order 2010, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 123, Against 2, Abstentions 1.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Climate Change (International Aviation and Shipping) (Scotland) Order 2010 be approved.

I propose to put a single question on motions S3M-6418 to S3M-6421. As no member objects, the question is, that motions S3M-6418 to S3M-6421, on approval of Scottish statutory instruments, be agreed to.  Motions agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Climate Change (Limit on Carbon Units) (Scotland) Order 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Carbon Accounting Scheme (Scotland) Regulations 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 (Exclusions and Exceptions) (Scotland) Amendment Order 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Protection of Vulnerable Groups (Scotland) Act 2007 (Removal of Barred Individuals from Regulated Work) Regulations 2010 be approved.

I think that Parliament is grateful for that information.

The question on the motion will be put at decision time. The next item of business is consideration of a further four Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motions S3M-6418, S3M-6419, S3M-6420 and S3M-6421, which are on the approval of SSIs on climate change, on the carbon accounting scheme, on the rehabilitation of offenders and on the protection of vulnerable groups.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Climate Change (Limit on Carbon Units) (Scotland) Order 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Carbon Accounting Scheme (Scotland) Regulations 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 (Exclusions and Exceptions) (Scotland) Amendment Order 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Protection of Vulnerable Groups (Scotland) Act 2007 (Removal of Barred  Individuals from Regulated Work) Regulations 2010 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The questions on the motions will be put at decision time, to which we now come.

Can we have one question at a time, please? We leave a question behind when we move to the next one.

Question 6 was not lodged.

We will move on to the next item. We are very tight for time for the rest of the afternoon's business.

Order, Mr McNeil.

The question was about Skills Development Scotland. Iain Gray has another question.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Before we come to the next item of business, I know that all members in the chamber will wish to join me in welcoming to the gallery the New Zealand high commissioner, His Excellency Derek Leask. [ Applause .]

Order.

I remind members that they should always speak through the chair and not directly to each other.

I call Mike Rumbles to speak to and move amendment S3M-6409.2.

Good morning. The first item of business this morning is a debate on motion S3M-6409, in the name of Annabel Goldie, on relationships between Her Majesty's Government and the Scottish Parliament and Government. I advise members that we are pretty tight for time and ask them to stick to the guidance that is given.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-6364, in the name of Karen Whitefield, on the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee's "Report on supporting children's learning code of practice", be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee's 3rd Report, 2010 (Session 3): Report on supporting children's learning code of practice (SP Paper 436), together with the Official Report of the Parliament's debate on the report, should form the Parliament's response to the Scottish Government on its revised code of practice, supporting children's learning .

The second question is, that—

At the end of decision time, please.

At the end of decision time, please, Lord Foulkes. When a question has been put, you cannot make a point of order. I am putting a question to the Parliament. The next question is, that motion S3M-6391, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, on the Forth Crossing Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 113, Against 3, Abstentions 2.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Forth Crossing Bill and that the Bill should proceed as a Hybrid Bill.

The next question is, that motion S3M-6067, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution to the Forth Crossing Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 115, Against 2, Abstentions 1.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Forth Crossing Bill, agrees to any expenditure of a kind referred to in Rules 9C.16.3(b)(ii) and (iii) of the Parliament's Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.

I can now take a point of order from George Foulkes.

Order. I think that that is largely the purpose of stage 2. [ Interruption .] Order. I am happy to confirm that the bill will return to the chamber to be passed—or not—at a final stage.

I hope that this is a point of order.

With all due respect, I think that I need to know what the point of order is.

That is certainly not a point of order and I think that we have covered the technicalities involved. There is a fourth question to be put as part of decision time. I propose to put a single question on motions S3M-6406, S3M-6410 and S3M-6407. As no one objects, the question is, that motions S3M-6406, S3M-6410 and S3M-6407, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on membership of and substitution on committees, be agreed to.  Motions agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that Elaine Smith be appointed to replace Margaret Curran as a member of the Subordinate Legislation Committee. That the Parliament agrees that— Alex Johnstone be appointed to replace Jackson Carlaw as a member of the Subordinate Legislation Committee; Jackson Carlaw be appointed to replace Alex Johnstone as a member of the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee. That the Parliament agrees that— Malcolm Chisholm be appointed to replace Margaret Curran as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Local Government and Communities Committee; Karen Gillon be appointed to replace Elaine Smith as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Subordinate Legislation Committee.

The next item of business is consideration of three Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motions S3M-6406, S3M-6410 and S3M-6407, on membership of committees and substitution on committees.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that Elaine Smith be appointed to replace Margaret Curran as a member of the Subordinate Legislation Committee. That the Parliament agrees that— Alex Johnstone be appointed to replace Jackson Carlaw as a member of the Subordinate Legislation Committee; Jackson Carlaw be appointed to replace Alex Johnstone as a member of the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee. That the Parliament agrees that— Malcolm Chisholm be appointed to replace Margaret Curran as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Local Government and Communities Committee; Karen Gillon be appointed to replace Elaine Smith as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Subordinate Legislation Committee.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on the motions will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-6067, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution in respect of the Forth Crossing Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Forth Crossing Bill, agrees to any expenditure of a kind referred to in Rules 9C.16.3(b)(ii) and (iii) of the Parliament's Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.—[ Stewart Stevenson .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-6401, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 2 June 2010 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee Debate: Report on the way forward for Scotland's banking, building society and financial services sector followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 3 June 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Justice and Law Officers; Rural Affairs and the Environment 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Student Fees followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 9 June 2010 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Final Stage Debate: William Simpson's Home (Transfer of Property etc.) (Scotland) Bill followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Scottish Parliamentary Commissions and Commissioners etc. Bill followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 10 June 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-6402, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 1 of the Historic Environment (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Historic Environment (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 12 November 2010.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-6403, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out an extension to the stage 1 timetable for the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Alcohol etc. (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be extended to 11 June 2010.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-6405, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a stage 2 timetable for the Legal Services (Scotland) Bill. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-6405.

I stand corrected. My script differs from yours, minister, but you are correct. It is motion S3M-6404.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Legal Services (Scotland) Bill at Stage 2 be completed by 1 July 2010.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-6405, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on consideration of the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Bill at Stage 2 be completed by 18 June 2010.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-6391, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, on the Forth Crossing Bill. I warn members that we have no time to spare in this debate, so draconian measures will have to be taken if members overrun the guideline timings that they have been given.

I invite Kenneth Gibson to wind up the debate on behalf of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee.

I must ask you to finish.

I am afraid that we must move on.  Motion S3M-6364 moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee's 3rd Report, 2010 (Session 3): Report on supporting children's learning code of practice (SP Paper 436), together with the Official Report of the Parliament's debate on the report, should form the Parliament's response to the Scottish Government on its revised code of practice, supporting children's learning .

The question is, that motion S3M-6400, in the name of Bruce Crawford, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is the debate on motion S3M-6364, in the name of Karen Whitefield, on the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee's "Report on supporting children's learning code of practice". We are extremely tight for time this afternoon. I warn members that the Presiding Officers will switch off a member's microphone if he or she speaks for longer than they have been advised. I call Karen Whitefield to speak to and move the motion on behalf of the committee. Four minutes, please.

George Foulkes has indicated that he wishes to speak against the motion.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader is the Rev James Whyte from Fairlie parish church in Ayrshire.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-6400, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme for the day. I invite Bruce Crawford to move the motion.

There are 10 questions to be put as a result of today's business. I remind members that in relation to the debate on a high-speed rail link, if the amendment in the name of Charlie Gordon is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Alex Johnstone will fall. The first question is, that amendment S3M-6350.2, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6350, in the name of Hugh Henry, on protection for workers, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-6350.1, in the name of John Lamont, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6350, in the name of Hugh Henry, on protection for workers, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 16, Against 59, Abstentions 40.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-6350.3, in the name of Robert Brown, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6350, in the name of Hugh Henry, on protection for workers, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 73, Against 0, Abstentions 42.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-6350, in the name of Hugh Henry, on protection for workers, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament believes that further measures need to be taken to deter violence against shop workers and other workers delivering a service to the public; notes with concern the finding of the Scottish Crime and Justice Survey 2008-09 that, of those adults who had jobs involving contact with the general public, 35% had experienced either verbal abuse or physical abuse; recognises that there has been a 78% increase in violence and abuse against Scottish shop workers over the last three years, according to Retailers Against Crime; welcomes the Freedom from Fear campaign organised by the Union of Shop, Distributive and Allied Workers (USDAW), which seeks to make shops and shopping areas safer for staff and customers; acknowledges the efforts of the trade union movement as a whole to highlight the continuing problems of violence for those workers with direct contact with the public; recognises that there have been year-on-year increases in prosecutions under the Emergency Workers (Scotland) Act 2005; believes that the Parliament and the Scottish Government should take further action to ensure that workers can carry out their duties without facing violence or intimidation by accepting that a comprehensive approach to changing Scotland's relationship with alcohol is required, which includes effective enforcement of existing laws and innovative, evidence-based policies; recognises that attacks on public sector workers are treated with gravity under existing law, and believes that effective prosecution through the courts of such offences and the further development of non-legislative measures, including evidence sharing and partnership working, are an appropriate response to violence against workers delivering a public service.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-6349.1, in the name of  Charlie Gordon, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6349, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, on a high-speed rail link, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 99, Against 16, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

Amendment S3M-6349.2, in the name of Alex Johnstone, is therefore pre-empted. The next question is, that amendment S3M-6349.3, in the name of Robert Brown, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6349, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, on a high-speed rail link, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 28, Against 87, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-6349, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, on a high-speed rail link, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament welcomes the work of High Speed Two, Greengauge21, the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee and Network Rail, among others, which have developed the case for high-speed rail in the United Kingdom during the last year; notes the strong economic and environmental case for extending high-speed rail to Scotland; notes the opportunity to engage with the new Westminster administration to secure Scotland's place in a UK high-speed rail network, and supports work to bring high-speed rail to Scotland at the earliest opportunity, as well as supporting interim steps to reduce rail journey times between Scotland and London.

The next question is, that motion S3M-6359, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on committee membership, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that— Alasdair Allan be appointed to replace Aileen Campbell on the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee; Stuart McMillan be appointed to replace Willie Coffey on the Equal Opportunities Committee; Dave Thompson be appointed to replace Angela Constance on the Justice Committee; Alasdair Morgan be appointed to replace Alasdair Allan on the Local Government and Communities Committee; Aileen Campbell be appointed to replace Alasdair Morgan on the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee; Angela Constance be appointed to replace Dave Thompson on the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee.

The final question is, that motion S3M-6360, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on substitution on committees, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that Maureen Watt be appointed to replace Aileen Campbell as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Justice Committee.

I believe that I have a point of order from Patrick Harvie.

As always, I am grateful for prior notice of the point of order. I can certainly confirm that the bureau is due to consider this matter at its meeting on Tuesday.

As I said—

It will be up to the bureau to decide on that. As I said in my response, the bureau will consider the matter on Tuesday.

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-6359, on committee membership, and motion S3M-6360, on substitution on committees.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that— Alasdair Allan be appointed to replace Aileen Campbell on the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee; Stuart McMillan be appointed to replace Willie Coffey on the Equal Opportunities Committee; Dave Thompson be appointed to replace Angela Constance on the Justice Committee; Alasdair Morgan be appointed to replace Alasdair Allan on the Local Government and Communities Committee; Aileen Campbell be appointed to replace Alasdair Morgan on the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee; Angela Constance be appointed to replace Dave Thompson on the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Maureen Watt be appointed to replace Aileen Campbell as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Justice Committee.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The questions on the motions will be put at decision time.

Order. There is too much noise.

You must close, please.

Order.

Order.

Order. When I ask for order in the chamber, I do not expect that to be an invitation to anyone to continue as they have been doing. Also, just as the questions in the chamber must refer to matters that lie within the First Minister's responsibility, the bulk of the answers should do so as well. [ Applause .] Order!

Order.

Order.

Without wishing to draw undue attention to the school that the next questioner attended, I advise that question 3 is from Jamie McGrigor.

Yes, I too attended that school.

A question, please.

Question 7 was not lodged.

That concludes the debate on the protection of workers. Although we are a few seconds early, we can move straight to the next item of business as everybody is in place.

We come to the open debate. Members will have picked up the fact that they are welcome to speak for longer than the time that they have been given. That remains the case.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-6350, in the name of Hugh Henry, on protection for workers. We have a bit of time available, so members should feel free to take interventions if they wish to do so.

There are two questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-6318, in the name of Duncan McNeil, on the Local Government and Communities Committee's report on local government finance, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Local Government and Communities Committee's 2nd report 2010 (Session 3): Report on Local Government Finance Inquiry (SP Paper 377).

I propose to ask a single question on motions S3M-6341 to S3M-6344. If any member objects to my so doing, they should say so now. As there are no objections, the question is, that motions S3M-6341 to S3M-6344, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments, be agreed to.  Motions agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Protection of Vulnerable Groups (Scotland) Act 2007 (Automatic Listing) (Specified Criteria) Order 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Protection of Vulnerable Groups (Scotland) Act 2007 (Relevant Offences) (Modification) Order 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Protection of Vulnerable Groups (Scotland) Act 2007 (Modification of Regulated Work with Children) Order 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Protection of Vulnerable Groups (Scotland) Act 2007 (Modification of Regulated Work with Adults) Order 2010 be approved.

The next item of business is consideration of four Parliamentary Bureau motions.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Protection of Vulnerable Groups (Scotland) Act 2007 (Automatic Listing) (Specified Criteria) Order 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Protection of Vulnerable Groups (Scotland) Act 2007 (Relevant Offences) (Modification) Order 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Protection of Vulnerable Groups (Scotland) Act 2007 (Modification of Regulated Work with Children) Order 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Protection of Vulnerable Groups (Scotland) Act 2007 (Modification of Regulated Work with Adults) Order 2010 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The question on the motions will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-6340, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. I invite Bruce Crawford to move the motion.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 26 May 2010 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 1 Debate: Forth Crossing Bill followed by Financial Resolution: Forth Crossing Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 27 May 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Progress Towards 18 Week Referral to Treatment followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 2 June 2010 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 3 June 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time  2.15 pm Themed Question Time Justice and Law Officers; Rural Affairs and the Environment 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-6347, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a revised business programme for this afternoon. I invite Bruce Crawford to move the motion.

We now move to the statement by Kenny MacAskill, on 1,000 additional police officers protecting our communities. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his 10-minute statement; I therefore ask that there be no interventions or interruptions.

The cabinet secretary will now take questions on issues that were raised in the statement. We have around 20 minutes, but not a second longer.

Order.

Order. I am sorry to stop you for a moment, Mr Baker. The cabinet secretary will have an opportunity in due course to answer the question. Until then, members should refrain from answering it.

Order. Pease speak through the chair, cabinet secretary. I ask all members to speak not directly to each other but through the chair.

Order.

We come to open questions, and we do not have long, so I ask for questions and answers to be brief.

Order.

Order.

The next item of business, for which we are extremely tight for time, is a debate on motion S3M-6318, in the name of Duncan McNeil, on the Local Government and Communities Committee report on local government finance. I call Duncan McNeil to speak to and move the motion on behalf of the Local Government and Communities Committee in no more than 11 minutes, please, convener.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Pastor Ken Bleakley of Larbert Baptist church.

There are seven questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-6266.1, in the name of Sarah Boyack, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6266, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 55, Against 64, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-6266, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 64, Against 0, Abstentions 55.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Bill.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5673, in the name of John Swinney, on the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Bill's financial resolution, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any increase in expenditure of a kind referred to in paragraph 3(b)(iii) of Rule 9.12 of the Parliament's Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-6295.3, in the name of Jackie Baillie, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6295, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the NHS quality strategy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 55, Against 62, Abstentions 2.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-6295.1, in the name of Mary Scanlon, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6295, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the NHS quality strategy, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The question is, that amendment S3M-6295.2, in the name of Ross Finnie, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6295, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the NHS quality strategy, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 57, Against 62, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-6295, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the NHS quality strategy, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament commends The Healthcare Quality Strategy for NHSScotland as the right approach, at the right time, to delivering the highest quality healthcare to everybody in Scotland, responding to what they want, need and deserve and, through this, to ensuring that the quality of healthcare services across NHS Scotland becomes recognised as among the best in the world, and calls on the Scottish Government to report back to the Parliament by the end of summer recess on how it intends to respond to the needs highlighted in the report, The Healthcare Quality Strategy for NHSScotland , in order to protect NHS frontline services.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Order.

We will take a supplementary question from Andy Kerr.

That concludes questions to the First Minister. I remind members that we now move to members' business and that they should depart the chamber quietly.

There should be a little bit less noise from members, please.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-6266, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Bill. We have a little time in hand, although not that much, so members should feel free to take interventions. I will let members know if we are getting tight for time.

There are eight questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-6228, in the name of Irene Oldfather, on the new European Commission's legislative work programme, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament welcomes the European Commission Work Programme, published by the European Commission on 31 March 2010; notes that it is likely to inform European Union policy for the next five years, and supports in particular the proposals for delivering a new economic strategy (Europe 2020) and allied platform to combat poverty, the commitment to further develop renewable energy and the energy grid, the recognition of the need to reform both the Common Fisheries Policy and the Common Agricultural Policy and the desire to restructure the European Union's budget.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-6275.1, in the name of Elaine Murray, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6275, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the zero waste plan, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-6275.2, in the name of John Scott, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6275, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the zero waste plan, as amended, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-6275.3, in the name of Liam McArthur, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6275, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the zero waste plan, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 49, Against 43, Abstentions 16.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-6275, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the zero waste plan, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the need for a coherent zero-waste policy approach to encourage waste prevention and efficient use of all resources; supports measures to increase recycling and deliver high-quality recycled materials, to ensure resources are recovered and treated in the most environmentally beneficial way and to minimise the disposal of resources into landfill; looks to the forthcoming Zero Waste Plan for Scotland to provide clear long-term policy stability for the necessary investment to deliver a zero-waste Scotland and to address the concerns raised in the Audit Scotland report, Protecting and improving Scotland's environment , that councils need additional waste management facilities to meet national landfill and recycling targets; considers that greater encouragement to recycle and reuse must be given to the commercial and industrial sector and that a focus must be placed on ensuring that the necessary infrastructure is created and put in place in moving toward a zero-waste society; regrets the delay in the publication of the Zero Waste Plan, and recognises the necessity of meeting EU  landfill diversion targets in order to avoid potentially punitive fines.

The next question is, that motion S3M-6258, in the name of Shirley-Anne Somerville, on the William Simpson's Home (Transfer of Property etc) (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the William Simpson's Home (Transfer of Property etc.) (Scotland) Bill and that the Bill should proceed as a Private Bill.

The next question is, that motion S3M-6292, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the designation of a lead committee, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Historic Environment (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1.

The next question is, that motion S3M-6293, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on parliamentary recess dates, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees the following parliamentary recess dates under Rule 2.3.1: 12 February - 20 February 2011 (inclusive).

We come now to closing speeches. I call Iain Smith, who will be followed by Murdo Fraser. We are still on four minutes roughly for speeches.

Thank you, Mr Hepburn. Perhaps you would be good enough to turn off your BlackBerry once Mr Matheson gives it back to you, as it is not meant to be on in the first place.

You must close, please.

We are now down to four minutes for speeches, but I have a little flexibility so, if members want to take interventions, I will add on time.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is the Reverend Michael Philip of Bainsford parish church in Falkirk.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-6228, in the name of Irene Oldfather, on the new European Commission's legislative work programme.

Order. The point has been made.

That concludes questions to the First Minister.

That is not a point of order.

Questions 7 and 8 have been withdrawn.

There are 11 questions to be put as a result of today's business. I remind members that, in relation to the debate on a living wage, if the amendment in the name of Alex Neil is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Jeremy Purvis falls; if the amendment in the name of Andy Kerr is agreed to, the amendments in the name of Derek Brownlee and of Jeremy Purvis fall; and if the amendment in the name of Derek Brownlee is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Jeremy Purvis falls. [ Interruption .] I have not finished. In relation to the debate on democratic reform, if the amendment in the name of Paul Martin is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Murdo Fraser falls. I trust that that is entirely clear. The first question is, that amendment S3M-6216.2, in the name of Alex Neil, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6216, in the name of Patrick Harvie, on a living wage, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 37, Against 45, Abstentions 13.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-6216.4, in the name of Andy Kerr, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6216, in the name of Patrick Harvie, on a living wage, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 29, Against 67, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-6216.1, in the name of Derek Brownlee, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6216, in the name of Patrick Harvie, on a living wage, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 13, Against 83, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-6216.3, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6216, in the name of Patrick Harvie, on a living wage, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 64, Against 32, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-6216, in the name of Patrick Harvie, on a living wage, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 68, Against 28, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament recognises that unacceptable levels of poverty and income inequality continue to blight Scotland; notes that the income of the richest 10% of people in Scotland is approximately the same as the total income of the poorest 50%; further notes that, among working-age adults, in-work poverty is still on the increase; believes that a more equal society would be a happier, healthier, safer and greener society and that this must become a core objective of government at all levels, and believes that, during the tight financial climate, public sector pay policy should be structured to ensure that those on lower incomes benefit more than those on higher incomes from pay changes.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-6215.2, in the name of Paul Martin, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6215, in the name of Robin Harper, on democratic reform, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 29, Against 67, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-6215.1, in the name of Murdo Fraser, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6215, in the name of Robin Harper, on democratic reform, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 13, Against 54, Abstentions 29.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-6215, in the name of Robin Harper, on democratic reform, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 54, Against 41, Abstentions 1.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament believes that the current UK general election must be the last to use the discredited first-past-the-post electoral system and that the single transferable vote is the best way to ensure that the public receive the democratic representation that they deserve in future.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-6223.2, in the name of Ken Macintosh, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6223, in the name of Adam Ingram, on changing lives: a confident, competent social care workforce, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-6223.1, in the name of Elizabeth Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6223, in the name of Adam Ingram, on changing lives: a confident, competent social care workforce, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 13, Against 38, Abstentions 45.  Amendment disagreed to.

The final question is, that motion S3M-6223, in the name of Adam Ingram, on changing lives: a confident, competent social care workforce, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament recognises the significant contribution made to the lives of the people of Scotland by all those who work in social services, often in difficult and complex circumstances; agrees the need for a confident, competent and valued social services workforce to deliver safe, effective and personalised practice; notes the work that has been done following the review of social work services, Changing Lives; notes the finding from the performance inspections of the Social Work Inspection Agency that leadership is of critical importance in the performance of social work services; welcomes the focus on leadership being jointly taken forward by the Scottish Social Services Council and the four social services learning networks; endorses the need for political, operational and professional leadership and engagement to support and develop the social services workforce; while acknowledging the important role of the social work and social care workforce in supporting and protecting people  across the whole age spectrum, notes the impact of changing demographics and, in particular, the increase in the older population on the demand for services, as indicated by the Social Work Inspection Agency report, Improving Social Work in Scotland , which estimates that by 2018 the number of people aged 85 and over will have increased by 40%, and calls on the Scottish Government to ensure that social care services are sufficiently prepared and resourced accordingly, taking into account the fact that many older people are themselves carers.

That concludes the debate on changing lives. Despite the finest efforts of the two closing speakers, I have no option but to suspend the meeting until 5 o'clock.

Thank you, Mr McNulty. That was a noble effort. I call on the minister to wind up.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Order. [ Interruption .]

Lord Foulkes, when I ask for order, I expect to have it.

Mr Rumbles.

That concludes general questions.

Very briefly, please.

I am sorry, but I have to move on. I gave you fair warning.

Jeremy Purvis does not have time for an intervention.

We come to the open debate. I have no spare time, so I ask members to keep speeches tight, please.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-6216, in the name of Patrick Harvie, on a living wage.

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motion S3M-6222, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Census (Scotland) Order 2010 to the extent that it relates to the following particulars in Schedule 2— (a) item 1; (b) in item 2, the words "and, as the case may be, where there are 5 or fewer persons in the household, the relationship of each of the previous persons mentioned in the return and where there are 6 or more persons in the household, the relationship of the sixth and subsequent persons to the two previously mentioned persons in the return"; (c) item 7; (d) in item 8, the words "and, if not born in the United Kingdom, month and year of most recent arrival to live in the United Kingdom"; (e) items 9,10,12,14,17,18,19,20; (f) in item 21, the words "on a Government sponsored training scheme;" (g) items 22,27,28,30,31,33,34; and items 1,2,3 and 4 of Schedule 3 to the Order, be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-6167, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the Interpretation and Legislative Reform (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Interpretation and Legislative Reform (Scotland) Bill be passed.

The next question is, that motion S3M-6168, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the Legal Services (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 92, Against 2, Abstentions 0.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Legal Services (Scotland) Bill.

The third question is, that motion S3M-6222, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Census (Scotland) Order 2010 to the extent that it relates to the following particulars in Schedule 2— (a) item 1; (b) in item 2, the words "and, as the case may be, where there are 5 or fewer persons in the household, the relationship of each of the previous persons mentioned in the return and where there are 6 or more persons in the household, the relationship of the sixth and subsequent persons to the two previously mentioned persons in the return"; (c) item 7; (d) in item 8, the words "and, if not born in the United Kingdom, month and year of most recent arrival to live in the United Kingdom"; (e) items 9,10,12,14,17,18,19,20; (f) in item 21, the words "on a Government sponsored training scheme;" (g) items 22,27,28,30,31,33,34; and items 1,2,3 and 4 of Schedule 3 to the Order, be approved.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-6218, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees— (a) the following programme of business— Wednesday 5 May 2010 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Members' Business 2.50 pm General Question Time 3.10 pm First Minister's Question Time 3.40 pm Themed Question Time Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and Law Officers followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 4.20 pm Decision Time Wednesday 12 May 2010 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 13 May 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business (b) that the period for lodging First Minister's Questions for First Minister's Question Time on 5 May 2010 ends at 4.00 pm on Thursday 29 April 2010 and (c) that the period for lodging First Minister's Questions for First Minister's Question Time on 3 June 2010 ends at 4.00 pm on Thursday 27 May 2010.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-6219, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a stage 1 timetable for the Patient Rights (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Patient Rights (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 19 November 2010.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-6221, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a stage 2 timetable for the Scottish Parliamentary Commissions and Commissioners etc Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Scottish Parliamentary Commissions and Commissioners etc Bill at Stage 2 be completed by 7 May 2010.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

I should have pointed out that, because the Parliament did not divide during consideration of amendments, we have a few minutes in hand, so I do not need to be too strict about the length of speeches. I call Paul Martin to speak on behalf of the Scottish Labour Party.

I call Helen Eadie to wind up very briefly and either press or withdraw amendment 25.

We come to group 5. Amendment 6, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendment 7.

We come to group 6. Amendment 9, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendments 10 to 15.

We come to the final group. Amendment 16, in the name of the minister, is the only amendment in the group.

That ends consideration of amendments.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-6167, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the Interpretation and Legislative Reform (Scotland) Bill. I invite Bruce Crawford to speak to and move the motion, in around six minutes please, minister.

I am afraid that I must hurry you, minister.

Mrs Eadie, I can give you one minute to wind up and indicate whether you are pressing or withdrawing amendment 22.

We come to group 4. Amendment 25, in the name of Helen Eadie, is the only amendment in the group.

In dealing with the next item of business, members should have the bill as amended at stage 2, which is SP bill 27A; the marshalled list, which is SP bill 27A-ML; and the groupings, which I, as Presiding Officer, have agreed. The division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for five minutes for the first division of the afternoon. The period of voting for that division will be 30 seconds. Thereafter, I will allow a voting period of one minute for the first division after any debate. All other divisions will be 30 seconds.

We come to group 1. Amendment 1, in the name of the minister, is the only amendment in the group.

We come to group 2. Amendment 2, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendments 3 to 5 and 8.

We move to group 3. I call amendment 22, in the name of Helen Eadie. I was going to call Helen Eadie to move  amendment 22—[ Interruption .] Ms Eadie, you are late for this group of amendments, which is not helpful. You are due to speak. I repeat: I call Helen Eadie to move amendment 22 and to speak to the other amendment in the group.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-6213, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a timetable for the stage 3 consideration of the Interpretation and Legislative Reform (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that, during Stage 3 of the Interpretation and Legislative Reform (Scotland) Bill, debate on groups of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limits indicated, each time limit being calculated from when the Stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the Stage being called) or otherwise not in progress: Groups 1 to 3: 25 minutes Groups 4 to 7: 45 minutes.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

Good afternoon. The first item of business, as always, is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Mrs Barbara Urquhart DCS, who is president of the diaconate council of the Church of Scotland and chair of the Scottish Churches Disability Agenda Group.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today's business. In relation to the debate on the economy, if the amendment in the name of Jim Mather is agreed to, the amendments in the name of Derek Brownlee and Jeremy Purvis fall. If the amendment in the name of Derek Brownlee is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Jeremy Purvis falls. The first question is, that amendment S3M-6174.3, in the name of Jim Mather, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6174, in the name of Andy Kerr, on the economy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 44, Against 64, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The question is, that amendment S3M-6174.2, in the name of Derek Brownlee, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6174, in the name of Andy Kerr, on the economy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 15, Against 49, Abstentions 45.  Amendment disagreed to.

The question is, that amendment S3M-6174.1, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6174, in the name of Andy Kerr, on the economy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 14, Against 93, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The question is, that motion S3M-6174, in the name of Andy Kerr, on the economy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 34, Against 61, Abstentions 14.  Motion disagreed to.

The question is, that motion S3M-6147, in the name of Christine Grahame, on the Control of Dogs (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Control of Dogs (Scotland) Bill be passed.

The cabinet secretary will now take questions on issues raised in his statement. We have until exactly 5 o'clock.

We come to open questions, and we have until exactly 5 o'clock to complete them. A large number of members wish to ask questions, so each member should be brief and ask only one question.

I apologise to the two members whom I was unable to call.

The next item of business is a statement by John Swinney on the volcanic ash cloud. The cabinet secretary will of course take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions during it.

That concludes the stage 3 debate on the Control of Dogs (Scotland) Bill. As it is not yet time to move to the next item of business, I suspend the meeting until 15 minutes past 4.

Order.

Order.

I considered it at the time, Mr Foulkes, and I consider that there is nothing unparliamentary in what the cabinet secretary said. What he chooses to say is a matter for him.

Question 5 was not lodged.

Question, please.

Come to your question please, Mr Smith.

Question 8 was not lodged.

That concludes general questions. Before moving on to First Minister's question time, I advise members that I noticed during this morning's debate and during general questions that there is a growing tendency for members to address each other directly. I suggest that, as we move into electoral times, we address each other through the chair.

You have about half a minute left, Mr Whitton.

Order. Can we cut out the constant sedentary commentary that is going on? Mr Kerr was listened to in reasonable silence, and the minister should be accorded the same courtesy.

Good morning. The first item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-6172, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a timetable for the stage 3 consideration of the Control of Dogs (Scotland) Bill. Any member who wishes to speak against the motion should press their request-to-speak button now.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that, during Stage 3 of the Control of Dogs (Scotland) Bill, debate on groups of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limit indicated, that time limit being calculated from when the Stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the Stage being called) or otherwise not in progress: Groups 1 to 3: 20 minutes.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

Mr Kerr has pressed his request-to-speak button, but I assume that he has done so for the next debate rather than to object to the business motion.

As no member has asked to speak against the motion—I assume that Mr Purvis has done the same as Mr Kerr—I will put the question. The question is, that motion S3M-6172, in the name of Bruce Crawford, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a Labour Party debate on motion S3M-6174, in the name of Andy Kerr, on the economy. We do not have a lot of time available, so members should keep to their times. Mr Kerr, you have 13 minutes.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today's business. In relation to the debate on transmission charging, I remind members that, if the amendment in the name of Lewis Macdonald is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Gavin Brown will fall. The first question is, that amendment S3M-6169.2, in the name of Lewis Macdonald, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6169, in the name of Jim Mather, on transmission charging, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 35, Against 71, Abstentions 2.  Amendment disagreed to.

The question is, that amendment S3M-6169.1, in the name of Gavin Brown, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6169, in the name of Jim Mather, on transmission charging, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 52, Against 54, Abstentions 2.  Amendment disagreed to.

The question is, that amendment S3M-6169.3, in the name of Liam McArthur, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6169, in the name of Jim Mather, on transmission charging, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 71, Against 0, Abstentions 38.  Amendment agreed to.

The question is, that motion S3M-6169, in the name of Jim Mather, on transmission charging, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 57, Against 0, Abstentions 52.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament opposes the existing locational approach to charging electricity generators for access and use of the GB grid system applied by National Grid and Ofgem that results in areas with the greatest renewables potential facing the highest charges in the United Kingdom; agrees that locational charging is a barrier to delivering  renewable energy generation from Scotland, impacts on investment decisions and the growth of the Scottish energy sector and undermines delivery of a balanced, diverse and sustainable energy mix that helps to meet the challenge of climate change through moving to a low-carbon energy generation mix; supports the Scottish Government in continuing to work with industry, utilities, academia and environmentalist and business organisations to address the issue of high transmission charges; welcomes the work now in hand to develop and deliver options for change to the transmission charging regime that will help deliver Scotland's energy potential and ensure security of energy supply; recognises also that the current system of charging threatens efforts to develop and deploy large-scale carbon capture and storage technology; believes that it now is essential that an urgent review of the locational charging regime be carried out, and urges the Scottish Government to work with any incoming UK administration to help ensure that such a review gets underway before the end of 2010.

A revised version of section A of today's Business Bulletin is now available at the back of the chamber. The revised version includes a business motion to revise business for tomorrow afternoon. We move to consideration of business motion S3M-6178, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme for Thursday 22 April.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-6171, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees— (a) the following programme of business— Wednesday 28 April 2010 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Interpretation and  Legislative Reform (Scotland) Bill followed by Stage 1 Debate: Legal Services (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 29 April 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Green Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Changing Lives: A Confident, Competent Social Care Workforce followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 5 May 2010 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Members' Business 2.50 pm General Question Time 3.10 pm First Minister's Question Time 3.40 pm Themed Question Time Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and Law Officers followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 4.20 pm Decision Time and (b) that Rule 5.6.1(c) of Standing Orders be suspended for the purpose of Members' Business on Wednesday 5 May 2010.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

Order. There is too much background noise.

You did move the amendment at the start, but I very much welcome the fact that you have taken up extra time.

I point out to members that we have a bit of time available in the debate, so I will not be too stringent about length of speeches.

The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Father Chris Boles, director of the Lauriston Jesuit Centre here in Edinburgh.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-6169, in the name of Jim Mather, on transmission charging.

There are nine questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-6140.1, in the name of John Swinney, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6140, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, on supporting business, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 44, Against 68, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The question is, that amendment S3M-6140.2, in the name of Derek Brownlee, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6140, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, on supporting business, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 16, Against 96, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The question is, that motion S3M-6140, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, on supporting business, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 50, Against 62, Abstentions 1.  Motion disagreed to.

The question is, that amendment S3M-6142.2, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6142, in the name of Liam McArthur, on fuel prices, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 60, Against 38, Abstentions 15.  Amendment agreed to.

The question is, that amendment S3M-6142.1, in the name of Alex Johnstone, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6142, in the name of Liam McArthur, on fuel prices, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 16, Against 96, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The question is, that motion S3M-6142, in the name of Liam McArthur, on fuel prices, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 73, Against 38, Abstentions 1.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the AA report of 8 April 2010 that indicates that the average price of petrol in the United Kingdom has reached an all-time high and is likely to rise still further; recognises the high premium over the national average paid for fuel at filling stations in remote rural and, particularly, island communities; regrets the damaging financial and social impact that this has on individuals and businesses in these areas; further regrets the lack of progress that has been made on efforts to find a mechanism to reduce the price of fuel in specified remote rural and island areas of Scotland, and calls on the Scottish Government to hold urgent discussions with the UK Government and the European Commission to construct a mechanism, including consideration of a fair fuel regulator, under the EU energy products directive or otherwise, to reduce the fuel price differential between remote rural and island communities and urban areas of the UK.

The question is, that amendment S3M-6143.2, in the name of Pauline McNeill, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6143, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on an action plan for Gaelic, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The question is, that amendment S3M-6143.1, in the name of Ted Brocklebank, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6143, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on an action plan for Gaelic, as amended, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The final question is, that motion S3M-6143, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, as amended, on an action plan for Gaelic, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament recognises that Gaelic is more than a language and, as such, it strengthens and enriches many aspects of Scotland's social, cultural and economic life; also recognises that the current condition of Gaelic needs urgent attention; welcomes the programme of action provided by Bòrd na Gàidhlig, which is designed to achieve the outcome of increasing the number of Gaelic speakers and bring renewed attention to the important place that Gaelic holds in Scotland; calls on the Scottish Government  to keep the funding for Bòrd na Gàidhlig under review in light of the Gaelic language targets, and recommends that the Parliament and Bòrd na Gàidhlig pay close attention to the New Zealand Government's successful initiatives to increase the numbers of Maori language speakers.

That concludes decision time. I was overtaken by the amount of consensus at the end.

Under rule 13.2.2 of standing orders, I have agreed that the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth may make a statement on the volcanic cloud. The statement will take five minutes; 15 minutes will be available for questions.

As the cabinet secretary indicated, he will now take questions. We will get through as many as possible in the time available.

We come to open questions. At least five members want to ask a question and we have five minutes in which to accommodate them.

I am afraid that I must close the session. I apologise to the three members whom I was unable to call.

I am sorry, but I must interrupt you, Dr Simpson. You were kind enough to give me the wording of your point of order, which I very much appreciate, but I think at this stage that rule 7.2.5 of the code of conduct for members of the Scottish Parliament applies only to how members of the Scottish Parliament treat each other—it does not cover behaviour towards United Kingdom ministers. I caution you against continuing with your point of order.

That is not a point of order for me and I think that I have already covered the point.

I should have said that question 3 was not lodged.

Question 7 has been withdrawn and question 8 was not lodged.

Question 16 has been withdrawn.

Question 18 has been withdrawn.

The abnormal number of questions that has been either withdrawn or not lodged allows me to say something for the first time in this Parliament—question 20 is from Jackie Baillie.

Order.

We came to First Minister's questions quite late, so I will take question 6 from Liam McArthur.

I say with respect, Ms Smith, that you could not ask your question because I did not call it and not because we ran out of time. It is now five minutes past the normal finishing time; I allowed time because the First Minister gave an update on the situation. It is entirely open to him to request a statement if he wishes to do so. The update did not affect the time that was available for First Minister's question time.

Is this a point of order, First Minister?

Order.

That concludes general questions. Before we move to the next item of business, Parliament will wish to note that I have written to the consul general for Poland, asking that he pass on the condolences of the entire Parliament to the Polish people, both here and in Poland, following the tragic plane crash in Smolensk last week.

I suspend the sitting for two minutes.

You must close, please.

You must close, please.

We come to the open debate. I ask members to stick tightly to four minutes, please.

Order. We have had enough sedentary comments from the Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats for the time being.

Order. I am sorry to single out Mr Tavish Scott, but we have had a persistent running commentary from him since the beginning of the debate. I would be grateful if that ceased.

That is not a point of order. Mr Brownlee is speaking to the motion. You should wind up now, please, Mr Brownlee.

I ask Mr Purvis to write to me or e-mail me on that subject and I will look into it.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-6140, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, on supporting business.

We come to decision time. There are five questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-6127, in the name of John Swinney, on the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Amendment Order 2010, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 95, Against 0, Abstentions 13.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Amendment Order 2010 be approved.

The question is, that amendment S3M-6129.3, in the name of Andy Kerr, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6129, in the name of John Swinney, on the economic recovery plan, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 43, Against 65, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The question is, that amendment S3M-6129.1, in the name of Derek Brownlee, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6129, in the name of John Swinney, on the economic recovery plan, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 18, Against 78, Abstentions 12.  Amendment disagreed to.

The question is, that amendment S3M-6129.2, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6129, in the name of John Swinney, on the economic recovery plan, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 63, Against 45, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The question is, that motion S3M-6129, in the name of John Swinney, on the economic recovery plan, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 61, Against 2, Abstentions 45.  Motion, as amended agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the Scottish Government's response to the global recession through the Economic Recovery Plan and notes the three core themes of investing in innovation and industries of the future,  strengthening education and skills, and supporting jobs and communities, and regrets that unemployment continues to rise in Scotland while falling in the United Kingdom as a whole.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-6136, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 21 April 2010 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Transmission Charging followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 22 April 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Europe, External Affairs and Culture; Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Stage 3 Proceedings: Control of Dogs (Scotland) Bill followed by Scottish Government Debate: Progress Towards 18 Week Referral to Treatment followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 28 April 2010 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Interpretation and Legislative Reform (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 29 April 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Paul Martin. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-6137, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out an extension to the stage 1 timetable for the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be extended to 14 May 2010.—[ Paul Martin. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-6138, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out an extension to the stage 1 timetable for the Alcohol (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Alcohol (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be extended to 14 May 2010.—[ Paul Martin. ]  Motion agreed to.

Briefly, please, Mr Brown.

I ask Mr Swinney to reply and then close, please.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-6129, in the name of John Swinney, on the economy recovery plan.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is the Rev Andrew Jolly, chaplain to the United Kingdom oil and gas industry.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-6127, in the name of John Swinney, on the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Amendment Order 2010.

There is one question to be put as a result of today's business. The question is, that motion S3M-6023, in the name of John Swinney, on the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 109, Against 16, Abstentions 0.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Bill be passed.

The cabinet secretary will take questions on issues raised in his statement. We have dead on 20 minutes for such questions, after which we must go to decision time.

We come to open questions. We have 12 minutes for the 10 members who want to ask a question, so if we keep it pretty brief, we will get there.

Order. There should be a bit less noise in the chamber, please.

That concludes the debate on the bill. I am grateful to members for ensuring that we were able to bring the debate to a close on time.

The next item of business is a statement by John Swinney on the Scottish Government's response to the United Kingdom budget. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his 10-minute statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions during it.

I thank all members for speaking within the time that is available and I hope that members will continue to do that.

You must close now, please, Ms McNeill.

I am sorry; I have no more time available. I can give Margo MacDonald one minute.

I will allow Jeremy Purvis up to four minutes. All other members who take part in the debate must speak for one minute less than they have been advised, as we must finish the debate at 4.45.

Order. Mr Kerr, I will not have accusations of that type made in this chamber. I hope that you will withdraw that remark.

Just as I think it is wrong for somebody to call another member "a numptie", I do not think that the word "sap" is advisable, First Minister.

Order.

Order.

Order.

I will take a supplementary question from Alasdair Allan.

Question 3 has been withdrawn.

Order, Mr Fraser.

Question 8 was not lodged.

I call on David Whitton to wind up and either press or withdraw amendment 24. Could you do so in four minutes or less, please, Mr Whitton?

Order.

Order.

Order.

The question is, that amendment 24 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 62, Against 63, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 24 disagreed to.

I apologise for having to suspend, but I wanted to get this right, as I believe that it is fundamentally important. The SPCB has previously invited Parliament to establish a committee to consider SPCB proposals and, if it wishes to do so, to bring those proposals forward—I give you, by example, the Scottish Parliamentary Commissions and Commissioners etc Bill, which was debated in Parliament yesterday. I would interpret that as the SPCB  initiating legislation, but I point out that, once any bill is introduced to Parliament, it becomes the property of Parliament itself. That is the situation as regards primary legislation. I confirm that the SPCB does not have the power to initiate subordinate legislation at this point in time. I hope that that clarifies the issue to members' satisfaction. I have completely lost track of where we had got to.

I have just answered that very question, Mr Purvis.

That is correct, and I confirm that I sent that letter to Mr Swinney.

With equal respect, that is not a point or order for me to consider at this stage; it is for others to consider at another time, should they wish to do so. We are becoming dangerously short of time. I can offer the minister two minutes in which to respond to the debate.

I think that the member is probably correct, but she has her point on the record.

I am not really prepared to comment at this point. We are getting into a policy debate that I am not prepared to get drawn into at this time.

The member makes a perfectly fair point. I will suspend the meeting for five minutes and then come back to the chamber.

Order.

Order.

We will proceed with the division.

The result of the division is: For 63, Against 64, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 1 disagreed to.

Group 2 is on order-making powers. Amendment 24, in the name of  David Whitton, is grouped with amendments 25, 57, 27, 28, 58, 29, 30, 32 to 41, 43, 52, 87, 26, 31, 42 and 55. Members will have picked up that time is pretty tight. I understand that there are important points to be made and important debates to be had, but I ask members to be as brief as possible. I also draw members' attention to the pre-emption information that is shown on the groupings paper.

I call Patrick Harvie to wind up and either press or withdraw amendment 1. I ask him to do so as briefly as he can.

The question is, that amendment 1 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division, but there will be a five-minute suspension before it.

Good morning. The first item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-6051, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a timetable for stage 3 of the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that, during Stage 3 of the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Bill, debate on groups of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limits indicated, each time limit being calculated from when the Stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the Stage in the morning and afternoon being called) or otherwise not in progress: Groups 1 and 2: 55 minutes Groups 3 to 5: 1 hour 25 minutes Groups 6 to 9: 2 hours Groups 10 to 13: 2 hours 40 minutes Groups 14 and 15: 3 hours 15 minutes.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is stage 3 of the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Bill. In dealing with amendments, members should have the bill as amended at stage 2, which is SP bill 26A; the marshalled list of amendments, which is SP bill 26A-ML; and the groupings, which I, as Presiding Officer, have agreed. The division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for five minutes before the first division this morning. The period of voting for the first division will be 30 seconds. Thereafter, I will allow a voting period of one minute for the first division after a debate. All other divisions will be 30 seconds.

Group 1 is on regulation of the water industry. Amendment 1, in the name of Patrick Harvie, is grouped with amendments 4, 79 to 81, 5, 84, 85, 91, 2, 3 and 92.

There should be. We will put that right as soon as possible, if that is the case. I call Patrick Harvie.

Four members wish to speak in the open debate. I can give them no more than two minutes each.

I must hurry you.

I really must hurry you.

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motions S3M-6044, S3M-6045 and S3M-6046.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Advice and Assistance and Civil Legal Aid (Financial Conditions and Contributions) (Scotland) Regulations 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the International Organisations (Immunities and Privileges) (Scotland) Amendment Order 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the National Bus Travel Concession Scheme for Older and Disabled Persons (Scotland) Amendment Order 2010 be approved. —[Bruce Crawford.]

The questions on the motions will be put at decision time. Before we come to decision time, the Liberal Democrats wish to seek the leave of Parliament to withdraw amendment S3M-6033.2, in the name of Mike Pringle, in relation to the earlier debate on double jeopardy. Does any member object to the amendment being withdrawn?

There is an objection, so the question will have to be put at decision time.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-5681, in the name of Trish Godman, on the Scottish Parliamentary Commissions and Commissioners etc Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Scottish Parliamentary Commissions and Commissioners etc. Bill.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-6033.2, in the name of Mike Pringle, which seeks to amend motion S3M-6033, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on double jeopardy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 0, Against 104, Abstentions 14.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-6033, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on double jeopardy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 115, Against 2, Abstentions 0.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that, although double jeopardy must continue to provide an important safeguard, it needs to be reformed to fit with a fair and modern criminal justice system; agrees that persons who confess after an acquittal or who undermine trials by threats or corruption should be retried; supports reform to allow a second trial in very serious cases where important new evidence emerges and for this to apply retrospectively, and welcomes the Scottish Government's consultation on this issue.

The next question is, that motion S3M-6027, in the name of Tom McCabe, on the reimbursement of members' expenses scheme, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament recognises that the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body ("the SPCB") commissioned and received a report from Sir Neil McIntosh on the Reimbursement of Members' Expenses Scheme and in implementation of those recommendations therefore agrees to: (a) Amend the Resolution of 12 June 2008 ("the Resolution") agreeing to the Reimbursement of Members' Expenses Scheme ("the Scheme") annexed as Annex 1 to the Resolution by— (i) adding after "appropriate" at the end of paragraph (iv) "and in particular, and without prejudice to the generality— (a) entering into arrangements with those members who, in relation to Edinburgh accommodation, are claiming and have claimed reimbursement of mortgage interest allowance in accordance with paragraph 4(5)(b) of Part B of the Previous Scheme and paragraph (v) of the Resolution. In respect of paragraph 2.1.6 of the Scheme as amended by this Resolution, the entitlement to the costs in paragraph 2.1.3 (b), (c), (d) and (e) of the Scheme will not apply to those members who have not entered into such an arrangement with the SPCB; and (b) making provision for termination payments to members' staff who are close family members of the member (as defined in paragraph 9.1.1 of the Scheme),  where the costs of employing such close family members is reimbursed in accordance with Section 3 of the Scheme and termination of the employment of such close family members on or before the 31 July 2015 is due to the effect of paragraph 3.1.8 of the Scheme as inserted by this Resolution, and paragraph (a)(ii) of this Resolution. Such termination payments shall be calculated in accordance with the principles for determining redundancy payments provided for in Section 3.6 of the Scheme"; (ii) adding after "31 March 2011" at the end of paragraph (v) "except that (i) the entitlement to reimbursement of staff costs under Section 3 of the Scheme in respect of close family members (as defined in paragraph 9.1.1 of the Scheme) whose employment by a member commenced before 1 April 2010, and (ii) the requirement to declare such relationships to the SPCB in accordance with paragraph 3.7 of the Scheme as it read prior to the amendment made by this Resolution, shall end not later than 31 July 2015"; (b) Amend the Scheme with effect from 1 April 2010 by— (i) substituting for existing paragraph 1.6.2— "On no more than two occasions in any financial year, a member may transfer in total an amount which does not exceed in aggregate one half of the limit on that member's entitlement to reimbursement of office costs to that member's entitlement to reimbursement of staff salary costs. A member making such a transfer shall notify the SPCB in advance of incurring any costs in respect of the sum transferred"; (ii) deleting from paragraph 2.1.4 the words "and 2.1.6"; (iii) substituting for existing paragraph 2.1.6(b)— "(b) the member also owns another residence in Edinburgh which the member uses in connection with the performance of Parliamentary duties, the member is entitled to claim reimbursement of the actual costs specified in paragraph 2.1.3 (b), (c), (d) and (e) in respect of that other residence."; (iv) inserting as new paragraph 2.3— " 2.3 SHARED RESIDENTIAL LEASED ACCOMMODATION  2.3.1 Section 2.3 shall only apply to a member with a main residence in a constituency listed in Group Three of Annex A. 2.3.2 Subject to paragraph 2.3.3, where more than one member leases the same residential property in Edinburgh together with another member or members, those members are entitled between or amongst them to reimbursement of the costs of leasing the residential property in accordance with paragraph 2.1.3. 2.3.3 The limit on the entitlement of each member to reimbursement of costs reimbursed under paragraph 2.3.2 is the limit in each financial year specified in the Schedule of Rates plus one third of that amount in respect of each additional member, apportioned equally between the members. 2.3.4 A member who submits a claim in respect of the cost of shared residential leased accommodation shall declare that arrangement to the SPCB. The declaration shall be in writing, include the name(s) of the other member or members with whom tenancy is shared, a copy of the letting agreement and/or lease, and such other information as the SPCB shall determine."; (v) inserting new paragraph 3.1.8—  "Section 3 does not apply in relation to the employment of a close family member by a member, whether individually or through a pool; (vi) substituting for existing paragraphs 3.7 and 3.7.1— " 3.7 EMPLOYMENT OF CLOSE FAMILY MEMBERS OF ANOTHER MEMBER  3.7.1 A member who submits a claim in respect of the costs of employing a close family member of another member, whether individually or through a pool shall declare that relationship to the SPCB. The declaration shall be in writing and shall include the name of the close family member, the name of the other member, the relationship to that other member and such other information as the SPCB may determine" ; (vii) substituting for existing paragraph 8.4— " 8.4 ACCOMMODATION, OFFICE AND ASSOCIATED COSTS  8.4.1 A former member is entitled to reimbursement of the costs reasonably incurred— (a) in the closing down of a parliamentary office; (b) in connection with the termination of any agreement pertaining to leasing residential property within Edinburgh under paragraph 2.1.2(b); (c) in connection with any ancillary obligations arising from paragraph 8.4.1(b); (d) for the purpose of travel within Scotland undertaken in connection with (a) (b) or (c); 8.4.2 The reimbursements in paragraph 8.4.1 are subject to a limit equivalent to one third of the office cost provisions set out in section 4"; 8.4.3 Any costs reimbursed under paragraph 8.4.1 may include the costs of travel of the former member's staff provided that such costs are incurred for the purpose of paragraphs 8.4.1(a), (b) or (c).".

The next question is, that motion S3M-6034, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on Scottish ministers' nominations to the European Economic and Social Committee, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament endorses the Scottish Executive's proposal to nominate Mr George Traill Lyon, nominated by CBI Scotland and the Institute of Directors Scotland, Mr Sandy Boyle, nominated by the STUC, and Ms Maureen O'Neill, nominated by the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations and the Poverty Alliance, to the UK delegation on the Economic and Social Committee of the European Union for the forthcoming mandate from September 2010 to September 2015.

Unless any member objects, I propose to put a single question on motions S3M-6044 to S3M-6046, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments. There being no objection, the next question is, that motions S3M-6044 to S3M-6046, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of SSIs, be agreed to.  Motions agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Advice and Assistance and Civil Legal Aid (Financial Conditions and Contributions) (Scotland) Regulations 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the International Organisations (Immunities and Privileges) (Scotland) Amendment Order 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the National Bus Travel Concession Scheme for Older and Disabled Persons (Scotland) Amendment Order 2010 be approved.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-6042, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 14 April 2010 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Local Government Finance (Scotland) Amendment Order 2010 followed by Scottish Government Debate: Economic Recovery Plan followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 15 April 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Liberal Democrats' Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Gaelic - An Action Plan for Gaelic followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 21 April 2010 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 22 April 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time  2.15 pm Themed Question Time Europe, External Affairs and Culture; Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Stage 3 Proceedings: Control of Dogs (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business —[Bruce Crawford.]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-6043, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on an extension to the stage 2 timetable for the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill at Stage 2 be extended to 7 May 2010. —[Bruce Crawford.]  Motion agreed to.

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-6034, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on Scottish ministers' nominations to the European Economic and Social Committee.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament endorses the Scottish Executive's proposal to nominate Mr George Traill Lyon, nominated by CBI Scotland and the Institute of Directors Scotland, Mr Sandy Boyle, nominated by the STUC, and Ms Maureen O'Neill, nominated by the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations and the Poverty Alliance, to the UK delegation on the Economic and Social Committee of the European Union for the forthcoming mandate from September 2010 to September 2015. —[Fiona Hyslop.]

Again, the question on the motion will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-6027, in the name of Tom McCabe, on the reimbursement of members' expenses scheme.

You may continue.

I am sorry, Mr Maxwell, but you should speak through the chair, rather than to the member directly.

You should conclude now.

I call Johann Lamont, to open on behalf of the Scottish Labour Party. She has four minutes.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is the Rev Alan Gibson, from the united parish of Carstairs and Carstairs Junction.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-5681, in the name of Trish Godman, on the Scottish Parliamentary Commissions and Commissioners etc Bill. We have no flexibility in the debate. We can take a little time, but not a lot, out of the next debate, so I ask members to stick pretty closely to the times that they are given.

Order.

Order.

To save Mr Park's blushes, it was Paul Martin who attended the Parliamentary Bureau.

Order—and I am sorry if I have caused Paul Martin any blushes.

Order.

Order, order.

I was asking for order from George Foulkes, First Minister. Please continue.

By your non-point of order, you have already done that.

Once again—

No, these are not points of order. You have got the points on the record. I suggest that we suspend until 2.15. >12:33

Mr McLetchie is not present to ask question 2. That is regrettable. As I have said before in the chamber, if a member does not turn up to ask their question, supplementary questions are ruled out. Also, question 2 has brought the Deputy First Minister, who will not have to answer another question during general questions, to the chamber. That is highly regrettable.

Order.

Had you been here on time, Mr Gibson, you would have heard a point of order on that very issue.

I must hurry you.

Thank you. I am sorry to hurry everyone, but we are very short of time. >09:36

I am grateful that you finished 20 seconds early.

I apologise for the slight delay in starting, but the lens in my glasses fell out and I am completely blind without them.

I will answer the first point of order before hearing yours, Mr Harvie.  I am grateful for the minister's prior notice of his point of order. I am advised that there are no rules about live planning applications in terms of either the admissibility or selectability of an amendment. It is therefore entirely up to ministers how they approach the issue in the debate. I am sure that members will take the minister's points into account.

I am happy to confirm that that is the situation. That being case, we come to the first item of business, which is a debate on motion S3M-5978, in the name of Sarah Boyack, on climate change. >09:18

The next item is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motion S3M-5972, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Renewables Obligation (Scotland) Amendment Order 2010 be approved—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today's business. The question is, that amendment S3M-5962.3, in the name of Lewis Macdonald, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5962, in the name of Jim Mather, on tourism, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 70, Against 50, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The question is, that amendment S3M-5962.2, in the name of Gavin Brown, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5962, in the name of Jim Mather, on tourism, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 70, Against 47, Abstentions 3.  Amendment agreed to.

The question is, that amendment S3M-5962.1, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5962, in the name of Jim Mather, on tourism, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 56, Against 64, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The question is, that motion S3M-5962, in the name of Jim Mather, on tourism, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 71, Against 49, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament supports the Scottish tourism industry as it works toward the shared growth ambition set out in the Tourism Framework for Change (TFFC) strategy; commends the commitment shown by the industry in establishing the new TFFC Leadership Group to drive an industry-led approach to improvements in quality, skills, innovation and investment across the sector; believes, however, that the Scottish Government must also take responsibility for meeting the skills gaps; notes that, in spite of the efforts made by tourism businesses and local communities as part of Homecoming Scotland 2009, overseas visitor numbers and economic activity in the hotels and catering sector fell in the first three quarters of 2009; regrets that, in spite of that fall in earnings in the sector, many Scottish tourism businesses are facing significant increases in non-domestic rates with immediate effect; notes the recent announcement that a focus on Scotland's food and drink will start in 2010; recognises tourism as a key sector with a vital contribution to make to the Scottish Government's strategic objectives and economic recovery plan; notes the importance of continuing to promote Scotland as a place to visit, stay, live and work; further notes that in its 2008 report, Growing Pains - can we achieve a 50% growth in tourist revenue by 2015 ?, the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee recommended unanimously that the Scottish Government should set up a review group of leading industry specialists to make recommendations on the type and number of tourism education, skills and training courses in the future; notes  that the committee's report suggested that the starting point for the review group should be a wholesale rationalisation into a model that suits Scottish needs and has industry buy-in; calls on the Scottish Government to implement the committee recommendation as soon as possible, and calls on the Scottish Government to ensure that all press releases and announcements that it issues regarding tourism statistics paint a clear and wholly accurate picture of the industry.

The question is, that motion S3M-5972, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Renewables Obligation (Scotland) Amendment Order 2010 be approved.

That concludes decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5970, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised time for the start of business on 25 March 2010.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that "09:00" be substituted for "09:15" in Rule 2.2.3 for the purpose of allowing the meeting of the Parliament on Thursday 25 March 2010 to begin at 9.00 am.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5971, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 24 March 2010 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 1 Debate: Scottish Parliamentary Commissions and Commissioners etc. Bill followed by Scottish Government Debate: Double Jeopardy followed by SPCB Motion on the Allowances Scheme followed by Scottish Ministers' Nominations to the European Economic and Social Committee followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 25 March 2010 9.00 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Public Services Reform (Scotland) Bill 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Justice and Law Officers; Rural Affairs and the Environment 2.55 pm Continuation of Stage 3 Proceedings: Public Services Reform (Scotland) Bill followed by Ministerial Statement: Scottish  Government's Response to the UK Budget followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 14 April 2010 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 15 April 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5974, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a timetable for stage 1 of the End of Life Assistance (Scotland) Bill. If any member wishes to speak against the motion, they should press their request-to-speak button now.

Can we wait until the end of decision time, Ms MacDonald?

Do you wish to speak against the motion?

Ms MacDonald has asked why this matter has been brought before us; I offer the minister an opportunity to respond.

Would you like to clarify, Ms MacDonald?

I hope that that clarifies the position.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the End of Life Assistance (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 24 November 2010—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

You should be winding up pretty soon, minister.

You have time.

I ask the minister to respond and then conclude.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Rabbi Shefa Gold, who is a delegate at the Edinburgh International Festival of Middle Eastern Spirituality and Peace.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-5962, in the name of Jim Mather, on tourism.

There are eight questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-5926.3, in the name of Michael Russell, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5926, in the name of Elizabeth Smith, on the management of schools, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5926.2, in the name of Des McNulty, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5926, in the name of Elizabeth Smith, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 44, Against 69, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5926.1, in the name of Margaret Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5926, in the name of Elizabeth Smith, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5926, in the name of Elizabeth Smith, on the management of schools, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

The motion is agreed to.

Make it plain, please.

You did not make it plain enough for me to hear it. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 67, Against 3, Abstentions 43.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees with the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning that "choice and diversity are the hallmarks of a mature and confident society" in the provision of state-funded education and that it is now time to explore alternative models for delivery of school education with a view to empowering head teachers, raising standards and increasing parental choice; welcomes the community trust model for schools put forward by East Lothian Council as worthy of further examination and believes that this and other models to be found elsewhere in Europe should be the subject of detailed consideration and debate; recognises that Scottish education is generally of good quality with many important strengths; believes that any alternative models that are considered should build on these strengths and preclude academic selection as a legitimate criterion for school entry, and calls on the Scottish Government to publish an options paper on models of school organisation to facilitate this; believes that any changes to the model of school organisation should be motivated by raising attainment and improving pupil outcomes rather than profit and dogma; recognises the benefits of greater community and parental involvement in the management of schools; notes that the implementation of a new curriculum, falling teacher numbers and straitened budgets remain key areas of concern for education professionals, and recognises the cross-party consensus behind the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee's examination of the management of schools.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5929.2, in the name of Richard Baker, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5929, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on serious and organised crime, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 56, Against 1, Abstentions 58.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5929.1, in the name of Bill Aitken, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5929, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5929.3, in the name of Robert Brown, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5929, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5929, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on serious and organised crime, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament recognises that serious organised crime can have a devastating impact on communities and businesses in Scotland; further recognises that tackling this menace should be a key priority for a Safer and Stronger Scotland; supports the role of the Serious Organised Crime Taskforce in spearheading Scotland's commitment to address this type of crime; supports Scottish law enforcement in implementing the taskforce's serious organised crime strategy, Letting our Communities Flourish and supports the view that serious organised crime cannot  be seen to pay; believes that the Scottish Government should ensure that there are no further delays in the construction of the Scottish Crime Campus at Gartcosh, which was originally due for completion this year but is now not expected to be fully operational until mid-2013; supports the crucial role played by the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency in ensuring that there is a co-ordinated strategy to tackling serious and organised crime in Scotland, and also believes that the Scottish Government must make progress in implementing the findings of the Joint Thematic Report on the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002, published by HM Inspectorate of Constabulary for Scotland and the Inspectorate of Prosecution in Scotland, to ensure that there is greater success in seizing and recovering the assets of those who profit from crime and asks the Scottish Government to keep the entire issue of serious and organised crime under review in order that any further measures that may be deemed necessary can be considered; believes that, while good progress has been made on the recovery of assets under the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002, the Serious Organised Crime Taskforce must ensure that police and prosecutors use the Act to its full extent; notes with concern that there are no current convictions for human trafficking in Scotland, despite Glasgow being considered to be second only to London for the extent of people trafficking, and calls on the Scottish Government to take urgent, concerted and properly resourced action to break the misery of sex trafficking and to identify and support women being trafficked to Scotland, particularly in the lead up to the Commonwealth Games in Glasgow in 2014.

I am sorry, minister. I ask for a little less conversational noise from members.

For entirely understandable reasons, question 6 has had to be withdrawn. That should not be an excuse for questions or answers to be any longer than usual.

Order. Let us have the question, please.

Order. There are too many sedentary interventions from Labour members. Please keep it under control.

Order, order.

Order, Mr Rumbles.

There have been a considerable number of requests for questions on the matter of this supplementary question, so I hope that members will understand my taking the question from the relevant constituency member, Paul Martin.

I will take another supplementary from Derek Brownlee.

Order.

That is enough, thank you, Lord Foulkes—no more.

I do not believe that that is within the cabinet secretary's responsibility, although I would be surprised if he does not have a view to share.

I am sorry. You must close now.

We come to the open debate. Members might have guessed that we do not have a lot of time available. I ask members to stick fairly closely to their allocated time.

The member should be closing.

Good morning. The first item of business is a Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party debate on the management of schools.

Order.

As I should have done earlier, I ask members who wish to speak in the debate to press their request-to-speak buttons.

The next item of business is consideration of six Parliamentary Bureau motions. I invite Bruce Crawford to move motions S3M-5920 to S3M-5925, on approval of Scottish statutory instruments, en bloc.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Budget (Scotland) Act 2009 Amendment Order 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Community Care (Personal Care and Nursing Care) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Public Appointments and Public Bodies etc. (Scotland) Act 2003 (Treatment of Office or Body as Specified Authority) Order 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Housing Support Grant (Scotland) Order 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Town and Country Planning (Fees for Applications and Deemed Applications) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Local Government Investments (Scotland) Regulations 2010 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The questions on those motions will be put at decision time, to which we now come.

There are six questions to be put as a result of today's business. I remind members that, in relation to the debate on aquaculture, if the amendment in the name of Dr Elaine Murray is agreed to, the amendment in the name of John Scott will fall. The first question is, that amendment S3M-5908.2, in the name of Elaine Murray, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5908, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on aquaculture, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 43, Against 58, Abstentions 14.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5908.4, in the name of John Scott, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5908, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 73, Against 43, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5908.3, in the name of Liam McArthur, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5908, as amended, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5908.1, in the name of Robin Harper, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5908, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 2, Against 114, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5908, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on aquaculture, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 113, Against 0, Abstentions 2.  Motion, as amended agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the continued development of an ambitious and sustainable Scottish aquaculture industry; recognises the economic importance of the industry to Scotland as a whole and many coastal communities in particular; calls on the Scottish Government to clarify what action it is taking to develop and retain a skilled and qualified workforce in the sector; supports industry calls for greater clarity about the food consumers buy through country of origin labelling, and invites ministers to make clear their intentions regarding any moves to amend  protected geographical status for Scottish farmed salmon; notes the considerable work being carried out under the auspices of A Fresh Start - the renewed Strategic Framework for Scottish Aquaculture , published on 21 May 2009; notes the continuing need to consult with industry stakeholders on the development of the industry in Scotland, and further notes that ways must be found to streamline the planning process and remove barriers to the development and growth of the fish farming industry such as the lack of affordable housing and available sites for fish farms in order to allow the industry to grow to its full potential.

I propose to ask a single question on motions S3M-5920 to S3M-5925 in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on approval of Scottish statutory instruments. If any member objects to a single question being put, they should say so now. There being no objection, the question is, that motions S3M-5920 to S3M-5925, on approval of SSIs, be agreed to.  Motions agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Budget (Scotland) Act 2009 Amendment Order 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Community Care (Personal Care and Nursing Care) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Public Appointments and Public Bodies etc. (Scotland) Act 2003 (Treatment of Office or Body as Specified Authority) Order 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Housing Support Grant (Scotland) Order 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Town and Country Planning (Fees for Applications and Deemed Applications) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Local Government Investments (Scotland) Regulations 2010 be approved.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5916, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 17 March 2010 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Tourism followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 18 March 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: International Development in Malawi followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 24 March 2010 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 25 March 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Public Services Reform (Scotland) Bill 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Justice and Law Officers;  Rural Affairs and the Environment 2.55 pm Continuation of Stage 3 Proceedings: Public Services Reform (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item is consideration of business motion S3M-5917, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a stage 1 timetable for the Children's Hearings (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Children's Hearings (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 2 July 2010.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item is consideration of business motion S3M-5918, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out an extension to the stage 1 timetable for the Legal Services (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Legal Services (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be extended to 30 April 2010.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item is consideration of business motion S3M-5919, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a stage 2 timetable for the Control of Dogs (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Control of Dogs (Scotland) Bill at Stage 2 be completed by 26 March 2010.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

I am fairly certain that Mr Scott is correct and that your amendment pre-empts his; that is the judgment that we made last night. We will check the point and I will make a final announcement at decision time.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Sister Isabel Smyth, an honorary lecturer at the centre for inter-faith studies, Glasgow university, and secretary to the Catholic Bishops Committee for Inter Religious Dialogue.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-5908, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on aquaculture. We have a little time available during the afternoon, but not much, so I ask members to stick pretty closely to the times that have been allocated.

We come to decision time. There are eight questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-5872.1, in the name of Alex Neil, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5872, in the name of Patricia Ferguson, on factoring services, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5872.3, in the name of Mary Scanlon, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5872, in the name of Patricia Ferguson, on factoring services, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 13, Against 57, Abstentions 46.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5872.2, in the name of Robert Brown, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5872, in the name of Patricia Ferguson, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5872, in the name of Patricia Ferguson, on factoring services, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament notes that the Office of Fair Trading market study into the property management market found that the market is not working well for consumers in Scotland; welcomes the recent cross-party support for proposals to require property factors to register and to make provision for an accessible form of dispute resolution between homeowners and property factors; further welcomes this positive progress toward the introduction of legislation to ensure better accountability of property managers for their standards and the services that they provide; seeks to ensure that the appropriate authorities are given the powers necessary for effective enforcement of any new legislation, and calls on the Scottish Government to give consideration to the introduction of a mandatory accreditation scheme to cover private, public and voluntary sector property managers.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5871.1, in the name of Des McNulty, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5871, in the name of Michael Russell, on educating children and young people to compete in a globalised 21 st century, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 70, Against 48, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5871.3, in the name of Elizabeth Smith, which also seeks to amend motion S3M-5871, in the name of Michael Russell, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 70, Against 1, Abstentions 47.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5871.2, in the name of Margaret Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5871, in the name of Michael Russell, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The final question is, that motion S3M-5871, in the name of Michael Russell, as amended, on educating children and young people to compete in a globalised 21 st century, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 71, Against 45, Abstentions 2.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament recognises that in the globalised and increasingly interconnected 21st century it is essential that young people are equipped with the skills and capacities needed to succeed in the global marketplace; regrets the absence of a coherent skills strategy and the lack of preparedness for implementation of the Curriculum for Excellence, particularly the lack of detail regarding the new qualifications and provision for vital continuing professional development; notes the Scottish Government's determination to learn from other countries' education systems to ensure that Scotland further improve its performance and applies a global perspective to its approach and ambitions; believes that the priorities for parents and teachers across Scotland are substantial improvements in basic standards of literacy and numeracy, greater rigour and greater flexibility in the SQA qualifications structure and wider opportunities for young people to pursue formal vocational training so that Scotland can strengthen its international reputation in educational attainment; notes the particular importance of modern languages and science in modern society and the global marketplace, and believes that the Donaldson review of teacher training must ensure that teachers are equipped with the right knowledge and skills to develop these and other key subjects and meet the needs of pupils in the 21st century.

Order. We have had enough sedentary interventions from all parts of the chamber.

As Ms Smith said, that was for the record. I think she recognises that it was not a point of order.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is themed question time. The whole session will be given over to questions on finance and sustainable growth. Question 1 is from Christopher Harvie. It is regrettable that Christopher Harvie is not here. I therefore move to question 2, from Mike Pringle.

I must hurry you, Mr Pringle.

As I have said before, I am afraid that they cannot. That is one of the regrettable knock-on effects of members not being here on time. I am aware that you wished to ask a supplementary to question 1, but I am afraid that that cannot be done.

Question 11 was withdrawn.

Order.

Order.

Question 15 was withdrawn.

I will take a constituency question from Willie Coffey.

Order.

Question 8 has been withdrawn.

I am sorry, but Mr Brown's microphone seems to have stopped working. [ Interruption. ] It now seems to be working again.

Please speak through the chair, Ms Mulligan.

I remind members that they should speak through the chair and not directly to each other. There seems to be a growing tendency to do that in the debate.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-5872, in the name of Patricia Ferguson, on factoring services. We have a little flexibility, and I can give all members an extra minute of speaking time at this stage. I call Patricia Ferguson to speak to and move the motion. You have up to 14 minutes.

There are 15 questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-5817, in the name of David Stewart, on the Ure Elder Fund Transfer and Dissolution Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Ure Elder Fund Transfer and Dissolution Bill be passed.

The next question is that, amendment S3M-5852.1, in the name of Johann Lamont, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5852, in the name of Alex Neil, on regeneration, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is that, amendment S3M-5852.2, in the name of Jamie McGrigor, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5852, in the name of Alex Neil, on regeneration, as amended, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5852.3, in the name of Ross Finnie, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5852, in the name of Alex Neil, on regeneration, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 65, Against 0, Abstentions 45.  Amendment agreed to.

The question is, that motion S3M-5852, in the name of Alex Neil, on regeneration, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament acknowledges the continuing need for regeneration of communities across Scotland, particularly in challenging economic times; also acknowledges the critical role of local government, community planning partners, the private and voluntary sectors and community members in delivering regeneration; notes in particular the importance of an effective planning system and the necessity of genuine community engagement to secure real change; recognises the contribution that regeneration makes to increasing sustainable economic growth and the improvement of opportunities for people living in deprived communities; acknowledges the success of the New Life for Urban Scotland initiative focused on Castlemilk, Ferguslie Park, Wester Hailes and Whitfield and described as a landmark in the history of urban regeneration in Scotland in the official assessment of the scheme; welcomes the £60 million Town Centre Regeneration Fund secured in the 2009 budget, and therefore calls on the Scottish Government to bring forward detailed proposals on how it intends to deliver its regeneration ambitions in the context of its economic recovery plan and how it will protect and enhance the contribution of the voluntary sector through structured and sustainable funding from central and local government.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5859, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument on the Aberdeen western peripheral route, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 104, Against 2, Abstentions 0.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the A90 (Aberdeen Western Peripheral Route) Special Road Scheme 2010 be approved.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5860, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of an SSI on the Aberdeen western peripheral route, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 107, Against 3, Abstentions 0.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the A90 (Aberdeen Western Peripheral Route) Trunk Road Order 2010 be approved.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5861, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of an SSI on the Aberdeen western peripheral route, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

One member has been hauled back into line. The result of the division is: For 108, Against 2, Abstentions 0.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the A90 (Aberdeen Western Peripheral Route) (Craibstone Junction) Special Road Scheme 2010 be approved.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5862, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of an SSI on the Aberdeen western peripheral route, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

Free will obviously still exists. The result of the division is: For 107, Against 3, Abstentions 0.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the A96 (Aberdeen Western Peripheral Route) Trunk Road Order 2010 be approved.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5863, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument on the Aberdeen western peripheral route, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

I give up. The result of the division is: For 108, Against 2, Abstentions 0.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the A956 (Aberdeen Western Peripheral Route) Special Road Scheme 2010 be approved.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5864, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of an SSI on the Aberdeen western peripheral route, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 108, Against 2, Abstentions 0.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the A956 (Aberdeen Western Peripheral Route) Trunk Road Order 2010 be approved.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5865, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of a statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft CRC Energy Efficiency Scheme Order 2010 (SI 2010/draft) be approved.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5866, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the designation of a lead committee, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Children's Hearings (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5867, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the office of the clerk, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that, between 4 December 2010 and 31 January 2011, the Office of the Clerk will be open on all days except: Saturdays and Sundays, 24 (pm), 27, 28, 29, 30 and 31 December 2010, 3 and 4 January 2011.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5868, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on parliamentary recess dates, be agreed to.  Motion agreed,  That the Parliament agrees the following parliamentary recess dates under Rule 2.3.1: 23 December (pm) 2010 - 9 January 2011 (inclusive).

The next item of business is consideration of further Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-5865, on the approval of a statutory instrument.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft CRC Energy Efficiency Scheme Order 2010 (SI 2010/draft) be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The question on that motion will be put at decision time. I also ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-5866, on the designation of the lead committee for the Children's Hearings (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Children's Hearings (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

Again, the question on the motion will be put at decision time. We have two further Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-5867, on days when the office of the clerk will be open, and motion S3M-5868, on parliamentary recess dates.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that, between 4 December 2010 and 31 January 2011, the Office of the Clerk will be open on all days except: Saturdays and Sundays, 24 (pm), 27, 28, 29, 30 and 31 December 2010, 3 and 4 January 2011. That the Parliament agrees the following parliamentary recess dates under Rule 2.3.1: 23 December (pm) 2010 - 9 January 2011 (inclusive).—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The questions on the motions will be put at decision time.

As the member is probably aware, that is a debating point rather than a point of order for me. She now has the matter on the record, so it will be up to the minister to respond if he thinks that it is appropriate to do so.

The questions on the motions will be put at decision time.

I ask members, if they must have conversations, to do so in whispered tones, rather than just chat among themselves.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5858, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 10 March 2010 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Aquaculture followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 11 March 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning; Europe, External Affairs and Culture 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Serious and Organised Crime followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 17 March 2010 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 18 March 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time  Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of six Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move en bloc motions S3M-5859 to S3M-5864, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments on the Aberdeen western peripheral route.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the A90 (Aberdeen Western Peripheral Route) Special Road Scheme 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the A90 (Aberdeen Western Peripheral Route) Trunk Road Order 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the A90 (Aberdeen Western Peripheral Route) (Craibstone Junction) Special Road Scheme 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the A96 (Aberdeen Western Peripheral Route) Trunk Road Order 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the A956 (Aberdeen Western Peripheral Route) Special Road Scheme 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the A956 (Aberdeen Western Peripheral Route) Trunk Road Order 2010 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-5852, in the name of Alex Neil, on regeneration.

Good afternoon. As always on a Wednesday, the first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. I am pleased to welcome our time for reflection leaders today, who are Kamal Akil and Caley Gallison from the middle east youth festival.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-5817, in the name of David Stewart, on behalf of the Ure Elder Fund Transfer and Dissolution Bill Committee.

There are 12 questions to be put as a result of today's business. I remind members that, for the questions relating to the debate on justice, if the amendment in the name of Kenny MacAskill is agreed to—whether amended or not—the amendment in the name of Richard Baker will fall. The first question is, that amendment S3M-5809.3, in the name of Michael Russell, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5809, in the name of Margaret Smith, on education, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5809.2, in the name of Ken Macintosh, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5809, in the name of Margaret Smith, on education, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 35, Against, 77, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5809.1, in the name of Elizabeth Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5809, in the name of Margaret Smith, on education, as amended, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5809, in the name of Margaret Smith, on education, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament supports the full and effective implementation of the Curriculum for Excellence; notes the ongoing concerns of teaching unions, education academics and parents' organisations about the lack of clarity and the impact of education budget cuts and reduced teacher numbers and training places on implementation plans; agrees that it is essential that the new curriculum and assessment arrangements, including literacy and numeracy tests, are properly resourced over the full four years and that teachers are given the required continuing professional development and support; believes that if this cannot be guaranteed then the Scottish Government must be prepared to give the implementation process more time; recommends that the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning take advice about the timetable from the Curriculum for Excellence Management Board with a view to making a final decision about the timetable for the introduction of the new curriculum within a reasonable timeframe over the next few months, and further seeks an assurance from the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning that the reform of the exam system accompanying the Curriculum for Excellence will provide sufficient academic rigour and skills-based testing so as to ensure the highest possible standards of attainment in Scottish schools.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5808.2.1, in the name of Bill Aitken, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-5808.2, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on justice, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 60, Against 16, Abstentions 35.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5808.2, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, as amended, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5808, in the name of Robert Brown, on justice, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 61, Against 16, Abstentions 35.  Amendment, as amended, agreed to.

That means that amendment S3M-5808.1, in the name of Richard Baker, is pre-empted. The next question is, that motion S3M-5808, in the name of Robert Brown, on justice, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 61, Against 16, Abstentions 35.  Motion, as amended agreed to,  That the Parliament recognises that firearms legislation is reserved and that Strathclyde Police is entitled to exercise operational discretion over the use of Tasers under this reserved legislation and notes the role of local police authorities and joint boards in scrutinising Scottish police forces; further notes that in 2006-07 there were 12,974 recorded assaults on police officers across Scotland, which was an increase of 58% between 2000-01 and 2006-07; believes that Tasers provide a less lethal option than firearms where police officers are facing violent or armed suspects and need to incapacitate them, and awaits the results of the pilot being run in Strathclyde, which sees 30 police officers being armed with Tasers after appropriate training.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5807.4, in the name of Sarah Boyack, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5807, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the Brian Pack inquiry, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5807.2, in the name of John Scott, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5807, on the Brian Pack inquiry, as amended, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5807.3, in the name of Liam McArthur, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5807, on the Brian Pack inquiry, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 14, Against 98, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The final question is, that motion S3M-5807, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the Brian Pack inquiry, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the publication of the Interim Report by the Inquiry into Future Support for Agriculture in Scotland; acknowledges the considerable work that has gone into producing this comprehensive and considered report, and welcomes the inquiry's continuing commitment to extensive stakeholder engagement on the future application of the Common Agricultural Policy in Scotland; recognises the need for any future framework to ensure a sustainable farming sector within vibrant rural communities; acknowledges the challenges posed by climate change and food security, and calls on the Scottish Government to ensure that there is a clear focus on the supply of healthy, affordable food produced as locally as possible with good environmental stewardship, while noting that as Scotland moves to an area-based payment scheme there will be redistribution of existing support, and therefore encourages the Scottish Government to ensure that the process of redistribution is as equitable as possible and takes particular account of the Less Favoured Areas.

I can absolutely confirm that it is within the gift of the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee to dictate its own work programme. The matter is not technically a point of order, but you now have the matter on the record.

Order. Can I have a bit less noise in the chamber, please? I am having trouble hearing the cabinet secretary.

Order. I repeat that there is too much noise in the chamber.

Thank you. This is one of these debates in which I am horribly tempted to call myself, but I had better not. I will stick with convention.

I will take a constituency question from Mike Rumbles.

That subject was also addressed during general question time, so we will move straight to question 5.

The manner of the First Minister's delivery is a matter for him.

We have taken 10 minutes to cover three questions, to which there have been only two supplementaries. I would appreciate it if both questions and answers were a little shorter—if questions are a little shorter, it follows that the answers will be, too.

Question 5 has been withdrawn.

I am afraid that we have no time for further general questions, so I will move straight to the next item of business.

I must hurry you.

I am sorry to interrupt. There is too much use of the word "you", which should apply only to me.

We come to the open debate. Members will have picked up that we have a little time in hand, but I stress the word "little". Speeches should be no more than four and a half minutes long.

Good morning. The first item of business is a Liberal Democrat debate on motion S3M-5809, in the name of Margaret Smith, on education.

I must hurry you, please.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5800, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. I invite Bruce Crawford to move the motion.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 3 March 2010 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Final Stage Debate: Ure Elder Fund Transfer and Dissolution Bill followed by Scottish Government Debate: Regeneration followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 4 March 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Educating Children and Young People to Compete in a Globalised 21st Century followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 10 March 2010 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 11 March 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning; Europe, External Affairs and Culture 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-5801, on the suspension of standing orders in relation to the Ure Elder Fund Transfer and Dissolution Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that, for the Ure Elder Fund Transfer and Dissolution Bill, Consideration Stage shall not take place and, accordingly, agrees that, for the purposes of the Bill, Rules 9A.7.1(b), 9A.9 and the first sentence of 9A.8.10 of the Standing Orders be suspended—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-5798.1, in the name of Richard Simpson, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5798, in the name of Shona Robison, on preventing obesity in Scotland, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 70, Against 46, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5798.2, in the name of Ross Finnie, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5798, in the name of Shona Robison, on preventing obesity in Scotland, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5798, in the name of Shona Robison, on preventing obesity in Scotland, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 70, Against 1, Abstentions 45.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament, while recognising the role of individual responsibility and choice, welcomes the Scottish Government's commitment to take action to prevent overweight and obesity as set out in the recent publication, Preventing Overweight and Obesity in Scotland: A Route Map Towards Healthy Weight, to support a cross-government approach that will guide future work and to welcome the establishment of a joint governmental leadership group to ensure and oversee progress, but regrets that the Scottish Government is failing to meet the SNP manifesto pledges to ensure that every pupil has two hours of quality PE each week delivered by specialist PE teachers and for children to be given free, year-round access to council swimming pools.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5801, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the suspension of standing orders, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that, for the Ure Elder Fund Transfer and Dissolution Bill, Consideration Stage shall not take place and, accordingly, agrees that, for the purposes of the Bill, Rules 9A.7.1(b), 9A.9 and the first sentence of 9A.8.10 of the Standing Orders be suspended.

As I indicated, the cabinet secretary will now take questions on the issues raised in her statement. I have exactly 20 minutes for such questions.

Order.

We come to open questions. Thus far, we have had substantive questions and answers. From now on, the question and the answer should be as brief as possible. We will get through as many questions as we can.

I am afraid that we have come to the end of the time that was allocated for this item. I am sorry that there are members who could not be called.

I am sorry to say that Ms Grahame was in error right at the beginning of her point of order. This business was not scheduled as a result of a complaint; it was scheduled as a result of a request, which was agreed to by the Parliamentary Bureau.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-5798, in the name of Shona Robison, on preventing obesity in Scotland.

As a business manager, Mr Rumbles, that is a matter for you to raise, if you wish to do so, at the next bureau meeting.

The next item of business is a statement by Nicola Sturgeon on representing constituents. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of her statement, so there will be no interventions or interruptions during it.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is the Rev Alex Noble, from Saltcoats North parish church in Ayrshire.

We now come to decision time—[ Interruption .] Order. There are nine questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-5650, in the name of Alex Neil, on the Home Owner and Debtor Protection (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Home Owner and Debtor Protection (Scotland) Bill be passed.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5720.2, in the name of Pauline McNeill, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5720, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on access to BBC Alba, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5720.1, in the name of Ted Brocklebank, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5720, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5720.3, in the name of Iain Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5720, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5720, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on access to BBC Alba, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament welcomes the contribution made by BBC Alba to Scottish culture and the promotion of the Gaelic language since its launch in September 2008; believes that BBC Alba's growing viewership, along with the direct employees and the independent broadcasters working for the channel, requires assurances about its long-term economic and cultural future; believes that this contribution would be even greater if BBC Alba was available on a wider variety of broadcasting platforms; and therefore calls on the BBC management and Virgin Media to resolve the ongoing dispute regarding carrying BBC channels on the cable network to ensure the widest possible access to BBC Alba; urges the BBC Trust to decide to make BBC Alba available on Freeview following its recent consultation on this issue, however the removal of existing BBC radio stations from the digital terrestrial TV platform in Scotland should not have to be a consideration in that decision; further believes that all Scottish residents should have access to the full range of broadcasting following digital switchover, and calls on the UK Government to require that all relay transmitters in Scotland are capable of transmitting the full range of Freeview channels by the 2010 and 2011 launch dates.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5679, in the name of Margaret Mitchell, on the Equal Opportunities Committee's report on female offenders in the criminal justice system, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Equal Opportunities Committee's 3rd Report 2009 (Session 3): Female offenders in the criminal justice system (SP Paper 332).

The next question is, that motion S3M-5719, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Bribery Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Bribery Bill, introduced in the House of Lords on 19 November 2009, relating to bribery and corruption, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, should be considered by the UK Parliament.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5718, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Crime and Security Bill, which is UK legislation, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Crime and Security Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 19 November 2009, relating to the regulation of the private security industry, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, should be considered by the UK Parliament.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5751, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on committee membership, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that Michael Matheson and Ian McKee be appointed as members of the End of Life Assistance (Scotland) Bill Committee.

Members should be aware that the revised version of section A of today's Business Bulletin  is available at the back of the chamber and has been e-mailed to members. It includes a Parliamentary Bureau motion, which sets out the proposed Scottish National Party membership of the End of Life Assistance (Scotland) Bill Committee, and a business motion that revises business for Wednesday 24 February. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-5751, on membership of the End of Life Assistance (Scotland) Bill Committee.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that Michael Matheson and Ian McKee be appointed as members of the End of Life Assistance (Scotland) Bill Committee.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5755, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to business for Wednesday 24 February.

Order.

What I will do, because I have received a number of requests from members and business managers, is read out verbatim rule 8.1.1 from the code of conduct. It reads as follows: "Every constituent is represented by one constituency MSP and seven regional MSPs. It is expected that each member will take on a case when approached although it is recognised that there may be legitimate reasons for a member to decline a constituent's case in certain circumstances, for example, where a constituent requests an MSP to take inappropriate action, or if that case seeks action which would represent a conflict of interest with existing casework or is contrary to the member's political beliefs. If so, the member would ordinarily be expected to inform the constituent that the member is not taking up the case."

Mr Martin, I have not made a ruling; I have read out the code of conduct  verbatim.

As Mr Martin knows well, I cannot ask the First Minister to do that. The matter is for the ministerial code, and we all know by now how that works.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-5719, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Bribery Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Bribery Bill, introduced in the House of Lords on 19 November 2009, relating to bribery and corruption, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[ Kenny MacAskill .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-5718, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Crime and Security Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Crime and Security Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 19 November 2009, relating to the regulation of the private security industry, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[ Kenny MacAskill .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

We do not need applause for points of order, thank you. Ms Grahame, I am grateful for the advance notice of your point of order. I believe that I dealt yesterday with the point that you have asked me to look at again. I think that I dealt with it firmly. Your point of order yesterday was predicated on the first paper that was received by the bureau. As I pointed out yesterday, the bureau then received another paper, after which it made its decision. That decision, which was to propose the establishment of a committee to consider the End of Life Assistance (Scotland) Bill, was made under rule 6.1.3. Under that rule—the one under which the decision was made—there is no requirement to consult the Conveners Group on the proposal. Rule 6.13.1 therefore does not apply. For the avoidance of doubt, I repeat what I said yesterday. The bureau has not breached standing orders. I hope that that is quite clear, and I hope that it is the last that we will hear of the matter.

I had a funny feeling that that was coming.

It was not the bureau that determined the outcome of yesterday's proceedings, but the Parliament. I think that that is as far as we need to go.

I must hurry you, I am afraid.

We have no spare time available, so I must ask members to stick to the times that they have been given.

Order.

Order.

Order.

When I ask for order, I must get it. As I have said before, I allow as much flexibility as possible. When I ask for order, please give it to me.

Order.

Order. [ Interruption. ] Order! I repeat that when I ask for order, I expect to get it. No matter whom I ask it from, I expect the same response.

I will take a constituency question from Cathy Jamieson.

Order.

Order. Let the member ask his question.

That concludes questions to the First Minister.

And what is the point of order, Mr Smith?

I can confirm that, but it is not a point of order for me to consider.

Briefly, please. This is a supplementary question.

Question, please.

That concludes the debate on access to BBC Alba. We are a few seconds early for general question time but, as the key players are in place, we will go straight to the first question.

Good morning. The first item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5717, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 3 of the Home Owner and Debtor Protection (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that, during Stage 3 of the Home Owner and Debtor Protection (Scotland) Bill, debate on groups of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limit indicated, that time limit being calculated from when the Stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the Stage being called) or otherwise not in progress: Groups 1 and 2: 15 minutes.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is stage 3 of the Home Owner and Debtor Protection (Scotland) Bill. In dealing with amendments, members should have the bill as amended at stage 2, which is SP Bill 32A; the marshalled list of amendments, which is SP Bill 32-ML; and the groupings, which I, as Presiding Officer, have agreed. The division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for five minutes before the first division this morning. The period of voting for the first division will be 30 seconds. Thereafter, I will allow a voting period of one minute for the first division after a debate. All other divisions will be 30 seconds.

Group 1 is entitled "Disposal by court on security holder's application". Amendment 2, in the name of Mary Mulligan, is grouped with amendment 3.

Group 2 is on family homes included in trust deeds. Amendment 1, in the name of the minister, is the only amendment in the group.

That ends consideration of amendments.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-5650, in the name of Alex Neil, on the Home Owner and Debtor Protection (Scotland) Bill. Before I invite the minister to open the debate, I call on Nicola Sturgeon, as a cabinet secretary, to signify Crown consent to the bill.

Thank you. I call Alex Neil to speak to and move the motion in his name.

There are nine questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-5672, in the name of David Stewart, on the Ure Elder Fund Transfer and Dissolution Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Ure Elder Fund Transfer and Dissolution Bill and that the Bill should proceed as a Private Bill.

The second question is, that motion S3M-5581, in the name of Christine Grahame, on the Control of Dogs (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Control of Dogs (Scotland) Bill.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5649, in the name of John Swinney, on the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Order 2010, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 106, Against 1, Abstentions 12.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Order 2010 be approved.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5710.1, in the name of Margo MacDonald, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5710, in the name of Mike Rumbles, on the establishment of a committee, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 49, Against 69, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5710, in the name of Mike Rumbles, on the establishment of a committee, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 69, Against 48, Abstentions 1.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to establish a committee of the Parliament as follows— Name of Committee: End of Life Assistance (Scotland) Bill Committee; Remit: To consider and report to the Parliament on the End of Life Assistance (Scotland) Bill; Duration: Until the Bill has received Royal Assent, falls or is withdrawn; Number of members: 6; Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish Liberal Democrat Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party; Membership: Helen Eadie, Ross Finnie, Nanette Milne, Cathy Peattie.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5711, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Public Appointments and Public Bodies etc. (Scotland) Act 2003 (Amendment of Specified Authorities) Order 2010 be approved.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5712, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of an SSI be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Health Board Elections (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2010 be approved.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5713, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on parliamentary recess dates, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees the following parliamentary recess dates under Rule 2.3.1: 9 October - 24 October 2010 (inclusive).

The final question is, that motion S3M-5714, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the office of the clerk, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that, between 1 September 2010 and 6 December 2010, the Office of the Clerk will be open on all days except: Saturdays and Sundays and 3 December 2010.

Order.

I am grateful to Ms Grahame for giving notice of her point of order. I do not believe that there has been a breach, because the paper to which Ms Grahame refers was the first of two papers that the bureau received. In its original discussions on that paper, the bureau determined that it wished to consider the matter further. A further paper was received at the bureau's next meeting and, after consideration, the bureau took the decision to set up what is referred to as an ad hoc committee, as it was quite entitled to do.

With the greatest respect, Ms Grahame, your point of order was on a paper that I am not quite sure how you came to be in possession of in the first place. It was the private business of the bureau. There has not been—[ Interruption. ] Members should not talk to each other or insult each other across the floor of the chamber. Members should be quite aware that there has not been a breach by the bureau of our standing orders.

I will need to consider what Margo MacDonald has said. I assure the chamber that that issue was in no way taken into consideration when the bureau took its decision to establish a special committee. I will put the question on the motion and the amendment at decision time. The next item of business is consideration of four further Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motions S3M-5711 and S3M-5712, on approval of Scottish statutory instruments.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Public Appointments and Public Bodies etc. (Scotland) Act 2003 (Amendment of Specified Authorities) Order 2010 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Health Board Elections (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2010 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-5713, on parliamentary recess dates, and motion S3M-5714, on the days when the office of the clerk will be open.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following parliamentary recess dates under Rule 2.3.1: 9 October - 24 October 2010 (inclusive). That the Parliament agrees that, between 1 September 2010 and 6 December 2010, the Office of the Clerk will be open on all days except: Saturdays and Sundays and 3 December 2010.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The questions on the motions will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Mike Rumbles to move motion S3M-5710 on the establishment of a committee to consider the End of Life Assistance (Scotland) Bill. As there is an amendment to the motion, 10 minutes have been allocated for a debate.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees to establish a committee of the Parliament as follows— Name of Committee: End of Life Assistance (Scotland) Bill Committee; Remit: To consider and report to the Parliament on the End of Life Assistance (Scotland) Bill; Duration: Until the Bill has received Royal Assent, falls or is withdrawn; Number of members: 6; Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish Liberal Democrat Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party; Membership: Helen Eadie, Ross Finnie, Nanette Milne, Cathy Peattie.—[ Mike Rumbles .]

With respect, minister, I say that I think that you are one motion ahead.

Will you move motion S3M-5708?  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 11 February 2010— (a) after 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Home Owner and Debtor Protection (Scotland) Bill insert followed by Scottish Government Debate: Access to BBC Alba and (b) after  2.55 pm Equal Opportunities Committee Debate: 3rd Report 2009: Female offenders in the criminal justice system insert followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Bribery Bill - UK Legislation followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Crime and Security Bill - UK Legislation—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

Well done. Now, minister, the next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5743, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. I call Bruce Crawford to move and explain motion S3M-5743.

We move to the next item of business. I am looking in vain for the Minister for Parliamentary Business. I see that he has just made it to the chamber. We are a little ahead of schedule. I make members aware that a revised version of section A of today's Business Bulletin is now available at the back of the chamber. It includes a new business motion that sets out a programme of business for the weeks beginning 24 February and 1 March. The previous version, which was printed in this morning's bulletin, has been withdrawn. We will come to that item in a moment. For now, the next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5708, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a revision to the business programme for Thursday 11 February. I call on Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-5708.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-5638, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the Flood and Water Management Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Flood and Water Management Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 19 November 2009, relating to reservoirs that sit on the border between Scotland and England, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[ Richard Lochhead .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

There are two questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-5559, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the Marine (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Marine (Scotland) Bill be passed.

The second question is, that motion S3M-5638, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the Flood and Water Management Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Flood and Water Management Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 19 November 2009, relating to reservoirs that sit on the border between Scotland and England, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, should be considered by the UK Parliament.

I thank the member for the prior notification of his point of order. Under rule 13.2, where a member of the Scottish Executive wishes to make a statement to a meeting of the Parliament, notice shall be given to the Presiding Officer. It is therefore not for me to ask the First Minister to make such a statement.

First Minister, I must press you to raise a point of order. You have not yet done so.

Order.

First Minister, I have to stop you there. I think that you are fully aware that that is not a point of order for me to discuss.

No. The matter is nothing to do with the proceedings of the Parliament, so that is not a legitimate point of order for me to discuss.

Order. Members who are talking are missing a fascinating geographical talk.

Question, please.

Order.

Order. Before I call the First Minister, may I have a cessation of loud conversations between other front-bench members?

Order. If the question includes local authority points in it, the First Minister is entitled to answer them.

I will take a constituency question from Willie Coffey.

I will take a further constituency question from Marlyn Glen.

Order.

A number of members wish to come in on this important topic. Please keep your questions and answers brief.

Question, please.

Too late, I am afraid. The question is, that amendment 107 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 106, Against 17, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 107 agreed to.  Amendment 27 moved—[Richard Lochhead]—and agreed to.  Amendment 108 not moved.

We come to group 6. Amendment 109, in the name of Karen Gillon, is grouped with amendments 28 to 31 and 8 to 12.

That is the second time that an electronic signal has come through the microphones. I would be grateful if all members would ensure that they have BlackBerrys and mobiles switched off.

We come to group 7. Amendment 32, in the name of Liam McArthur, is grouped with amendments 110 and 33.

We come to group 8. Amendment 13, in the name of Liam McArthur, is grouped with amendments 14, 15, 111, 34 and 35.

The question is, that amendment 24 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 62, Against 60, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 24 agreed to.  Amendment 104 moved—[Robin Harper]—and agreed to.  Amendment 25 moved—[Elaine Murray].

The question is, that amendment 25 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 62, Against 60, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 25 agreed to.  Amendment 105 moved—[Robin Harper]—and agreed to.

The question is, that amendment 106 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 61, Against 62, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 106 disagreed to.

We come to group 4. Amendment 26, in the name of the cabinet secretary, is grouped with amendments 69, 84, 97 and 98.

We come to group 5. Amendment 107, in the name of Karen Gillon, is grouped with amendments 27, 108 and 112.

We will proceed with the division on amendment 6 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

The result of the division is: For 59, Against 62, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 6 disagreed to.  Amendment 103 moved—[Liam McArthur]—and agreed to.

Amendment 24, in the name of Elaine Murray, is grouped with amendments 104, 25, 105, 106, 42 and 43.

Good morning. The first item of business today is consideration of business motion S3M-5671, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a timetable for stage 3 consideration of the Marine (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that, during Stage 3 of the Marine (Scotland) Bill, debate on groups of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limits indicated, each time limit being calculated from when the Stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the Stage in the morning and afternoon being called) or otherwise not in progress: Groups 1 and 2: 25 minutes Groups 3 to 5: 55 minutes Groups 6 to 9: 1 hour 40 minutes Groups 10 to 12: 2 hours 10 minutes Groups 13 and 14: 2 hours 40 minutes Groups 15 to 17: 3 hours 5 minutes Groups 18 to 20: 3 hours 40 minutes Groups 21 and 22: 4 hours.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is stage 3 of the Marine (Scotland) Bill. In dealing with amendments, members should have the bill as amended at stage 2—that is, SP bill 25A; the marshalled list, which was revised on Tuesday—that is, SP bill 25AML (revised); and the groupings which, as Presiding Officer, I have agreed. The division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for five minutes before the first division this morning. The period of voting will be 30 seconds. Thereafter, I will allow a voting period of one minute for the first division after a debate and 30 seconds for all other divisions. I inform members at the outset that time is incredibly tight, so I ask everyone to keep their contributions as brief as possible.

We come to group 1. Amendment 101, in the name of Peter Peacock, is grouped with amendments 2 and 5.

Amendment 102, in the name of Elaine Murray, is grouped with amendments 6, 103, 23, 91 and 92.

Before I call Liam McArthur to speak to amendment 6 and the other amendments in the group, I point out to members that amendments 6 and 103 are direct alternatives.

The question is, that amendment 6 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division. As this is the first division of the day, there will be a five-minute suspension.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-5637.1, in the name of Andy Kerr, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5637, in the name of John Swinney, on the Budget (Scotland) (No 4) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 59, Against 66, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5637, in the name of John Swinney, on the Budget (Scotland) (No 4) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 66, Against 45, Abstentions 14.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Budget (Scotland) (No. 4) Bill be passed.

The third and final question is, that motion S3M-5665, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Loch Ryan Port (Harbour Empowerment) Order 2009 be approved.

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motion S3M-5665, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, the Loch Ryan Port (Harbour Empowerment) Order 2009.

Patrick Harvie has indicated that he wants to speak against the motion.

The question is, that motion S3M-5663 be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that "09.00" be substituted for "09:15" in Rule 2.2.3 for the purpose of allowing the meeting of the Parliament on Thursday 4 February 2010 to begin at 9.00 am.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5662, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to the business programme for Thursday 4 February.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 4 February 2010— delete 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Marine (Scotland) Bill and insert 9.00 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Marine (Scotland) Bill—[ Bruce Crawford ].  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5664, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 10 February 2010 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by SPCB Question Time 2.20 pm Preliminary Stage Debate: Ure Elder Fund Transfer and Dissolution Bill followed by Stage 1 Debate: Control of Dogs (Scotland) Bill followed by Scottish Government Debate: The Local Government Finance (Scotland) Order 2010  followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 11 February 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Home Owner and Debtor Protection (Scotland) Bill 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Equal Opportunities Committee Debate: 3rd Report 2009: Female offenders in the criminal justice system followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 24 February 2010 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 25 February 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and Law Officers 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford ].  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5663, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, to enable business to begin at 9 am on Thursday 4 February.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that "09.00" be substituted for "09:15" in Rule 2.2.3 for the purpose of allowing the meeting of the Parliament on Thursday 4 February 2010 to begin at 9.00 am—[ Bruce Crawford ].

George Foulkes has asked to speak against the motion.

Order. He is entitled to do so.

The cabinet secretary should wind up shortly.

No—the cabinet secretary must conclude.

Mr Kerr.

That concludes the debate on the Budget (Scotland) (No 4) Bill.

It is simply a question of debate management, Mr Harvie, which the Presiding Officers are entitled to carry out as they see fit. We allocated the time to you and to Ms MacDonald today early—and we notified you of that—so that we could fit you into the middle of the debate, rather than just leave you until the end and see what time was available. I hope that that is sufficient reasoning, but I will take on board your comments.

Order.

Order.

Order.

I am grateful to Mr Gordon for giving me prior notice of his point of order. That is courteous and welcome—thank you for that. I confirm that this is a genuine point of order. I point out, however, that transport and works private bills provide only parliamentary authority for the building of such projects; it is up to the promoter and/or the Government to decide whether to proceed. Therefore, the actions that were carried out by the Government were in order in that instance.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-5637, in the name of John Swinney, on the Budget (Scotland) (No 4) Bill. I advise members right from the outset that we are extremely tight for time; therefore, they should stick rigidly to the allocation that they have been given.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader is Rose Goodenough, from the Scottish Inter Faith Council.

There are 10 questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-5620.2, in the name of Jim Mather, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5620, in the name of Pauline McNeill, on the Scottish newspaper industry, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 48, Against 75, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5620.1, in the name of Ted Brocklebank, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5620, in the name of Pauline McNeill, on the Scottish newspaper industry, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 76, Against 48, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5620, in the name of Pauline McNeill, on the Scottish newspaper industry, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 76, Against 48, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the important role played by local newspapers in Scotland; believes that, in the current economic climate, it is more important than ever to recognise the importance and value of community newspapers; notes that local newspapers provide a forum for expression that enables local people to deliberate on issues affecting their community; regrets that almost a year after the Glasgow Caledonian University seminar on 4 February 2009 on the newspaper industry, organised by the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism and involving newspaper proprietors, journalists, trade unionists and other stakeholders, there appears to have been little further dialogue between the Scottish Government and the sector; notes with concern the Scottish Government proposals to remove the legal requirement for local authorities to advertise public information notices in newspapers; believes that, if this proposal succeeds, it will deny the 38% of Scots who do not have internet access vital information currently available to them in newspapers, will create a democratic deficit and damage the local and national newspaper industry at a critical time; fears that a smaller newspaper industry will dilute quality journalism and training opportunities for young journalists, and calls on the Scottish Government to withdraw the draft Local Authority Public Information Notices (Electronic Publication) (Scotland) Order 2010.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5619.2, in the name of David Whitton, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5619, in the name of Keith Brown, on the skills strategy, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5619.1, in the name of Elizabeth Smith, which also seeks to amend motion S3M-5619, in the name of Keith Brown, on the skills strategy, as amended, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5619.3, in the name of Margaret Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5619, in the name of Keith Brown, on the skills strategy, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 15, Against 109, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5619, in the name of Keith Brown, on the skills strategy, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that flexibility and responsiveness to the needs of businesses and employees are critical elements of a successful skills strategy in helping tackle the challenges of the recession and the recovery and believes that the Scottish Government must maintain its focus on developing practical initiatives that help people and businesses with training for work, training in work and training from work to work and, to that end, calls on the Scottish Government to bring forward early publication of a refreshed Skills Strategy that takes account of the current economic climate and is backed by the resources necessary to provide appropriate places on  Training for Work and Get Ready for Work programmes and the wide range of modern apprentice schemes; believes that pupils in secondary schools who wish to do so should have the opportunity to pursue formal vocational training, and calls on the Scottish Government to ensure that the system is more demand-led and that publicly funded training matches far more closely the needs of employers.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5586, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Equality Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Equality Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 24 April 2009, to make provision within the legislative competence of the Parliament and to alter the executive competence of the Scottish Ministers in respect of the public sector duty to promote equality; the hearing of disability discrimination school education cases by the Additional Support Needs Tribunals for Scotland; the arrangements for educational endowments; the power to prescribe qualification authorities in relation to equality, transitional arrangements for single sex educational establishments; a duty on relevant public authorities in Scotland, when making decisions of a strategic nature about how to exercise their functions, to have due regard to socio-economic disadvantage; and reasonable adjustments to common parts of buildings to suit the needs of disabled people who live in those buildings, should be considered by the UK Parliament.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5587, in the name of John Swinney, on the Constitutional Reform and Governance Bill, which is UK legislation, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Constitutional Reform and Governance Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 20 July 2009, to alter the executive competence of the Scottish Ministers in respect of the civil service and to make provision within the legislative competence of the Parliament and to alter that legislative competence in respect of Convention rights proceedings brought under the Scotland Act 1998 should be considered by the UK Parliament.

The final question is, that motion S3M-5585, in the name of John Swinney, on the Energy Bill, which is UK legislation, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the UK Energy Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 19 November 2009, relating to the disbursal of funds for any future Carbon Capture and Storage demonstration projects that will be the subject of assistance schemes (as they relate to environmental issues), so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, or alter the executive competence of the Scottish Ministers, should be considered by the UK Parliament.

The next item of business is consideration of legislative consent motion S3M-5586, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Equality Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Equality Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 24 April 2009, to make provision within the legislative competence of the Parliament and to alter the executive competence of the Scottish Ministers in respect of the public sector duty to promote equality; the hearing of disability discrimination school education cases by the Additional Support Needs Tribunals for Scotland; the arrangements for educational endowments; the power to prescribe qualification authorities in relation to equality, transitional arrangements for single sex educational establishments; a duty on relevant public authorities in Scotland, when making decisions of a strategic nature about how to exercise their functions, to have due regard to socio-economic disadvantage; and reasonable adjustments to common parts of buildings to suit the needs of disabled people who live in those buildings, should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[ Nicola Sturgeon. ]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of legislative consent motion S3M-5587, in the name of John Swinney, on the Constitutional Reform and Governance Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Constitutional Reform and Governance Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 20 July 2009, to alter the executive competence of the Scottish Ministers in respect of the civil service and to make provision within the legislative competence of the Parliament and to alter that legislative competence in respect of Convention rights proceedings brought under the Scotland Act 1998 should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[ John Swinney .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of a further legislative consent motion, S3M-5585, also in the name of John Swinney, on the Energy Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the UK Energy Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 19 November 2009, relating to the disbursal of funds for any future Carbon Capture and Storage demonstration projects that will be the subject of assistance schemes (as they relate to environmental issues), so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, or alter the executive competence of the Scottish Ministers, should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[ John Swinney .]

Order. I am sorry, minister, but there is far too much conversation taking place. I want to hear the minister even if members do not.

We come now to closing speeches. I have approximately seven minutes in hand, so members may by all means extend their contributions a little bit.

Order.

Order. That is enough noise.

Order.

Question please, Ms MacDonald.

It is meant to be a question.

That concludes questions—and suggestions—to the First Minister.

Question 2 has been withdrawn.

Question 4 was lodged by Margaret Smith, but she is not in the chamber. The sad thing about that is that I cannot call Ian  McKee to ask a perfectly good supplementary question.

While the minister is answering that question, perhaps Mr Smith might consider turning off his BlackBerry. I assume that he got the information about Andy Murray from that.

That concludes the debate on the Scottish newspaper industry. We have finished a few seconds early, but everyone who is required to be here to allow us to commence general question time is present.

Good morning. The first item of business today is a debate on motion S3M-5620, in the name of Pauline McNeill, on the Scottish newspaper industry.

I remind members to speak through the chair rather than directly to each other.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-5560, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Tobacco and Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

I cannot take a point of order during voting, Mr Brown.

The result of the division is: For 108, Against 15, Abstentions 0.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Tobacco and Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Bill be passed.

That covers all the bases, Mr Brown. Your point is on the record. We will have the console looked at. The second question is, that motion S3M-5614, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Crofting (Designation of Areas) (Scotland) Order 2010 be approved.

If no member objects, I propose to ask a single question on motions S3M-5615 and S3M-5616. The question is, that motions S3M-5615 and S3M-5616, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of codes of practice, be agreed to.  Motions agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Scottish Government Code of Practice for the Welfare of Dogs (SG 2009/279) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Scottish Government Code of Practice for the Welfare of Cats (SG 2009/280) be approved.

The fourth question is, that motion S3M-5617, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the establishment of a committee, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to establish a committee of the Parliament as follows— Name of Committee: Forth Crossing Bill Committee; Remit: To consider and report to the Parliament on the Forth Crossing Bill; Duration: Until the Bill has received Royal Assent, falls or is withdrawn; Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party and the Deputy  Convener will be a member of the Scottish Liberal Democrat Party; Membership: Jackson Carlaw, Joe FitzPatrick, Hugh O'Donnell, David Stewart.

The next item of business is consideration of four Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-5614, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Crofting (Designation of Areas) (Scotland) Order 2010 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motions S3M-5615 and S3M-5616, on codes of practice for the welfare of dogs and cats.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Scottish Government Code of Practice for the Welfare of Dogs (SG 2009/279) be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Scottish Government Code of Practice for the Welfare of Cats (SG 2009/280) be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on the motions will be put at decision time. Finally, I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-5617, on the establishment of a Forth crossing bill committee.

The question on the motion will be put at decision time, to which we now come.

We have many business motions and other processes to go through, and we will do that as rapidly as possible. The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5609, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme for Thursday 28 January.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 28 January 2010— after 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Skills Strategy insert followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Equality Bill - UK Legislation followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Constitutional Reform and Governance Bill - UK Legislation followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Energy Bill - UK Legislation—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item is business motion S3M-5610, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. Anyone who wishes to speak against the motion should press their request-to-speak button.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 3 February 2010 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Budget (Scotland) (No.4) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 4 February 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Marine (Scotland) Bill 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Europe, External Affairs and Culture; Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Continuation of Stage 3 Proceedings: Marine (Scotland) Bill followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Flood and Water Management Bill - UK Legislation followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 10 February 2010 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by SPCB Question Time 2.20 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 11 February 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Home Owner and Debtor Protection (Scotland) Bill 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item is business motion S3M-5611, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a stage 1 timetable for the Housing (Scotland) Bill. Anyone who wishes to speak against the motion should please press their request-to-speak button.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Housing (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 25 June 2010.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item is business motion S3M-5612, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a stage 2 timetable for the Criminal  Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill. Anyone who wishes to speak against the motion knows what to do by now.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill at Stage 2 be completed by 26 March 2010.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5613, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a stage 2 timetable for the Interpretation and Legislative Reform (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Interpretation and Legislative Reform (Scotland) Bill at Stage 2 be completed by 26 March 2010.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

We will proceed with the division.

The result of the division is: For 14, Against 103, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 4 disagreed to.

The question is, that amendment 29, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 60, Against 60, Abstentions 0. I will therefore use my casting vote. In this case, the status quo is the bill, and the amendment would be a change, so I vote against the amendment.  Amendment 29, as amended, disagreed to.

The question is, that amendment 30 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 60, Against 61, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 30 disagreed to.

Does Mary Scanlon wish to move amendment 5?

I exercise my power under rule 9.8.4A to extend the deadline to allow the debate on groups 1 and 2 to be completed. Group 2 is on offences involving purchase of tobacco products by or on behalf of persons under 18. Amendment 18, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendments 21 to 23.

I call Dr Richard Simpson. Please be as brief as possible, Dr Simpson.

Minister, do you wish to wind up?

I am grateful to you.  Amendment 18 agreed to.

The question is, that amendment 31 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division. This is a one-minute division.

The result of the division is: For 60, Against 61. There was one abstention but it seems to have disappeared from the screen.  Amendment 31 disagreed to.  Amendment 32 not moved.

Group 3 is on prohibition of use of vending machines for the sale of tobacco—exemption. Amendment 1, in the name of Rhoda Grant, is grouped with amendments 2 and 3.

I will be able to fit in the four members who wish to speak, if they are very brief.

I call Mary Scanlon to wind up and either press or withdraw amendment 4.

The question is, that amendment 4 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division. I suspend the meeting for five minutes.

The next item of business is stage 3 proceedings on the Tobacco and Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Bill. For dealing with the amendments, members should have in front of them the bill as amended at stage 2, which is marked "SP Bill 22A", and the marshalled list of amendments, which is marked "SP Bill 22A-ML". In addition, they should have the groupings of amendments, which I as Presiding Officer have agreed. Members should also have a supplement to the marshalled list containing a manuscript amendment that I have agreed may be considered in this afternoon's proceedings. The supplement has been placed on each desk. During the course of the afternoon, the division bell will sound. Proceedings will be suspended for five minutes for the first division. The period of voting for the first division will be 30 seconds. Thereafter, I will allow a voting period of one minute for the first division after a debate. For all other divisions, the voting period will be 30 seconds.

Group 1 is prohibition of tobacco displays et cetera. Amendment 4, in the name of Mary Scanlon, is grouped with amendments 29, 29A, 30, 5, 6, 31, 32, 7 to 10, 14, 47 and 16. I draw members' attention to the pre-emption information on the groupings sheet under "Notes on amendments in this group".

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5605, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a timetable for stage 3 consideration of the Tobacco and Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that, during Stage 3 of the Tobacco and Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Bill, debate on groups of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limit indicated, that time limit being calculated from when the Stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the Stage being called) or otherwise not in progress: Groups 1 and 2: 25 minutes Groups 3 to 5: 1 hour Groups 6 to 8: 1 hour 25 minutes.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

Good afternoon. The first item this afternoon is time for reflection, and we are very privileged that our time for reflection leader today is the Right Rev William Hewitt, moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland.

There are six questions to be put as a result of today's business. If members would come to order, please, I remind them that, in relation to this morning's debate, if the amendment in the name of Nicola Sturgeon is agreed to, the amendments in the name of Jackie Baillie and Ross Finnie will fall. If the amendment in the name of Jackie Baillie is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Ross Finnie will fall. The first question is, that amendment S3M-5572.3, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5572, in the name of Mary Scanlon, on prescription charges and NHS spending priorities with particular reference to health visitors, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 49, Against 32, Abstentions 42.  Amendment agreed to.

Amendment S3M-5572.1, in the name of Jackie Baillie, and amendment S3M-5572.2, in the name of Ross Finnie, are pre-empted. The next question is, that motion S3M-5572, in the name of Mary Scanlon, on prescription charges, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 49, Against 32, Abstentions 42.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament recognises that the progress towards abolishing prescription charges is already benefiting all those patients with long-term conditions and on low incomes who are not entitled to exemption and ensuring that fewer patients face having to choose between buying their prescriptions or paying for other necessities and that total abolition is the simplest and fairest way of ensuring that nobody in Scotland has to make such a choice and that healthcare is free at the point of use.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5573.1, in the name of James Kelly, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5573, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on Scotland's water rescue review, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The final question is, that motion S3M-5573, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on Scotland's water rescue review, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament welcomes the findings of Paddy Tomkins' Independent Review of Open Water and Flood Rescue in Scotland , which examined the arrangements and protocols for inland water rescue in Scotland, and believes that the report's recommendations should be carefully considered and acted on in order to strengthen multi-agency arrangements and ensure that an effective and proportionate response capability exists across Scotland that includes adequate equipment and training being made available to staff required to attend water and flood incidents.

I am not convinced that that is a point of order. [ Interruption. ] Order. This is quite unusual procedure. I have offered the First Minister the opportunity to comment, but he has asked whether the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing can do so. As long as— [ Interruption. ] Order. As long as it is purely a point of clarification, I am happy to let the cabinet secretary respond.

I will take your point of order after the cabinet secretary has responded, Mr Purvis.

Order.

I have other points of order to take, Mr Rumbles. I will take Mr McLetchie's point of order, although I make it clear that I am not prepared to have another debate on this subject.

The bottom line is that that is a question of the veracity—

I will come to you in due course, Mr Rumbles. The bottom line is that that is a matter of the veracity of answers, and members know perfectly well that that is not a matter for Presiding Officers to deal with. The specifics of the issue should be taken up with the First Minister if members wish to do so. The next point of order is from Jackie Baillie.

Order. I would like to know what your point of order is.

That is simply not a point of order. Reference has been made to an unusual procedure; I undertook an unusual procedure—I have the right to do that. That is not a point of order, Ms Baillie; we are back to questions of veracity.

That should be dealt with through the ministerial code of conduct, if members want to take it any further.

No, but you can make a point of order.

I am sorry, cabinet secretary, but I must ask you to take your seat. That is a continuation of the debate that I have said I am not prepared to have. I have made it quite plain that if members want to pursue a specific point from what the First Minister said today, they should do so with the First Minister.

Order. There is far too much background noise.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is themed question time, and the first set of questions is on justice and law officers. I call Michael Matheson to ask question 1. The member is not here. That is not very impressive, if I may say so. I call Johann Lamont to ask question 2.

Which happens to be my family motto. I call John Scott.

Question 4 was not lodged.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-5573, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on Scotland's water rescue review. I invite members who wish to speak in the debate to press their request-to-speak buttons now. It might be helpful if members who do not really wish to speak in the debate pressed their request-to-speak buttons too, because we have a little flexibility in time. I call Fergus Ewing to speak to and move the motion. I will tell you when to stop, minister.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Order.

We will take a supplementary question from Jackie Baillie.

A question, please, Dr Simpson.

I hope that members will forgive me if we indulge in a little overtime. I felt that it was important that all sides of the debate should be heard on question 4. Question 6 is from Elizabeth Smith.

Question 3 was not lodged.

Order.

I remind members that the debate is about prescription charges.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-5572, in the name of Mary Scanlon, on prescription charges and national health service spending priorities, with particular reference to health visitors. Ms Scanlon, you have around 13 minutes to speak to and move the motion.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-5567, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Adoption and Children (Scotland) Act 2007 (Modification of Enactments) Order 2010 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

There are two questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-5541, in the name of John Swinney, on the Budget (Scotland) (No 4) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 64, Against 46, Abstentions 18.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Budget (Scotland) (No.4) Bill.

The second question is, that motion S3M-5567, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to. Are we agreed?  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Adoption and Children (Scotland) Act 2007 (Modification of Enactments) Order 2010 be approved.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5565, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 27 January 2010 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Tobacco and Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 28 January 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Skills Strategy followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 3 February 2010 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Budget (Scotland) (No.4) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 4 February 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Marine (Scotland) Bill 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time  2.15 pm Themed Question Time Europe, External Affairs and Culture; Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Continuation of Stage 3 Proceedings: Marine (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5566, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out an extension to the stage 1 timetable for the Control of Dogs (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Control of Dogs (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be extended to 12 February 2010.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

I did not wish to interrupt Mr Kerr in the middle of his speech, but I would appreciate members' not referring to one another directly but speaking through the chair.

I call on Andy Kerr to open on behalf of the Scottish Labour Party. You have 11 minutes, Mr Kerr.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection, for which our leader is the Right Rev David Gillham, Bishop of the Open Episcopal Church in Scotland.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-5541, in the name of John Swinney, on the Budget (Scotland) (No 4) Bill. Time is pretty tight in the debate.

We come to decision time. The first question is, that amendment S3M-5512.2, in the name of Michael Russell, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5512, in the name of Des McNulty, on the report of the literacy commission, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5512.1, in the name of Elizabeth Smith, also seeking to amend motion S3M-5512, in the name of Des McNulty, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 15, Against 102, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5512.3, in the name of Margaret Smith, also seeking to amend motion S3M-5512, in the name of Des McNulty, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5512, in the name of Des McNulty, on the report of the literacy commission, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament welcomes the report of the Literacy Commission, set up by Labour, and its recommendations on actions needed to support the acquisition of basic literacy skills and the development of higher-order literacy-related skills; calls on the Scottish Government to bring forward as a matter of priority, following discussion with the Literacy Commission and all stakeholders, a literacy action plan within the context of the Curriculum for Excellence, which has the aim of raising standards of literacy at every level; notes also the successful role of trade unions in promoting literacy and numeracy among adults and the commission's support for nurture groups in primary schools in areas of disadvantage as pioneered by Glasgow City, North Lanarkshire, West Dunbartonshire, Clackmannanshire councils and others, and suggests that, in order to assist those children facing the biggest barriers, the Scottish Government work in partnership with local authorities serving areas with concentrations of socio-economic disadvantage to implement and assess pilot schemes that can provide continuous and systematic support for families with children in the birth to three age group and make sure that these efforts produce benefits for children from low-income families wherever they live in Scotland.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5515.1, in the name of Johann Lamont, seeking to amend motion S3M-5515, in the name of Alex Neil, on attendance allowance for people with disabilities, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 43, Against 75, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The sixth question is, that motion S3M-5515, in the name of Alex Neil, on attendance allowance for people with disabilities, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 73, Against 45, Abstentions 0.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament notes that the UK Green Paper, Shaping the Future of Care Together , published in June 2009, may have long-term implications for vulnerable older and disabled people in Scotland who are eligible for attendance allowance and disability living allowance as it proposes to remove the universal benefits of attendance allowance and disability living allowance and instead redesign the benefit system to meet English social policy objectives and redirect funding to pay for the provision of a National Care Service in England, while failing to give adequate consideration to the position in Scotland, and calls on HM Government to consult fully with the Scottish Government, the Scottish Parliament, local authorities, NHS boards and other interested parties before proceeding any further.

Order.

Order. There is too much noise.

I call the minister to wind up the debate. Minister, you have until 5 o'clock.

That is not a point of order, Ms White, with great respect. You are eating into the time that the minister has to wind up.

In redistributing time, I find that I have a little more for Ms Baillie than I thought. I can offer her 10 and a half minutes.

At this stage, we have six minutes in hand, so, to be fair, I offer each of the remaining closing speakers up to an extra two minutes each. I call David McLetchie, who has up to eight minutes.

That is not a matter of responsibility for the First Minister.

As long as you stick to what comes within your responsibilities.

That is actually incorrect, Miss Goldie. The Scottish Government does not allocate that budget.

Order.

I will take a constituency question from Paul Martin.

I will take a further supplementary from Rob Gibson.

Order.

As the start of First Minister's questions was delayed, I will take a final supplementary from Lewis Macdonald.

Before we move on to questions to the First Minister, members will want to join me in welcoming to the gallery the chair of the London Assembly, Mr Darren Johnson, and a delegation from the Assembly. [ Applause .]

): Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-5512, in the name of Des McNulty, on the report of the literacy commission. Unless there are a few surprises, we have a little flexibility, so I will not be too rigorous in enforcing time limits—unless I have to be.

There are two questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-5428, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the Interpretation and Legislative Reform (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Interpretation and Legislative Reform (Scotland) Bill.

The second question is, that motion S3M-5464, in the name of John Swinney, on the Financial Services Bill, which is UK legislation, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Financial Services Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 19 November 2009, relating to the enhancement of understanding and knowledge of the public of financial matters and the ability of members of the public to manage their own financial affairs, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, should be considered by the UK Parliament.

The cabinet secretary will now take questions on his statement. We have 20 minutes and not one second longer, after which I must move on. Timing is very tight today, so please keep questions and answers brief.

I must hurry you, Mr Rumbles.

We come to open questions. I repeat that we have no time to play with; members should keep it brief.

Ask a question, please.

There are two more questions, and we have a minute and a half to get both in with their answers.

I must hurry you.

Thank you, Mr Stephen; I cannot allow you any more time.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-5428, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the Interpretation and Legislative Reform (Scotland) Bill.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5507, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme for today.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 13 January 2010— after 2.30 pm Time for Reflection - Father Robert Hendrie, St Luke's Church, Banknock followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions insert followed by Ministerial Statement: Aberdeen Western Peripheral Route Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a statement by John Swinney on the Aberdeen western peripheral route. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interruptions or interventions during it.

Good afternoon. As always on a Wednesday, the first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader is Father Robert Hendrie of St Luke's church in Banknock.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5456, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 13 January 2010 2.30 pmTime for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 1 Debate: Interpretation and Legislative Reform (Scotland) Bill followed by Public Petitions Committee Debate: Petition PE1150 on Community Prisons followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Financial Services Bill - UK Legislation followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pmDecision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 14 January 2010 9.15 amParliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 amGeneral Question Time 12 noonFirst Minister's Question Time 2.15 pmThemed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pmScottish Government Debate: Attendance Allowance for People with Disabilities followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pmDecision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 20 January 2010 2.30 pmTime for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pmDecision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 21 January 2010 9.15 amParliamentary Bureau Motions  followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 amGeneral Question Time 12 noonFirst Minister's Question Time 2.15 pmThemed Question Time Justice and Law Officers Rural Affairs and the Environment 2.55 pmScottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pmDecision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-5452, on the designation of a lead committee for the draft Census (Scotland) Order 2010.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Census (Scotland) Order 2010 (SSI 2010/draft).—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

There are two questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-5453, in the name of Christine Grahame, on the Health and Sport Committee's report on its inquiry into child and adolescent mental health and wellbeing, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Health and Sport Committee's 7th Report, 2009 (Session 3): Report on the Inquiry into child and adolescent mental health and well-being (SP Paper 309).

The second question is, that motion S3M-5452, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the designation of a lead committee for the draft Census (Scotland) Order 2010, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Census (Scotland) Order 2010 (SSI 2010/draft).

Thank you, minister. I am grateful for the couple of minutes of extra time that you have given to us. Time is extremely tight. I have exactly half an hour for questions on the statement. Many members have requested to speak, therefore I ask that questions and answers be as succinct as possible.

The minister has indicated that he is happy to respond and I am happy to let him do so.

I hope that you will come back to me when you have looked into that, minister. If there is anything further to report to Parliament in that regard, I will do so. We have come slightly early to the next item of business. The member who is meant to lead the item is not in the chamber, which is highly regrettable. Given the time in hand, I will suspend the meeting for two minutes.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5450, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which seeks to suspend standing orders to allow the Parliament to meet at 9 o'clock on Thursday 7 January. If any member wishes to speak against the motion, they should press their request-to-speak button now.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that "09:00" be substituted for "09:15" in Rule 2.2.3 for the purpose of allowing the meeting of the Parliament on Thursday 7 January 2010 to begin at 9.00 am.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

Sarah Boyack has pressed her button. I take it that you do not wish to speak against the motion.

The next item of business is consideration of another business motion, S3M-5451, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a revised business programme. Again, if any member wishes to speak against the motion, they should press their request-to-speak button now.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees— (a) the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 6 January 2010— delete followed by Health and Sport Committee Debate: Report on the Inquiry into Child and Adolescent Mental Health and Well-being followed by Public Petitions Committee Debate: Petition PE1150 on Community Prisons and insert followed by Ministerial Statement: The Decision on the Beauly to Denny Power Line followed by Health and Sport Committee Debate: Report on the Inquiry into Child and Adolescent Mental Health and Well-being and (b) the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 7 January 2010— delete 9.15 amParliamentary Bureau Motions  followed by Stage 1 Debate: Public Services Reform (Scotland) Bill and insert 9.00 amParliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Impact of Severe Weather in Scotland followed by Stage 1 Debate: Public Services Reform (Scotland) Bill—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The next item of business is a statement by Jim Mather on the decision on the Beauly to Denny power line. The minister will take questions at the end of his 15-minute statement so there should be no interventions or interruptions.

Good afternoon and welcome back. Our first item of business this afternoon, as always, is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader is the Rev Jim Cowan from Arthurlie parish church in Barrhead.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-5061, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution for the Home Owner and Debtor Protection (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Home Owner and Debtor Protection (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any increase in expenditure of a kind referred to in Rule 9.12.3(b)(i) or (iii) of the Parliament's Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.—[Fergus Ewing.]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-5405, in the name of Andrew Welsh, on the scrutiny of the draft Budget 2010-11, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the 7th Report 2009 (Session 3) of the Finance Committee on the scrutiny of the Draft Budget 2010-11 (SP Paper 349) and refers the report and its recommendations to the Scottish Government for consideration.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5415, in the name of Alex Neil, on the Home Owner and Debtor Protection (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Home Owner and Debtor Protection (Scotland) Bill.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5061, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution for the Home Owner and Debtor Protection (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Home Owner and Debtor Protection (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any increase in expenditure of a kind referred to in Rule 9.12.3(b)(i) or (iii) of the Parliament's Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.

That concludes decision time. I wish you all a happy Christmas and a good new year.  Meeting closed at 17:01.

I am grateful to the minister for ensuring that we did not have to suspend the sitting.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is themed question time. The whole 40 minutes will be given over to questions on finance and sustainable growth. Question 1 has been withdrawn.

Order.

Order.

Order.

We will take a supplementary question from Liam McArthur.

Order.

Question, please.

Minister, keep it brief, please.

Question 5 has been withdrawn.

Mr Aitken, could you draw your microphone towards you a bit?

Moving swiftly onwards.

Order. Let us hear the answer.

Order. I am sorry, Mr Whitton, but we cannot have front-bench conversations taking place during speeches.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-5405, in the name of Andrew Welsh, on the Finance Committee's report on the Scottish Government's draft budget 2010-11. I call Andrew Welsh, the convener of the committee, to speak to and move the motion.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-5423, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Pharmacy Order 2010 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

There is just one question to be put as a result of today's business. The question is, that motion S3M-5423, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of a statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Pharmacy Order 2010 be approved.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5421, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 6 January 2010 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Health and Sport Committee Debate: Inquiry into Child and Adolescent Mental Health and Well-being followed by Public Petitions Committee Debate: Petition PE1150 on Community Prisons followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 7 January 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 1 Debate: Public Services Reform (Scotland) Bill 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning; Europe, External Affairs and Culture 2.55 pm Continuation of Stage 1 Debate: Public Services Reform (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution: Public Services Reform (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 13 January 2010 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 14 January 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5422, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 1 of the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 30 April 2010.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5420, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme for today.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 16 December 2009— after 2.30 pm Time for Reflection - Rev Maureen Leitch, Bourock Parish Church, Barrhead followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions insert followed by Ministerial Statement: Education—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a statement by Michael Russell on education. As the cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, there should be no interventions or interruptions.

Order. I have already asked that there be no interruptions or interventions. There will be plenty of opportunity to question the cabinet secretary, and I ask members to stick to that.

Order. I ask members not to interrupt, and I ask the minister to stick to his statement.

We come to open questions. Time is at a premium so please keep them brief—and the same applies to the answers.

Order. Let us see whether we can get an answer.

The next item of business is a debate on the Scottish Government's response to the pre-budget report.

Good afternoon. As always on a Wednesday, our first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is the Rev Maureen Leitch from Bourock parish church in Barrhead.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-5378.2, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5378, in the name of Charlie Gordon, on concessionary travel, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5378.1, in the name of Alison McInnes, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5378, in the name of Charlie Gordon, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5378, in the name of Charlie Gordon, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament welcomes the recommendation of the Review of the Scotland Wide Free Bus Travel Scheme for Older and Disabled People to include seriously injured armed forces veterans to the scheme but notes with disappointment and concern the review's recommendation to disenfranchise disabled people who receive the lower rate of Disability Living Allowance (DLA) from the scheme; further notes that the review paints a worst-case scenario of the costs of including disabled people who receive the lower rate of DLA and that these costs are open to scrutiny and debate and that the review also played down the positive social impact that the scheme has on people's lives; acknowledges that denying disabled people on the lower rate of DLA access to the scheme will damage the main aims and ethos of the scheme, namely to allow disabled people improved access to services, facilities and social networks by free scheduled bus services and so promote social inclusion and improve health by promoting a more active lifestyle for disabled people; notes that previous local schemes operated in West Lothian and Strathclyde provided people on the lower rate of DLA access to concessionary travel schemes and that they supported the national scheme mirroring their eligibility criteria instead of the stringent criteria that are now adopted; welcomes disability organisations Leonard Cheshire Disability, Learning Disability Alliance Scotland (LDAS), Inclusion Scotland and many more in challenging the review's negative recommendation; considers that disabled people's views, that the national concessionary travel scheme should include people who receive the lower rate of DLA instead of backing the unfair recommendation on eligibility from the review, should be listened to; considers that if the Labour Party wishes this to be the case, it should bring forward a costed proposal to the Budget to show where the resources will be taken from to pay for this; recognises that rural areas suffer disproportionately from bus fare increases or reduced bus services, and calls on the Scottish Government to consider extending eligibility for the national concessionary travel  scheme to include older and disabled people using community transport in rural areas.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5379.1, in the name of Patrick Harvie, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5379, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, on climate change, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 3, Against 117, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The final question is, that motion S3M-5379, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, on climate change, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament, having agreed unanimously on a 42% target reduction in Scotland's greenhouse gas emissions by 2020 and an 80% reduction by 2050, agrees that MSPs and Scotland as a whole must focus on the practical implementation of the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009; urges that all countries bring forward the most ambitious commitments appropriate to their circumstances early in the talks; looks to participants in Copenhagen to reach a legally binding agreement at the earliest opportunity that will prevent world temperatures rising by more than 2°C, and notes that a failure to do so would threaten vulnerable countries with, for example, inundation and desertification.

I am sorry to interrupt, minister, but could we please have less noise, particularly from members who are entering the chamber? A very important debate is going on.

I am sorry, minister, but I will have to try again. Could members please be quiet?

I am not sure that we need one, but I call Linda Fabiani to ask her supplementary question.

Briefly, please.

Order.

Question 2 has been withdrawn.

That concludes general questions, but before we come to First Minister's questions, I know that members will want to join me in welcoming to the gallery the Ambassador of Ireland to the United Kingdom, His Excellency Bobby McDonagh, and the Cuban Ambassador, His Excellency René Mujica Cantelar.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-5378, in the name of Charlie Gordon, on concessionary travel.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-5376, amending the remit of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the remit of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee be amended to— To consider and report on (a) further and higher education, lifelong learning, schools, pre-school care, skills and other matters falling within the responsibility of the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning and (b) matters relating to culture and the arts falling within the responsibility of the Minister for Culture and External Affairs.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-5365.1, in the name of Pauline McNeill, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5365, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on further powers for the Scottish Parliament, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 59, Against 66, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5365, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on further powers for the Scottish Parliament, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 63, Against 61, Abstentions 1.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament welcomes the recommendations of the Calman Commission on Scottish Devolution that responsibility for the law across a range of areas be devolved to the Scottish Parliament and also welcomes the recommendations for closer working between the Scottish and UK Ministers to ensure that the needs of Scotland are properly represented, and urges the UK Government to work with the Scottish Parliament to ensure that, where there is consensus, all such recommendations are implemented before the dissolution of the current UK Parliament.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5376, in the name of Bruce Crawford, amending a committee remit, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the remit of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee be amended to— To consider and report on (a) further and higher education, lifelong learning, schools, pre-school care, skills and other matters falling within the responsibility of the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning and (b) matters relating to culture and the arts falling within the responsibility of the Minister for Culture and External Affairs.

That concludes decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5373, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on the suspension of standing orders for the purpose of members' business on Thursday 17 December.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that Rule 5.6.1(c) of Standing Orders be suspended for the purpose of Members' Business on Thursday 17 December 2009.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5374, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 16 December 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Scottish Government's Response to the Pre-Budget Report followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 17 December 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Finance Committee Debate: Scrutiny of the Draft Budget 2010-11 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time followed by Members' Business 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Stage 1 Debate: Home Owner and Debtor Protection (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution: Home Owner and Debtor Protection (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Wednesday 6 January 2010 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 7 January 2010 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning; Europe, External Affairs and Culture 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5375, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 1 of the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be extended to 8 January 2010.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

I must hurry you, minister.

Good afternoon. As always, our first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Father John Campbell, from the parish of St Paul the Apostle, Shettleston, in Glasgow.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-5365, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on further powers for the Scottish Parliament.

We come to decision time. There are six questions to be put as a result of today's business. I remind members that, in relation to the debate on education, if the amendment in the name of Michael Russell is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Murdo Fraser will fall. The first question is, that amendment S3M-5334.2, in the name of Michael Russell, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5334, in the name of Margaret Smith, on education, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 47, Against 72, Abstentions 2.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5334.1, in the name of Des McNulty, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5334, in the name of Margaret Smith, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 59, Against 47, Abstentions 15.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5334.3, in the name of Murdo Fraser, which also seeks to amend motion S3M-5334, in the name of Margaret Smith, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 15, Against 106, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The fourth question is, that motion S3M-5334, in the name of Margaret Smith, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 57, Against 50, Abstentions 14.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament regrets that for the last two years the SNP government has presided over a series of failures on a range of education indicators, including teacher numbers and class sizes; believes that there are fundamental challenges that must be addressed in order to tackle the growing crisis in Scottish education; therefore calls on the new Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning to take immediate action to rebuild the bond of trust between central and local government and establish a constructive working relationship with local authorities so that schools can deliver the best possible outcomes for Scottish education and young people, to bring fresh impetus to the implementation of the Curriculum for Excellence and the new national qualifications, providing teachers with the clarity, training and resources that they urgently require to implement the changes, and to focus on the key issue of teacher numbers, giving new teachers the career opportunities that they deserve and delivering effective workforce planning for the future, and calls on the Scottish Government to introduce a properly planned and resourced scheme for early retirement and more flexible winding down arrangements for older teachers, linked to guarantees that teachers released from the classroom will be replaced by post-probationary teachers.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5335.1, in the name of Karen Whitefield, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5335, in the name of Adam Ingram, on getting it right for every child, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The final question is, that motion S3M-5335, in the name of Adam Ingram, on getting it right for every child, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament supports the Getting it right for every child (GIRFEC) approach; commends Highland and the other pathfinder programmes for their work in developing the approach; notes progress under the eCare framework to enable secure, targeted information sharing across Scotland; welcomes the report by the University of Edinburgh on progress to date, particularly with regard to the pathfinder programme in Highland; welcomes Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education's summary report on its first round of multi-agency children's services inspections as providing a clear and comprehensive picture of how children's services are operating across Scotland; encourages work to further develop and implement the GIRFEC approach as a means of public services and the third sector working with parents and communities to improve outcomes for children and deliver the Early Years Framework , Achieving our Potential , and Equally Well ; recognises the scale of the challenge described in the HMIe report, How well do we protect Scotland's children?, which states that almost half of the 30 councils inspected were assessed as weak or unsatisfactory in relation to the assessment of risks and needs; further acknowledges that the report highlights the need for improved information  sharing in relation to child protection, and calls on the Scottish Government to ensure that sufficient resources are available for the effective delivery of the Early Years Framework , Achieving our Potential and Equally Well .

Order. I ask members who are entering the chamber to respect the fact that a debate is going on.

Sorry, minister. Could we have a bit less noise in the chamber, please? There is a debate going on.

You must close please, minister.

Since I took the chair about an hour ago, a number of speeches have been interrupted by BlackBerry or mobile phone signals. Members should know by now that, according to the code of conduct, those items of equipment should be turned off in the chamber. I therefore find the fact that some members—they know who they are—have been using them quite blatantly this afternoon somewhat discourteous. I also refer to the point of order that Murdo Fraser raised. In fact, I cannot refer to it, because, as he probably knows, it is not a point of order in that I am not here to adjudicate on the accuracy of what is said during exchanges. However, the points that he raised are now in the Official Report and therefore on the record.

I am afraid that I must hurry you.

There is a certain amount.

I call Hugh Henry. You have quite a long time really, Mr Henry.

Order.

Order.

Question, please.

Order.

That concludes general questions. Before we move to First Minister's question time, I say to all members, including ministers, that questions and answers appear to be taking on the characteristics of speeches rather than questions and answers.

There is no need for anyone to applaud; you are all guilty of it. I ask all members to look at their practice.

Please speak through the chair.

Minister, I must ask you to close.

The member must close.

Members should cast their votes now.

The result of the division is: For 58, Against 0, Abstentions 52.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that Michael Russell be appointed as a Minister.

I ask members who are leaving the chamber to do so quietly, because we must move straight to the next item of business.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-5334, in the name of Margaret Smith, on education.

That concludes the debate on the appointment of a minister, and we now move to the question on the motion. The question is, that motion S3M-5313, in the name of the First Minister, on the appointment of a minister, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division. There will be a five-minute suspension, after which we will move to the vote.

Good morning. The first item of business today is a debate on motion S3M-5313, in the name of the First Minister, on the appointment of a minister. Members should note that the question on this motion will be put immediately after the debate, and not at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of three Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motions S3M-5324 and S3M-5325, on approval of Scottish statutory instruments.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Budget (Scotland) Act 2009 Amendment Order 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Crime (International Co-operation) Act 2003 (Designation of Participating Countries) (Scotland) (No. 3) Order 2009 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-5326, on the designation of a lead committee to consider the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Health and Sport Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Alcohol etc. (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The questions on the motions will be put at decision time.

There are six questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-5307.2, in the name of Johann Lamont, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5307, in the name of Alex Neil, on safer lives: changed lives—working together to end violence against women, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 53, Against 0, Abstentions 59.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5307.1, in the name of Bill Aitken, which also seeks to amend motion S3M-5307, in the name of Alex Neil, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5307, in the name of Alex Neil, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament is pleased to reaffirm its commitment to ending violence against women; supports the 16 Days of Activism Against Gender Violence and its theme this year of Commit - Act - Demand: we can end violence against women!; celebrates the commitment of partners across Scotland, including the voluntary sector, local authorities, the police, NHS boards and others, to work together to end violence against women; acknowledges the importance of the shared understanding developed through the Safer Lives: Changed Lives strategic approach, and welcomes the progress that has been made to date on tackling violence against women in Scotland, including the groundbreaking work to involve young people who have experienced domestic abuse as expert advisers; regrets that a report on the implementation of the first round of single outcome agreements has not yet been published, given the concerns of Scottish Women's Aid about the level of provision across Scotland; believes that the strategy of protection, provision and prevention remains central to the tackling of violence against women; agrees that the Scottish Government should produce a joint statement from across its directorates to ensure that all its key policies are tested against their impact on women facing violence, and calls on the Scottish Government to consider, where practical, extending the principle of domestic violence courts throughout Scotland.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5324, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Budget (Scotland) Act 2009 Amendment Order 2009 be approved.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5325, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of an SSI, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Crime (International Co-operation) Act 2003 (Designation of Participating Countries) (Scotland) (No. 3) Order 2009 be approved.

The final question is, that motion S3M-5326, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on designation of a lead committee, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Health and Sport Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Alcohol etc. (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5321, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised start time for business on Thursday 3 December.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that "09:00" be substituted for "09:15" in Rule 2.2.3 for the purpose of allowing the meeting of the Parliament on Thursday 3 December 2009 to begin at 9.00 am.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5322, also in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme for Thursday 3 December.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 3 December 2009— delete 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions and insert 9.00 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Appointment of Minister—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5323, again in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 9 December 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Further Powers for the Scottish Parliament followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 10 December 2009  9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and Law Officers 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Climate Change followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 16 December 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 17 December 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

No. The minister is in his last minute.

No. The minister is closing.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader is the Rev John Forbes, retired Church of Scotland minister from Banchory.

Our next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-5307, in the name of Alex Neil, on safer lives: changed lives—working together to end violence against women.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-4544, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution for the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any expenditure of a kind referred to in Rule 9.12.3(b)(i), (ii) or (iii) of the Parliament's Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.—[ Fergus Ewing .]

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-5284, on the establishment of a committee.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees to establish a committee of the Parliament as follows— Name of Committee: Ure Elder Fund Transfer and Dissolution Bill Committee; Remit: To consider and report to the Parliament on the Ure Elder Fund Transfer and Dissolution Bill; Duration: Until the Bill has received Royal Assent, falls or is withdrawn; Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish Labour Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party; Membership: Nanette Milne, Shirley-Anne Somerville, David Stewart.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The first question is, that motion S3M-5177, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill.

The next question is, that motion S3M-4544, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution for the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any expenditure of a kind referred to in Rule 9.12.3(b)(i), (ii) or (iii) of the Parliament's Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.

The final question is, that motion S3M-5284, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the establishment of a committee, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to establish a committee of the Parliament as follows— Name of Committee: Ure Elder Fund Transfer and Dissolution Bill Committee; Remit: To consider and report to the Parliament on the Ure Elder Fund Transfer and Dissolution Bill; Duration: Until the Bill has received Royal Assent, falls or is withdrawn; Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish Labour Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party; Membership: Nanette Milne, Shirley-Anne Somerville, David Stewart.

I remind members to speak through the chair and not directly to each other—in other words, do not use the word "you".

You must conclude, please, minister.

Quite quickly, please.

Order.

Members have the absolute right not to take interventions, but I have a very small amount of time in hand that I am willing to add on for members who wish to take an intervention.

You must close please.

You must close now, Mr Pringle.

You must close now.

The cabinet secretary will take questions on issues that were raised in her statement. We have until exactly 25 past 3, and not one second longer. I ask members to keep questions and answers as brief as possible.

Eight members want to ask a question, but we have less than 10 minutes. Members probably get the message.

I am afraid that I must draw that item of business to a conclusion. I apologise to the two doctors for being unable to call them, but we must now move to the next item of business.  Resumed debate.

The next item of business is the continuation of this morning's debate on motion S3M-5177, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on stage 1 of the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill. We continue with speeches of no more than five minutes.

The next item of business is a statement by Nicola Sturgeon on the Aberdeen royal infirmary health care environment inspectorate report. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of her statement, so there should be no interruptions or interventions.

The next item of business is First Minister's questions; perhaps I should say questions to the First Minister.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Order. Be quiet please, Lord Foulkes.

I repeat last week's message from the Presiding Officers: in order to get more members involved in question time sessions, brevity is the watchword.

Question 4 is from Cathy Peattie, who appears not to be in the chamber. Members will be aware of my disapproval of that, not least because Dr Ian McKee has an extremely good supplementary question, which I am now unable to get him to ask.

Can we have a bit less chatter in the chamber, please?

We have finished slightly early, so I will take the opportunity to say that I understand that Cathy Peattie is ill. I am truly sorry to hear that, but it should not be beyond the  wit of business managers to inform the Presiding Officer's office when such a situation occurs so that I do not give undue reprimands in the chamber.

You must close, please.

I am grateful to members for ensuring that we finished that session on time. The debate will continue this afternoon.

Good morning. The first item of business is a statement by John Swinney on the local government finance settlement. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interruptions or interventions.

The cabinet secretary will now take questions on the issues that were raised in his statement. We have until exactly 10 o'clock for questions. We must then move on to the next item of business.

We move to open questions. A considerable number of members wish to ask questions and, if we are to fit them all in, questions and answers must be as brief as possible.

I must hurry you, Ms McInnes.

Order.

Before we come to decision time, I will respond to the point of order that Iain Smith made earlier. In making today's ministerial statement, the Scottish ministers were simply complying with the requirement in the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009, which Parliament passed on 24 June, that a ministerial statement must be made to Parliament as soon as reasonably practicable after a plan for the promotion of the use of heat produced from renewable sources has been laid before Parliament.

There are six questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-5266.2, in the name of Ken Macintosh, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5266, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on learning about Scotland and its history, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

We are agreed.

Speak up if you wish to vote against the amendment. We are apparently not agreed, so there will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 101, Against 0, Abstentions 16.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5266.1, in the name of Murdo Fraser, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5266, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

That is better. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 29, Against 46, Abstentions 43.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5266.3, in the name of Margaret Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5266, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 72, Against 1, Abstentions 46.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5266, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on learning about Scotland and its history, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 104, Against 0, Abstentions 15.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament recognises the contribution of Scotland's children and young people in schools to a successful Year of Homecoming; acknowledges the importance of learning about Scotland's heritage, history and culture and place in the world, and welcomes the recent launch of Scotland's History online, a world-leading online resource from Learning and Teaching Scotland, which draws on resources from the National Galleries of Scotland, National Museums Scotland, the National Library of Scotland, the National Archives of Scotland and other sources; following concerns expressed by School Leaders Scotland and others over the Curriculum for Excellence, asks ministers to report to the Parliament on the place of history in the developing curriculum; reiterates its belief that history should be taught without political interference; recognises that the effective teaching of history and all other subjects requires teachers to be equipped with the necessary resources and training, and calls on the Scottish Government to provide urgent clarity over the substance and implementation of the Curriculum for Excellence and the changes to Scotland's national qualifications.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5267.1, in the name of Mary Mulligan, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5267, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Child Poverty Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 44, Against 74, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The final question is, that motion S3M-5267, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Child Poverty Bill, which is UK legislation, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Child Poverty Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 11 June 2009 to make provision within the legislative competence of the Parliament and to alter the executive competence of Scottish Ministers in respect of the duties to develop and lay a Scottish strategy to eradicate child poverty before the Scottish Parliament, should be considered by the UK Parliament.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5270, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme for Thursday 26 November.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 26 November 2009— after 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Europe, External Affairs and Culture; Education and Lifelong Learning insert followed by Ministerial Statement: Aberdeen Royal Infirmary Healthcare Environment Inspectorate Report—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5271, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 2 December 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Safer Lives: Changed Lives - Working Together to End Violence Against Women followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 3 December 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Liberal Democrats Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Getting it Right for Every Child followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time  followed by Members' Business Wednesday 9 December 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 10 December 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and Law Officers 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

Order. I am sorry to interrupt you, cabinet secretary. Will members who are coming into the chamber please keep quiet? A debate is going on.

As I intimated earlier, the minister will take questions on any issues raised in his statement. We have until just after 3 o'clock for questions. We will take front-bench questions first, starting with Lewis Macdonald.

We come to back-bench questions.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-5266, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on learning about Scotland and its history.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader is the Rev Tom McWhirter, the minister for Old Luce and New Luce parishes in Wigtownshire.

The next item of business is a statement by Jim Mather on the renewable heat action plan.

I will look into that and will provide that clarification—considerably after we have had the statement—at decision time today. The minister will take questions at the end of the statement. Therefore, there will be no interruptions or interventions during it.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-5221.1.1, in the name of Ross Finnie, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-5221.1, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on tackling Clostridium difficile, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 59, Against 61, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-5221.1, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5221, in the name of Jackie Baillie, on tackling Clostridium difficile, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 77, Against 43, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The third question is, that motion S3M-5221, in the name of Jackie Baillie, as amended, on tackling Clostridium difficile, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 77, Against 43, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that tackling Healthcare Associated Infection (HAI) must continue to be a top priority for the Scottish Government; notes the range of actions that are now in place to drive down infections, backed by an investment in excess of £50 million; welcomes the establishment of an independent Healthcare Environment Inspectorate that has begun its programme of announced and unannounced visits to all acute hospitals over the next three years; acknowledges that the establishment of a public inquiry into the events at the Vale of Leven Hospital last year will ensure that any additional actions are identified to help prevent such a tragedy happening again; further acknowledges that the HAI Taskforce has fully considered the Labour Party 15-point action plan and has agreed to further consider those measures not already included in its current three-year work programme; recognises the progress that has been made on a national staff uniform for NHS Scotland; further notes that the Scottish Government has agreed to pilot approaches to electronic bed management and tracking infections and will fully evaluate these pilots and take whatever action is appropriate, and further notes that the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing will continue to ensure that systems and processes for the notification and management of outbreaks are improved in light of experience.

The fourth question is, that motion S3M-5175, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the Schools Consultation (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Schools Consultation (Scotland) Bill be passed.

The fifth question is, that motion S3M-5228, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on substitution on committees, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that Sandra White be appointed to replace Jamie Hepburn as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee.

The next item of business is a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-5228, on substitution on committees.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that Sandra White be appointed to replace Jamie Hepburn as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

That concludes the debate on the bill. Despite the impressive efforts of the cabinet secretary I have no choice other than to suspend the meeting until 16:59.

I call the cabinet secretary to wind up the debate. You have 21 minutes. [ Laughter. ] I will amend that; you have up to 21 minutes.

The next item of business is stage 3 of the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill. In dealing with the amendments, members should have with them the bill as amended at stage 2, which is SP Bill 23A, the marshalled list, which is SP Bill 23A-ML, and the groupings, which I as Presiding Officer have agreed. The division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for five minutes for the first division this afternoon. All divisions thereafter will be 30 seconds.

Group 1 is on the provision of additional information during the consultation period. Amendment 1, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, is grouped with amendments 2 to 9, 13, 13A and 10 to 12.

Amendment 13A, in the name of Margaret Smith—[ Interruption. ] I apologise. Amendment 13A has fallen. It is a long time since we have had stage 3 proceedings.

I clarify that I realise that stage 3 proceedings took place yesterday, but I was not in the chair. That concludes consideration of amendments.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-5175, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill. I invite members who wish to speak to press their request-to-speak buttons and I ask them perhaps to speak for a little longer than they had originally prepared for. I call Fiona Hyslop to speak to and move the motion. She should take definitely no less than eight minutes.

I must press you for a question, Mr Gray.

Order.

I have said many times before that it is for members to ask questions during First Minister's question time.

Order.

Bill Butler has a brief supplementary question.

Several members want to ask supplementary questions on this important matter, and I am keen to allow as many as possible. Questions should therefore be short and sharp, as should the answers.

Question, please.

Hurry up, please.

As briefly as possible, please, First Minister.

I say to members at the outset of general question time that the Presiding Officers are all keen to tighten up the whole process of questioning and answering in order to get more members involved. I hope that members will respect that today. Having said that, I have acceded to a request from the Minister for Environment to give a brief update on the flooding situation in the south-west in response to question 1, so I will give her a small amount of leeway for that.

Question, please.

Quickly, please.

Question 4 has been withdrawn.

Question 6 was not lodged.

Order.

That concludes general questions. Before we come to the next item of business, I am sure that members will wish to join me in welcoming to the gallery the Speakers of the Parliaments of Penang, Uganda, St Lucia and the Pakistani province of the Punjab. [ Applause. ]

I must hurry you.

Order.

I must ask you to close now, please.

Ms Baillie, you must close now, please.

Good morning. The first item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5321, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for the stage 3 consideration of the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that, during Stage 3 of the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill, debate on the group of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limit indicated, that time limit being calculated from when the Stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the Stage being called) or otherwise not in progress: Group 1: 35 minutes.—[ David McLetchie .]

Superbly moved, Mr McLetchie.  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-5221, in the name of Jackie Baillie, on tackling Clostridium difficile. We have a little time in hand in this debate. Jackie Baillie, you have around 13 minutes in which to speak to and move the motion.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-5216, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Water Environment (Groundwater and Priority Substances) (Scotland) Regulations 2009 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

There are two questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-5176, in the name of Jim Mather, on the Arbitration (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Arbitration (Scotland) Bill be passed.

The second question is, that motion S3M-5216, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Water Environment (Groundwater and Priority Substances) (Scotland) Regulations 2009 be approved.

Members should be aware that a revised section A of today's Business Bulletin  is now available at the back of the chamber. It includes a new business motion, which sets out a programme of business for the weeks beginning 23 and 30 November. The previous business motion, which was printed in this morning's Business Bulletin , has been withdrawn. The next item of business is consideration of new business motion S3M-5223, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 25 November 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Renewable Heat Action Plan followed by Scottish Government Debate: Learning About Scotland and its History followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Child Poverty Bill - UK Legislation followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 26 November 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Local Government Finance Settlement followed by Stage 1 Debate: Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Europe, External Affairs and Culture; Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Continuation of Stage 1 Debate: Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution: Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time  followed by Members' Business Wednesday 2 December 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 3 December 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

I take the view at this stage that there will be several other opportunities for members to put those questions. I am sure that the minister will take on board your observation.

We come to open questions. I will get through the number of questions that has been bid for only if people keep their question succinct and if answers follow a similar model.

I cannot force the minister to do so, but I think that it would be helpful if he could address that question if it is put to him again.

John Park will ask the final question.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5219, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 3 consideration of the Arbitration (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that, during Stage 3 of the Arbitration (Scotland) Bill, debate on groups of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limit indicated, that time limit being calculated from when the Stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the Stage being called) or otherwise not in progress: Groups 1 and 2: 20 minutes Groups 3 to 5: 35 minutes.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a statement by Fergus Ewing on a sectarianism strategy. The minister will take questions at the end of his 10-minute statement and there should therefore be no interventions or interruptions.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection, as always. Our time for reflection leader today is the Rev Stephen Brown, from Fraserburgh United Reformed Church.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-5173.1, in the name of Sarah Boyack, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5173, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on the central Scotland green network, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5173.2, in the name of Alison McInnes, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5173, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on the central Scotland green network, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 13, Against 54, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5173, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, as amended, on the central Scotland green network, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament recognises and supports the significant contribution that the Central Scotland Green Network can make to the quality of life of the three million people living in the central belt, not just through environmental and social benefits, such as improving habitat networks, enhancing landscapes, mitigating climate change, improving health and wellbeing and stimulating educational and cultural activity, outdoor recreation and community involvement, but also through increasing economic benefits, such as business development, urban regeneration and derelict land restoration, and believes that there is a need for cooperation among the Scottish Government, local authorities and agencies and groups working in the area to ensure that maximum opportunities are delivered from the network.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5172.1, in the name of Bill Aitken, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5172, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the future of community fire safety in Scotland, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The final question is, that motion S3M-5172, in the name of Fergus Ewing, as amended, on the future of community fire safety in Scotland, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the Scottish Government's commitment to working in partnership with local government and the fire and rescue services to reduce fires and fire deaths in Scotland and that recommendations in the Scotland Together community fire safety study will contribute to a continued partnership approach to fire prevention, and calls on the Scottish fire and rescue authorities to consider the benefits of joint working.

The final item of business today is a members' business debate on motion S3M-5081, in the name of Jackie Baillie, on Citizens Advice Scotland's debt findings. The debate will be concluded without any question being put.  Motion debated,  That the Parliament welcomes the new research findings by Citizens Advice Scotland that set out the barriers and problems faced by vulnerable groups such as lone parents, older people, young people and sick and disabled people in Scotland in relation to debt as well as creditor behaviour; notes that the findings show that four in 10 clients have gone without essentials in order to try to cope with their debt, while one in four clients has borrowed further credit to pay existing debt; notes that two fifths of debt clients reported being pressurised or harassed by their creditors; further notes that two thirds of debt clients said that they would consider going bankrupt in order to manage their debt; believes that schemes such as the Low Income Low Asset (LILA) scheme and the Debt Arrangement Scheme (DAS) should be made fully accessible to debtors who are stuck in a cycle of debt and that the £100 fee for accessing the LILA route into bankruptcy should be abolished as only one in five clients said they could unconditionally afford it; further believes that more affordable mainstream credit should be made available to low-income groups; commends the work of the Citizens Advice Bureau in Dumbarton and bureaux across Scotland in providing free, impartial and confidential frontline advice to all who need it, and would welcome the provision of sustained funding for agencies such as Citizens Advice in order to address the growing demand for such advice.

I am sorry, but that must conclude justice and law officers questions. I will allow a few seconds for people to change places.

Question 5 was to be asked by Jackie Baillie, who does not appear to be in the chamber. I hope that members will relay my disapproval of that.

No, it is not. That is well established.

Question 9 was not lodged.

That concludes question time, but before we move on, I add that I have reflected on Mr McGrigor's point of order, which is an exact example of why the other Presiding Officers and I frown on members not turning up when they are due to ask questions. Other members will have come to the chamber with a view to asking supplementary questions and it becomes a complete waste of their time. That is why we frown on the practice. We will now move on to the next item of business. I will allow a few seconds for members to change places.

First Minister, the question was about the cost of the national conversation. I think that you should address that.

I remind all members that personal insults should form no part of questions or answers.

Order.

We must move on.

I will take a constituency question from Richard Baker.

Can we have a question, please, Ms MacDonald?

Quickly, please.

Order, Mr Rumbles.

Order.

You have just done so by putting it on the record, but it is certainly not a point of order.

Any member is entitled to ask a question, and I am entitled to select any of the questions to be asked, which is what I did.

Question 3 was not lodged.

Question 5 was not lodged.

That concludes general questions. I am sure that members will want to join me in welcoming to the gallery the Hon Bob Sneath, President of the Legislative Council of the Parliament of South Australia. [ Applause. ]

Good morning. The first item of business is a statement by Nicola Sturgeon on the Clostridium difficile outbreak at Ninewells hospital. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of her statement, so there should be no interruptions or interventions during it.

The cabinet secretary will take questions on issues that were raised in her statement. We have about 20 minutes for questions.

We come to open questions. Eight members seek to ask questions. If we are to fit them all in, questions and answers must be relatively brief.

Briefly, please.

From now on, I am taking time out of the next debate, so I ask that questions and answers be kept brief.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-5173, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on the central Scotland green network.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-5164, on committee membership, and motion S3M-5165, on the office of the clerk.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that Marlyn Glen be appointed to replace Des McNulty as a member of the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee. That the Parliament agrees that the Office of the Clerk be closed on 29, 30 and 31 December 2009.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The questions on the motions will be put at decision time.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-5160.1, in the name of Ted Brocklebank, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5160, in the name of Michael Russell, on Scotland's historic environment, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-5160.2, in the name of Iain Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5160, in the name of Michael Russell, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The third question is, that motion S3M-5160, in the name of Michael Russell, as amended, on Scotland's historic environment, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament welcomes the enthusiasm, passion and co-operation shown by all of the participants at the first Summit for the Built and Historic Environment held at the Bute Hall in Glasgow on Tuesday 3 November 2009 and recognises the valuable resource for the Scottish people and economy represented by Scotland's rich and varied heritage; particularly commends recent initiatives to save the nation's buildings at risk, involving bodies such as Historic Scotland, the National Trust for Scotland and the Heritage Lottery Fund; welcomes the continuing and vital involvement in this restoration work of private individuals and the voluntary sector; looks forward to hearing a comprehensive account of the discussions that took place at the summit, and encourages the Scottish Government to work constructively with Historic Scotland and the National Trust for Scotland and to develop relationships with the non-governmental sector to ensure the sustainability of Scotland's built environment and to maintain and improve public access to it.

The fourth question is, that motion S3M-5164, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on committee membership, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that Marlyn Glen be appointed to replace Des McNulty as a member of the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee.

The final question is, that motion S3M-5165, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the office of the clerk, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Office of the Clerk be closed on 29, 30 and 31 December 2009.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5174, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a revised business programme for Thursday 12 November.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 12 November 2009— after 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions insert followed by Ministerial Statement: Clostridium difficile outbreak at Ninewells Hospital—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5163, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees— (a) the following programme of business— Wednesday 18 November 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Sectarianism Strategy followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Arbitration (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 19 November 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Stage 3 Proceedings: Schools Consultation (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time  followed by Members' Business Wednesday 25 November 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 26 November 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Europe, External Affairs and Culture; Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business (b) that the deadline for lodging questions for First Minister's Question Time on 7 January 2010 shall be 2.00 pm on Tuesday 5 January 2010; (c) that the period for members to submit their names for selection for Question Times on 7 January 2010 ends at 12 noon on 16 December 2009; (d) that the deadline for lodging questions for Question Times on 7 January 2010 shall be 12 noon on 23 December 2009 and (e) that the period for members to submit their names for selection for Question Times on 14 January 2010 ends at 12 noon on 23 December 2009.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

That is not a point of order, but it is a point of clarification.

Is this an intervention or a speech, Mr Harvie?

Could you hurry up, please?

We have extra time available, but it does not all need to be taken up in one intervention.

I call Iain Smith. You may have a similarly loose nine minutes.

I call Ted Brocklebank, who has a loose nine minutes.

Good afternoon. It is perhaps particularly apt that, on this remembrance day, our time for reflection leader is the Rev Air Vice-Marshall Peter Mills of the Royal Air Force.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-5160, in the name of Michael Russell, on Scotland's historic environment, a unique resource for our economy and our people. We have a little time in hand this afternoon. I call Mike Russell to speak to and move the motion, for which he has roughly 13 minutes.

The next item of business is consideration of four Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motions S3M-5136 to S3M-5139 inclusive, on committee memberships and substitution on committees.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that Christina McKelvie be appointed to replace Bill Wilson as a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee. That the Parliament agrees that— Rhona Brankin be appointed to replace Charlie Gordon as a member of the European and External Relations Committee; Tom McCabe be appointed to replace Jackie Baillie as a member of the Finance Committee; Malcolm Chisholm be appointed to replace James Kelly as a member of the Finance Committee; James Kelly be appointed to replace Paul Martin as a member of the Justice Committee; Rhona Brankin be appointed to replace Marlyn Glen as a member of the Public Petitions Committee; Margaret Curran be appointed to replace Tom McCabe as a member of the Subordinate Legislation Committee; Rhoda Grant be appointed to replace Malcolm Chisholm as a member of the Subordinate Legislation Committee. That the Parliament agrees that— Dave Thompson be appointed to replace Andrew Welsh as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee; Stewart Maxwell be appointed to replace Kenneth Gibson as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Finance Committee; Bill Wilson be appointed to replace Christina McKelvie as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Public Petitions Committee. That the Parliament agrees that— Rhoda Grant be appointed to replace Jackie Baillie as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Equal Opportunities Committee; Margaret Curran be appointed to replace Paul Martin as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Local Government and Communities Committee; Rhona Brankin be appointed to replace Rhoda Grant as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on the motions will be put at decision time.

There are 16 questions to be put as a result of today's business. In relation to the debate on the minimum pricing of alcohol, if the amendment in the name of Nicola Sturgeon is agreed to, the amendments in the name of Jackie Baillie and Robert Brown will fall. If the amendment in the name of Jackie Baillie is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Robert Brown falls. The first question is, that amendment S3M-5112.1.1, in the name of Des McNulty, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-5112.1, in the name of Adam Ingram, on supporting families, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-5112.1.2, in the name of Margaret Smith, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-5112.1, in the name of Adam Ingram, as amended, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5112.1, in the name of Adam Ingram, as amended, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5112, in the name of Elizabeth Smith, on supporting families, be agreed to.

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 87, Against 15, Abstentions 1.  Amendment, as amended, agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5112, in the name of Elizabeth Smith, as amended, on supporting families, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 87, Against 15, Abstentions 1.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament considers that the family is the natural building block of our society; notes the significant  pressures facing families in Scotland today arising from relationship breakdown, poverty, unemployment and substance abuse; believes that the Scottish Government should focus on addressing the impact of the recession and take steps to ease the burden on families; recognises that long-term relationships provide stability in many families and acknowledges the status of marriage in society; believes that the needs and best interests of the child should always be at the centre of policies to support and promote stable families and reflect the reality of family life in Scotland; urges the Scottish Government to prioritise support for parents and extended families, ensuring that evaluation of these services is geared towards improving the quality and range of support that can be offered, and notes the valuable role of the voluntary sector in the delivery of services to children, parents and families, particularly those in vulnerable or disadvantaged circumstances.

The fifth question is, that amendment S3M-5118.2, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5118, in the name of Murdo Fraser, on minimum pricing of alcohol, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 45, Against 58, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The sixth question is, that amendment S3M-5118.1, in the name of Jackie Baillie, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5118, in the name of Murdo Fraser, on minimum pricing of alcohol, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 33, Against 70, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The seventh question is, that amendment S3M-5118.3, in the name of Robert Brown, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5118, in the name of Murdo Fraser, on minimum pricing of alcohol, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 29, Against 74, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The eighth question is, that motion S3M-5118, in the name of Murdo Fraser, on minimum pricing of alcohol, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 28, Against 74, Abstentions 1.  Motion disagreed to.

The ninth question is, that amendment S3M-5119.2, in the name of Sarah Boyack, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5119, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on autumn fisheries negotiations, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The 10 th question is that amendment S3M-5119.1, in the name of John Scott, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5119, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on autumn fisheries negotiations, as amended, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The 11 th question is, that amendment S3M-5119.3, in the name of Liam McArthur, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5119, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on autumn fisheries negotiations, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 14, Against 87, Abstentions 2.  Amendment disagreed to.

The 12 th question is, that motion S3M-5119, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the autumn fisheries negotiations, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 100, Against 1, Abstentions 2.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the Scottish Government's commitment to secure a fair deal at the forthcoming EU fisheries negotiations and to continue seeking radical and urgent changes to EU regulations to help cut discards and improve fisheries conservation and the industry's profitability; calls for Scotland's fishermen's growing reputation for innovative fisheries conservation to be given due recognition, and notes the European Commission Green Paper on the Reform of the Common Fisheries  Policy, which recognises the failures of the Common Fisheries Policy; welcomes the meeting of Inter Regional Advisory Council members, stakeholders and fisheries ministers from across the United Kingdom in Edinburgh this week; notes the growing support for ecosystem-based regional fisheries management amongst fisheries experts and interests, and agrees that the Scottish Government should put in place effective measures to support Scottish fishing communities in light of the outcomes of last year's fisheries negotiations and the ongoing recession, and believes that, in that context, a more regionally responsible approach to fisheries management is required and that, in order to achieve this, the Scottish Government and HM Government must work together in the interests of a sustainable Scottish fishing industry.

The 13 th question is, that motion S3M-5136, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on committee membership, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that Christina McKelvie be appointed to replace Bill Wilson as a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee.

The 14 th question is, that motion S3M-5137, also in the name of Bruce Crawford, on committee membership, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that— Rhona Brankin be appointed to replace Charlie Gordon as a member of the European and External Relations Committee; Tom McCabe be appointed to replace Jackie Baillie as a member of the Finance Committee; Malcolm Chisholm be appointed to replace James Kelly as a member of the Finance Committee; James Kelly be appointed to replace Paul Martin as a member of the Justice Committee; Rhona Brankin be appointed to replace Marlyn Glen as a member of the Public Petitions Committee; Margaret Curran be appointed to replace Tom McCabe as a member of the Subordinate Legislation Committee; Rhoda Grant be appointed to replace Malcolm Chisholm as a member of the Subordinate Legislation Committee.

The 15 th question is, that motion S3M-5138, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on substitution to committees, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that— Dave Thompson be appointed to replace Andrew Welsh as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee; Stewart Maxwell be appointed to replace Kenneth Gibson as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Finance Committee; Bill Wilson be appointed to replace Christina McKelvie as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Public Petitions Committee.

The 16 th and final question is, that motion S3M-5139, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on substitution to committees, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that— Rhoda Grant be appointed to replace Jackie Baillie as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Equal Opportunities Committee; Margaret Curran be appointed to replace Paul Martin as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Local Government and Communities Committee; Rhona Brankin be appointed to replace Rhoda Grant as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee.

That is not a matter for me. If the minister wishes to inform Parliament of anything to do with any of your points, he will do so. I suggest we move to the next item of business.

Order. I am sorry cabinet secretary. Would incoming members please respect the fact that a debate is going on?

I ask members to use proper names, please.

Order. I must ask you to stop, please, Mr Munro.

I am sorry to have to interrupt, but we have absolutely no spare time. We come now to the closing speeches.

You must close, please.

You must close.

I am sorry, but I have no spare time in the debate.

Questions should be to the First Minister, not by the First Minister.

Be brief, Mr Johnstone, please.

I will take a supplementary question from Mike Rumbles.

That concludes general questions. I am sure that, before we move to the next item of business, members will wish to join me in welcoming to the gallery the Chilean ambassador to the United Kingdom, His Excellency Rafael Moreno. [ Applause. ]

You must close, please.

That concludes this morning's Conservative party business.

I call Margaret Smith to speak to and move amendment S3M-5112.1.2, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-5112.1,  in the name of Adam Ingram. If she could do that in about the same time that it has taken me to call her, I would be very grateful.

No, the minister should be winding up.

I must ask you to close please, minister.

Thank you. From now on, all speeches should be of around four minutes. I call Des McNulty to speak to and move amendment S3M-5112.1.1, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-5112.1, in the name of Adam Ingram.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-5112, in the name of Elizabeth Smith, on supporting families.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-5110.1, in the name of Sarah Boyack, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5110, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on Scotland's national parks, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5110.2, in the name of John Scott, which also seeks to amend motion S3M-5110, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on Scotland's national parks, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 51, Against 51, Abstentions 0. I will therefore use my casting vote and, according to convention, the amendment will fall.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5110.3, in the name of Liam McArthur, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5110, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on Scotland's national parks, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 65, Against 37, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5110, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on Scotland's national parks, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament commends the contribution that Scotland's two national parks make to sustainable social and economic development and to delivering the Greener Scotland agenda; notes the outcome of the National Parks Strategic Review, and welcomes the proposal to set up a National Parks Strategy group; believes that it should explore the potential for establishing new national parks, including in marine and coastal areas; celebrates the success of the boards of the National Parks in giving a voice to local people in managing their own environment, and calls for early consideration to be given to increasing the directly elected presence on boards.

The final question is, that motion S3M-5116, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Public Appointments and Public Bodies etc. (Scotland) Act 2003 (Amendment of Specified Authorities) Order 2009 be approved.

I did not hear that, Dr Murray, but if that did indeed happen, I would not approve of it and I would suggest that members refrain from such behaviour.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-5116, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Public Appointments and Public Bodies etc. (Scotland) Act 2003 (Amendment of Specified Authorities) Order 2009 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5113, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a revised business programme for Thursday 5 November.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 5 November 2009— after 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing insert followed by Ministerial Statement: Sex Offenders—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of a further business motion, S3M-5114, which is also in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 11 November 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Scotland's Historic Environment - A Unique Resource for our Economy and our People followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 12 November 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Central Scotland Green Network 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Justice and Law Officers; Rural Affairs and the Environment 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: The Future of Community Fire Safety in Scotland followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions  5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 18 November 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Arbitration (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 19 November 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Stage 3 Proceedings: Schools Consultation (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of yet another business motion, S3M-5115, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out the timetable for stage 2 of the Marine (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Marine (Scotland) Bill at Stage 2 be completed by 4 December 2009.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

That concludes the opening speeches. We come to the open debate. As we have a little time in hand, members should feel free to take interventions and even to speak for longer than they have been advised to do, as long as they do not abuse that privilege. I am sure that they will not.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection, and our leader today is Father Michael Hutson, the parish priest at St Andrews, Rothesay, in the Isle of Bute.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-5110, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on Scotland's national parks.

There are seven questions to be put as a result of today's business. I remind members that, in relation to the debate on the Scottish economy, if the amendment in the name of Andy Kerr is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Jeremy Purvis will fall. The first question is, that motion S3M-4969, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the Marine (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Marine (Scotland) Bill.

The next question is, that motion S3M-4518, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution to the Marine (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Marine (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any expenditure of a kind referred to in Rules 9.12.3(b)(ii) and (iii) and 9.12.4 of the Parliament's Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5071.3, in the name of Andy Kerr, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5071, in the name of John Swinney, on the Scottish economy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 48, Against 67, Abstentions 2.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5071.1, in the name of Derek Brownlee, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5071, in the name of John Swinney, on the Scottish economy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 64, Against 52, Abstentions 1.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5071.2, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5071, in the name of John Swinney, on the Scottish economy, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 18, Against 99, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-5071.4, in the name of Patrick Harvie, which seeks to amend motion S3M-5071, in the name of John Swinney, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 3, Against 114, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-5071, in the name of John Swinney, on the Scottish economy, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 62, Against 54, Abstentions 1.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament recognises the impact of the recession on Scotland and notes the actions that the Scottish Government is taking to support jobs and communities, strengthen education and skills and invest in innovation and industries of the future to ensure that the nation is both protected from the worst of the downturn and well placed to take advantage of any recovery; further recognises the need to support existing and new businesses to create jobs; regrets the historic underperformance of the Scottish economy in new business creation; welcomes the positive and timely impact of the significant business rate reductions for small and medium-sized businesses and the Town Centre Regeneration Fund, and calls on the Scottish Government to work with all other levels of government and with the business community to do more to help raise the level of new business start-ups in Scotland.

No. The minister is in his last minute, Ms Alexander.

Before we come to decision time, I would like to give an answer to the point of order that was raised earlier by Jeremy Purvis. It is, obviously, a matter of good practice that all material that is relevant to debates in the Parliament be made available to members in sufficient time. If the relevant material is Government information, the responsibility for ensuring that that happens lies with the Government. However, I understand that, on Tuesday morning, the Minister for Parliamentary Business made all business managers aware of the arrangements for the distribution of the document that accompanied today's debate on the Scottish economy. Further, the minister has confirmed that, as agreed, a copy of the document was made available to either the business managers or the resource teams of the parties at 8 o'clock this morning. I can suggest only that, if Mr Purvis wishes to take the matter further, he does so with his own business manager.

Question 1 was not lodged.

After that exchange, I remind members that I do not like the use of nicknames in this chamber and I would prefer it to be avoided.

That is a point of clarification.

The question should be addressed to the First Minister, Ms Goldie.

Order.

Order.

I will take a supplementary question from Sarah Boyack.

Order.

Order, Mr Rumbles.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4518, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution for the Marine (Scotland) Bill. I call Richard Lochhead to move the motion.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Marine (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any expenditure of a kind referred to in Rules 9.12.3(b)(ii) and (iii) and 9.12.4 of the Parliament's Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.—[ Richard Lochhead .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

Question 4 was not lodged.

Question 6 was not lodged.

Before we come to questions to the First Minister, I am sure that members will wish to join me in welcoming to the gallery His Excellency Louis B Susman, the United States ambassador to the United Kingdom. [ Applause. ]

We have until exactly 10 o'clock, therefore I would appreciate it if all questions and answers were as brief as possible.

We come to open questions. We do not have long, so members should ask one question and get one answer. I assure members that if they do not press their request-to-speak button, they will not be called.

Good morning. The first item of business this morning is a statement by Nicola Sturgeon on influenza A(H1N1). The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of her statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions. This is a 10-minute statement.

The cabinet secretary will now take questions on her statement. We have around 20 minutes for such questions.

Sorry, Mr Finnie—I must ask you to speak through the chair rather than directly to the cabinet secretary.

We come to open questions. There are just over five minutes available, so I ask members for one short question followed by one short answer.

I apologise to the members whom I am unable to call, but I must move to the next item of business, as our timetabling today is extremely tight.

The next item of business is a statement by Shona Robison on elder abuse. As always, the minister will take questions at the end of her statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions.

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motion S3M-5069, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Teaching Council (Scotland) Act 1965 Modification Order 2009 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

There is one question to be put as a result of today's business. The question is, that motion S3M-5069, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Teaching Council (Scotland) Act 1965 Modification Order 2009 be approved.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5064, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a revised time for the start of business on Thursday 29 October.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that "9:00" be substituted for "9:15" in Rule 2.2.3 for the purpose of allowing the meeting of the Parliament on Thursday 29 October 2009 to begin at 9.00 am.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5065, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a revised business programme for Thursday 29 October.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 29 October 2009— delete 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 1 Debate: Marine (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution: Marine (Scotland) Bill and insert 9.00 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Influenza A (H1N1)  followed by Ministerial Statement: Elder Abuse followed by Stage 1 Debate: Marine (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution: Marine (Scotland) Bill—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5066, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 4 November 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions  followed by Scottish Government Debate: Scotland's National Parks followed by Ministerial Statement: Making Skills Work for Scotland: ScotAction followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 5 November 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Autumn Fisheries Negotiations followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 11 November 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 12 November 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Justice and Law Officers; Rural Affairs and the Environment 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5067, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a stage 1 timetable for the Home Owner and Debtor Protection (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Home Owner and Debtor Protection (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 18 December 2009.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-5068, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a stage 1 timetable for the Legal Services (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Legal Services (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 26 March 2010.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

I must ask you to close please, minister.

I call Dr Richard Simpson. You may have no more than eight minutes, Dr Simpson. [ Interruption. ]

You can have absolutely no more than eight minutes—seven, if you can.

The member must close now.

No, the member is closing.

I am sorry, Mr McNulty, but we must move to the closing speeches.

You must close please, Mr Brown.

I must point out that we have no spare time at all left in the debate, so members should please keep to the times given.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-4996, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Health Board Elections (Scotland) Regulations 2009 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

There are 10 questions to be put as a result of today's business. I remind members that in relation to the debate on school buildings, if the amendment in the name of Fiona Hyslop is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Margaret Smith will fall. The first question is, that amendment S3M-4988.3, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4988, in the name of Rhona Brankin, on school buildings, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 46, Against 75, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-4988.1, in the name of Elizabeth Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4988, in the name of Rhona Brankin, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 104, Against 17, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-4988.2, in the name of Margaret Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4988, in the name of Rhona Brankin, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 59, Against 62, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-4988, in the name of Rhona Brankin, on school buildings, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 58, Against 48, Abstentions 15.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament notes with concern that the Scottish Futures Trust has yet to fund a single new school building in Scotland despite the 2009 School Estates Statistics revealing that around 150,000 pupils remain in schools classified as being in poor or bad condition; is dismayed that, after more than two years, the SNP government has identified only 14 schools to be built under its first school building programme, that none of these 14 schools will be open to pupils in this parliamentary term and only 55 will be built in total by 2018; further believes that the SNP government's claims on the number of schools that it has commissioned are unsustainable given that its own School Estates Statistics reveal that a majority of schools built or substantially refurbished in the last two financial years were legacy PPP projects, and further believes that it is hypocritical for ministers to criticise PPP schools while praising them at their official opening and that the SNP's record in government is falling far short of its 2007 election manifesto pledge to "match the current school building programme brick for brick, and offer an alternative funding mechanism through the Scottish Futures Trust", and believes that the school building programme should be funded so as to deliver best value for money and that all sources of finance, including those in the private sector, should be considered.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-4985.1, in the name of Robert Brown, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4985, in the name of Johann Lamont, on volunteering, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 17, Against 104, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-4985, in the name of Johann Lamont, on volunteering, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament recognises and celebrates the role of the voluntary sector and volunteers across Scotland in supporting individuals, families and communities and in shaping and delivering services locally; notes the excellent work of volunteering organisations in encouraging volunteering through offering training and volunteering placements and particularly in reaching out to those who might not otherwise have the chance to volunteer; agrees, given the opportunity that volunteering provides to develop skills and build confidence, that, in this economic recession, volunteering organisations should be given adequate resources to allow them to do that important work, and further agrees that innovative organisations that create structured volunteering placements for young people, such as ProjectScotland, should be recognised and supported by the Scottish Government.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-4987.2, in the name of Richard Baker, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4987, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on civil justice, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-4987.1, in the name of Bill Aitken, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4987, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on civil justice, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-4987, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on civil justice, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament welcomes the Report of the Scottish Civil Courts Review conducted under the chairmanship of the Lord Justice Clerk and the reports of the Administrative Justice Steering Group conducted under the chairmanship of Lord Philip; looks forward to the report of final appellate jurisdiction in preparation by Professor Neil Walker, and believes that, following a full and wide consultation, the people of Scotland deserve a reformed and modernised civil justice system that is fit for purpose in the 21st century, which is founded on the principle of ensuring access to justice and that reforms must be driven by this as well as by efficiency in the justice system.

The final question is, that motion S3M-4996, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Health Board Elections (Scotland) Regulations 2009 be approved.

Too many conversations are taking place in the chamber. I would like to hear just the minister.

We come to closing speeches. We have a little time in hand, so members should feel free to take an extra minute or so if they would like—before I make it compulsory. I call Mike Pringle first.

Order.

It is up to Iain Gray to ask the questions. A very short supplementary, Mr Gray.

I will take a constituency question.

Order.

I have previously asked you not to use nicknames in the chamber, Lord Foulkes. I would be grateful if you would stick to that, thank you.

I will allow you extra time, Mr Thompson, as that was a rather long intervention.

No. I am afraid that the member must wind-up.

I am perfectly content that the motion is competent.

No. The minister is closing.

The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-4988, in the name of Rhona Brankin, on school buildings.

Order.

Order, Mr Swinney.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-4981, on the designation of a lead committee, and motion S3M-4982, on parliamentary recess dates.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Local Government and Communities Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Home Owner and Debtor Protection (Scotland) Bill.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The questions on the motions will be put at decision time.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-4973, in the name of Maureen Watt, on the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee's report on rural housing, be agreed to. Are we agreed?  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee's 5th Report, 2009 (Session 3): Rural Housing (SP Paper 256).

The second question is, that motion S3M-4981, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the designation of a lead committee, be agreed to. Are we agreed?  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Local Government and Communities Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Home Owner and Debtor Protection (Scotland) Bill.

The third question is, that motion S3M-4982, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on parliamentary recess dates, be agreed to. Are we agreed? I will be amazed if we are not.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees the following parliamentary recess dates under Rule 2.3.1: 5 July - 5 September 2010 (inclusive).

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4979, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 28 October 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Student Support followed by Scottish Government Debate: Reshaping the Future Care of Older People followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 29 October 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 1 Debate: Marine (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution: Marine (Scotland) Bill 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning; Europe, External Affairs and Culture 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: The Scottish Economy followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 4 November 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 5 November 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions  followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business — [ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4980, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a stage 2 timetable for the Tobacco and Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Tobacco and Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Bill at Stage 2 be completed by 26 November 2009 .— [ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

You will get another chance, minister.

Just before I call the minister, I point out that we can be a little flexible with time and can add on time taken for interventions. Had you insisted, convener, we could have let you have 14 minutes. I call Alex Neil to respond on behalf of the Government. Minister, you may have about 11 minutes.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader is the Rev Martin Thomson from Dalry Trinity Church in Ayrshire.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-4973, in the name of Maureen Watt, on the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee's report on rural housing. You have round about 13 minutes, convener.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-4940, in the name of Duncan McNeil, on the Local Government and Communities Committee's report, "Equal Pay in Local Government", be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Local Government and Communities Committee's 12th Report 2009 (Session 3): Equal Pay in Local Government (SP Paper 292).

The second question is, that amendment S3M-4956.2, in the name of Claire Baker, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4956, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the role of colleges in the economic recovery, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The third question is, that amendment S3M-4956.1, in the name of Murdo Fraser, which also seeks to amend motion S3M-4956, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the role of colleges in the economic recovery, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The fourth question is, that amendment S3M-4956.3, in the name of Margaret Smith, which also seeks to amend motion S3M-4956, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the role of colleges in the economic recovery, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The fifth question is, that motion S3M-4956, as amended, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the role of colleges in the economic recovery, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament recognises that Scotland's colleges are central to the Scottish Government's plans for tackling the recession and preparing for economic recovery; agrees that through the provision of flexible, locally relevant skills and training they are helping individuals and employers build for recovery; welcomes the fact that, as a result and working in partnership with other agencies, colleges are helping the communities that they serve to adapt to changed economic circumstances; notes the particular support that colleges provide to young people, and notes the continued financial support that the sector receives from the Scottish Government; notes the contribution that colleges are making in further developing links with industry that can help deliver the 7,800 apprenticeships promised in the 2009-10 budget; recognises the concerns that exist regarding the ability of colleges to fully accommodate the increase in applicants, including the 2009 Christmas school  leavers, and to cope with pressures on childcare and hardship funds, and calls on the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning to report to the Parliament on how she intends to address these concerns; urges the Scottish Government to encourage the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council, in allocating funds to the sector, to recognise the particular needs of colleges in rural areas and calls on the Scottish Government to review the current system of discretionary childcare funding, to work closely with the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council to develop articulation routes between further and higher education, helping to address problems that students face during transition and enhancing and developing links between the sectors, and, in recognising the valuable role of Scotland's colleges in skills development, to bring the revised skills strategy before the Parliament to allow detailed debate of its recommendations."

I am keen to hear a point of order, Mr Harvie.

You are asking about the procedure of holding ministers to account, Mr Harvie. The procedures are clearly laid out. We  have oral and written parliamentary questions for that—indeed, it is their very purpose. It is certainly not the role of the Presiding Officers to do so.

Order. There is too much noise.

We come to closing speeches. I have no extra time available so members should stick to the times that they have been given.

I must hurry you.

You must close.

I am sorry that I had to hurry you. We do not have a lot of spare time left.

Due to the suspension of standing orders that was agreed yesterday, question 1 to the Deputy First Minister will be asked by Johann Lamont.

Order.

The question was about the Scottish Futures Trust.

Order.

Order, please.

Question 1 is from Jim Hume, but it appears that he is not in the chamber. I will certainly deliver the necessary message to him.

Mr McNulty now has his point on the record. I think that he well knows that it is not a point of order.

I will take a supplementary question from Malcolm Chisholm. If the minister wants to respond to Des McNulty's point in his answer he can do so.

Question 4 has been withdrawn.

Briefly please, minister.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-4940, in the name of Duncan McNeil, on the Local Government and Communities Committee's report on equal pay in local government. We have a small amount of flexibility on timing, but I ask members to stick approximately to the time that they are given.

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-4952, on the suspension of standing orders for First Minister's question time on 1 October, and motion S3M-4953, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that, for the purpose of question 1 at First Minister's Question Time on Thursday 1 October 2009, Rule 13.7.4 of Standing Orders be suspended. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Mutual Recognition of Criminal Financial Penalties in the European Union (Scotland) Order 2009 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The questions on the motions will be put at decision time.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first is that motion S3M-4948, in the name of Iain Smith, on the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee's report, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee's 7th Report, 2009 (Session 3): Determining and delivering on Scotland's energy future (SP Paper 313).

The second question is that motion S3M-4952, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on the suspension of standing orders, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that, for the purpose of question 1 at First Minister's Question Time on Thursday 1 October 2009, Rule 13.7.4 of Standing Orders be suspended.

The third question is that motion S3M-4953, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Mutual Recognition of Criminal Financial Penalties in the European Union (Scotland) Order 2009 be approved.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4950, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme and a question time deadline.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees— (a) the following programme of business— Wednesday 7 October 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Rural Affairs and the Environment Committee Debate: 5th Report 2009: Rural Housing followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 8 October 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Civil Justice followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 28 October 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 29 October 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time  2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning; Europe, External Affairs and Culture 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business and (b) that the period for members to submit their names for selection for Question Times on 29 October 2009 ends at 12 noon on Wednesday 7 October 2009.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4951, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out an extension to the deadline for consideration of the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill at stage 1.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be extended to 27 November 2009.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

I can offer all closing speakers nearly two minutes more than they were offered previously. They are welcome to take up that time, if possible.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-4467, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution for the Tobacco and Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Tobacco and Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any expenditure of a kind referred to in paragraph 3(b)(iii) of Rule 9.12 of the Parliament's Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.—[ Nicola Sturgeon .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

There are 10 questions to be put as a result of today's business. I remind members that, in relation to the debate on teacher numbers, if the amendment in the name of Keith Brown is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Margaret Smith falls. The first question is, that amendment S3M-4910.3, in the name of Keith Brown, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4910, in the name of Rhona Brankin, on teacher numbers, be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 46, Against 73, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-4910.1, in the name of Murdo Fraser, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4910, in the name of Rhona Brankin, be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 70, Against 49, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The third question is, that amendment S3M-4910.2, in the name of Margaret Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4910, in the name of Rhona Brankin, be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 73, Against 46, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The fourth question is, that motion S3M-4910, as amended, in the name of Rhona Brankin, on teacher numbers, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 70, Against 48, Abstentions 1.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the most recent reduction in the number of teachers employed in Scotland revealed by the September 2009 public sector employment figures; further notes that this follows on from the Teachers in  Scotland 2008 census, which showed that the number of teachers fell by nearly 1,000 on the previous year, and asks how this can be reconciled with the SNP's manifesto pledge and concordat commitment to maintain teacher numbers in the face of falling school rolls in order to cut class sizes; raises concern about the implementation of the Curriculum for Excellence in the face of falling teacher numbers; acknowledges that the previous administration increased the number of teachers by 4,600 between 1999 and 2007; notes the continued reduction in the number of full-time equivalent nursery teachers as shown in the Scottish Government's Pre-school and Childcare Statistics 2009 ; highlights with concern the Times Educational Supplement Scotland survey, published in August 2009, suggesting that only 15% of this year's newly qualified teachers had secured full-time permanent work at the start of the school term as well as the General Teaching Council Scotland follow up survey suggesting that, even half way through the 2008-09 school year, only around a third of the previous year's probationary teachers had found full-time permanent posts; believes that the Scottish Government has precipitated a teacher jobs crisis, forcing many of the most qualified new teachers in Scotland's history to look elsewhere in the United Kingdom or beyond for suitable employment; believes that this represents an appalling loss of talent to Scotland's education system and a gross betrayal of those enticed to train as teachers as well as those who voted SNP due to its election pledges on schools, and therefore calls on the SNP government to publish detailed plans of how it will deliver on its manifesto and concordat commitments on teacher numbers; considers that the universal provision of free school meals in P1 to P3 will impact on the ability of councils to recruit and retain teachers, and believes that head teachers should have much greater say in the recruitment of teachers and other staff in their schools.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-4911.2.1, in the name of Robert Brown, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-4911.2, in the name of Adam Ingram, on child protection, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-4911.2, in the name of Adam Ingram, as amended, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4911, in the name of Karen Whitefield, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 58, Against 43, Abstentions 18.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-4911.1, in the name of Elizabeth Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4911, in the name of Karen Whitefield, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-4911, in the name of Karen Whitefield, as amended, on child protection, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 74, Against 43, Abstentions 2.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament notes with concern the 23% of local authority child protection services in Scotland that scored weak or unsatisfactory in at least one of the reference quality indicators, reported in the Summary of Indicative Quality Indicator Results from HMIE Inspections , published on 17 September 2009; welcomes the fact that 77% of authorities have achieved positive child protection reports; recognises the immensely valuable contribution made by those professionals working in frontline child protection services; recognises that further improvement is necessary and will be informed by the second round of inspections now underway; looks forward to HMIE's summary report that will provide the most comprehensive national picture of child protection that Scotland has ever had, which, taken together with the findings of the recent significant case review into the death of Brandon Muir, will feed into the national review of child protection guidance; encourages measures to address the increasing prevalence of substance misuse and its impact on children within the framework of Road to Recovery; encourages the promotion of the Getting it Right for Every Child approach, and looks forward to public consultation on the review of national child protection guidance that will address assessment of risk and information sharing for all children, including those suffering from parental substance misuse, domestic abuse  and other risks to their safety and wellbeing; recognises the initiative taken by the previous administration in tackling this problem by bringing together a series of actions contained in the Hidden Harm report; calls on the Scottish Government to take effective action to identify and focus on those children who are at risk, particularly as a result of living with parents or carers who are alcohol or substance abusers; calls on the Scottish Government to report to the Parliament within three months and thereafter periodically on the progress made on this, in building on the recommendations of Hidden Harm and in the follow-up inspection work by HMIE, and looks for a child-centred approach to child protection that has the welfare and best interests of children at its heart, and further calls on the Scottish Government to acknowledge the concern about the growing number of parents in society who lack the necessary skills to bring up their children responsibly and to address this issue as a matter of urgency.

The next question is, that motion S3M-4807, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Tobacco and Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 102, Against 16, Abstentions 1.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Tobacco and Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Bill.

The final question is, that motion S3M-4467, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution to the Tobacco and Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Tobacco and Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any expenditure of a kind referred to in paragraph 3(b)(iii) of Rule 9.12 of the Parliament's Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.

Question 6 is withdrawn.

Question 9 was withdrawn.

Order, Mr McAveety.

Order.

Order.

Order. I think that Miss Goldie deserves a chance to ask the question again. [ Interruption. ] Order.

You should wait until the end, please, Mr Macintosh.

The First Minister should be brief.

Order.

Order. I wish to hear the question even if members do not. Indeed, I would like a question, Mr Scott.

We started late, so I will take a final supplementary question.

If the First Minister wants to respond, I will let him do so.

In response to Mr Macintosh's point of order, I can say only that what the First Minister said is a matter of public record, and that it is for others to make of it what they will. The rest of what Mr Macintosh said was not a point of order.

That is not a point of order—we have been through this too many times in the Parliament.

Question 2 has been withdrawn.

You know that that is not my role, Mr Henry, but I am sure that the minister has noted your point.

Question 5 was not lodged.

As I am sure that Mr McConnell knows full well, it is for the minister to decide how he responds.

Order.

Order.

As briefly as possible, please, cabinet secretary.

Before we come to First Minister's question time, I know that members will wish to join me in welcoming to the gallery the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of the Parliament of Victoria, Jenny Lindell MP. [ Applause. ] Equally, I know that members will wish to join me in welcoming the Lithuanian Ambassador to the United Kingdom, His Excellency Dr Oskaras Jusys. [ Applause. ]

Order.

You should speak through the chair, please, Ms Campbell.

I remind members that they should always speak through the chair, please, rather than directly to each other.

You should be closing now.

We come to the open debate. Members will have picked up that we have a little bit of flexibility in hand, but speeches should be around four minutes.

Order.

You certainly did hear the minister say that he would be summing up, which he is perfectly entitled to do.

Order.

Order. There is too much noise.

Good morning. The first item of business this morning is a debate on motion S3M-4910, in the name of Rhona Brankin, on teacher numbers.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4904, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 30 September 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by SPCB Question Time 2.50 pm Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee Debate: 7th Report 2009: Determining and delivering on Scotland's energy future followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 1 October 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Local Government and Communities Committee Debate: 12th Report 2009: Equal Pay in Local Government 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and Law Officers 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Role of Colleges in the Economic Recovery followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 7 October 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 8 October 2009  9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

There is just one question to be put as a result of today's business. The question is, that motion S3M-4770, in the name of Frank McAveety, on the inquiry into the public petitions process, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the conclusions contained in the Public Petitions Committee's 3rd Report, 2009 (Session 3): Inquiry into the public petitions process (SP Paper 300).

I point out to the member that it is for the Government, not the Parliamentary Bureau, to make such a request. However, I can confirm that to date I have received no such request.

The minister will now take questions on the issues raised in his statement. We have barely 20 minutes for questions; after that, we will simply have to move on to the next item of business. It would therefore be useful if members kept their questions as short as possible.

I press the member for a question.

We come to open questions. One each please; we do not have long.

I ask Margo MacDonald to be very brief.

Very briefly, please.

Please answer within 10 seconds, minister.

On that note, we will move rapidly to the next item of business. I apologise to members whom I was unable to call.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-4770, in the name of Frank McAveety, on the Public Petitions Committee's inquiry into the public petitions process.

Good afternoon. Our first item of business is, as always on a Wednesday, time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Charandeep Singh, from the University of Strathclyde.

I believe that there is a point of order from Margaret Smith.

I will answer Margaret Smith's point of order first, if I may. I am grateful to Margaret Smith for prior notice of her point of order, which I have already reflected on. As members will recall, this is not the first occasion on which such a point of order has been raised. I am disappointed that the announcement appeared in the media earlier this morning prior to members being informed by an answer to an inspired parliamentary question. I remind the Government that major policy announcements should not enter the public domain before being communicated to Parliament. I will now take Mr Gibson's point of order.

I am not entirely convinced that that was a point of order. It is for me to decide whether I believe the matter was a major policy announcement. I believe that it was and that the announcement should have been made to Parliament first.

I remind members that we are short of time this afternoon. As a result of the two points of order, we have even less time. The next item of business is a statement by Michael Russell on broadcasting. As always, the minister will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions during it. This will be a 10-minute statement.

There are seven questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-4862.1, in the name of Derek Brownlee, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4862, in the name of John Swinney, on Diageo, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-4862.2, in the name of Robert Brown, which also seeks to amend motion S3M-4862, in the name of John Swinney, on Diageo, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-4862, in the name of John Swinney, on Diageo, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament believes that major commercial decisions in Scotland should be made in the context of sustainable economic development; regrets that the proposals by Diageo to close Port Dundas Distillery in Glasgow and the Kilmarnock packaging plant abandoned long-standing workforces and plants while taking little responsibility for the consequent public costs of their decisions; urges the Scottish Government to ensure that government support of communities faced with major job losses is applied consistently across all communities in Scotland; recognises the work of the Diageo Taskforce to safeguard jobs in the west of Scotland; notes with real disappointment that the taskforce and Diageo were unable to agree a way forward; recognises that support for the individuals and communities affected is a major priority; calls on the Scottish Government to support the trades unions in their efforts to ensure that an extension on the proposed closure of Port Dundas is fully considered, that the proposed new jobs in Leven are permanent and high quality in nature and the formal consultation process between Diageo and trades unions is extended to ensure that all necessary steps are taken to mitigate the closure of the Kilmarnock packaging plant; supports the continued work of taskforce members to tackle the devastating impacts that the job losses will have on the affected communities; calls on the Scottish Government to work together with the UK Government, local authorities and relevant agencies to encourage new job creation and new business start-ups in the affected communities and elsewhere in Scotland; recognises that Scotland must compete in a global market for the investment necessary to create and safeguard jobs, and calls on the Scottish Government to ensure that its actions are aimed at maximising such investment.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-4861.1, in the name of Des McNulty, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4861, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, on the Scottish road safety framework, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-4861.2, in the name of Alex Johnstone, which also seeks to amend motion S3M-4861, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, on the Scottish road safety framework, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-4861.3, in the name of Alison McInnes, which also seeks to amend motion S3M-4861, in the name of Stewart  Stevenson, on the Scottish road safety framework, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The next question is, that motion S3M-4861, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, on the Scottish road safety framework, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 100, Against 0, Abstentions 16.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament welcomes the publication on 15 June 2009 of Scotland's Road Safety Framework to 2020; notes the significant reductions in the numbers of children and young people killed and seriously injured in the period 1997 to 2007; calls on the Scottish Government to prioritise making streets safer for cyclists and for vulnerable groups of pedestrians such as visually impaired and partially sighted people; notes the road safety vision for Scotland, which is in line with other leading road safety countries, and further notes the road safety targets, priorities and commitments and the support of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland to tackle road casualty reductions in Scotland over the next decade; notes that ongoing investment in the road network is crucial to making our roads safer; believes that road spending should be prioritised on the most dangerous black spots and those roads with the highest numbers of accidents and fatalities;  reiterates its support for a reduction in the drink-driving limit from 80 mg to 50 mg per 100 ml of blood; expresses deep concern at the disproportionately high incidence of fatalities and serious injuries on rural roads, and calls for greater emphasis on specific, targeted action to improve the safety of Scotland's rural roads.

Order. Members who have just come into the chamber are making far too much noise. Will they please respect the fact that a debate is being wound up?

Order. I say again that there is far too much noise in this chamber.

I am afraid that I must hurry you.

You have an opportunity to respond when you wind up the debate, minister. I have a little flexibility if Mr Rumbles wants to take an intervention, but he does not have to.

Mr Stone, will you please check that your mobile phone or Blackberry is turned off? Something is interfering with the sound feed.

Then it is somebody very close to you, Mr Stone.

Order. I ask all members to check that their communication equipment is turned off. A member's telephone or Blackberry is on, and it is interfering with the sound feed.

Order.

Order.

Order.

I have a number of requests for constituency questions.

Order.

Order.

The questions are to the First Minister.

I know that members will wish to join me in welcoming to the gallery the Speaker of the House of Commons, the right hon John Bercow MP. [ Applause. ] Following First Minister's question time last week, I had a constructive meeting with party leaders at which we all agreed that the ability of back benchers to participate in First Minister's question time is an extremely important part of our proceedings. I am grateful to the party leaders for their co-operation on those matters. [ Interruption. ] It is anticipated co-operation.

We come now to speeches from back benchers. I repeat that we have absolutely no extra time available, so strict time limits will apply.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-4862, in the name of John Swinney, on Diageo. I point out right at the start that we have no spare time whatsoever available in the debate, so I ask members to stick strictly to their speaking times.

I was hoping that someone would ask that.

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-4856, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, and motion S3M-4857, on substitution on committees.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Act 2008 (Consequential Modifications) Order 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that— Gavin Brown be appointed to replace Murdo Fraser as the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party substitute on the Finance Committee; Murdo Fraser be appointed to replace Gavin Brown as the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party substitute on the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The questions on the motions will be put at decision time.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-4835, in the name of Christine Grahame, on the Health and Sport Committee's report on pathways into sport and physical activity, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Health and Sport Committee's 5th Report, 2009 (Session 3): Pathways into Sport and Physical Activity (SP Paper 260).

The second question is, that motion S3M-4856, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Act 2008 (Consequential Modifications) Order 2009 be approved.

The final question is, that motion S3M-4857, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on substitution on committees, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that— Gavin Brown be appointed to replace Murdo Fraser as the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party substitute on the Finance Committee; Murdo Fraser be appointed to replace Gavin Brown as the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party substitute on the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee.

I should probably declare an interest in the next item of business, given that it is centred on Whithorn, which is a royal burgh in the very heart of my constituency. I am pleased to introduce the final item of business, which is a members' business debate on motion S3M-4580, in the name of Alasdair Morgan, on Whithorn as cradle of Christianity and place of modern pilgrimage.  Motion debated,  That the Parliament recognises that Whithorn is the earliest known centre of Christianity in Scotland and that Whithorn has already produced archaeological artefacts of immense historical significance; notes that, while in ancient times Ninian was Scotland's premier saint and remains commemorated in many sites throughout the nation, the historical significance of Whithorn and Ninian's story is largely forgotten by a modern generation; recognises that the recognition of Whithorn as Scotland's cradle of Christianity will bring economic benefit to a depressed area, and supports the efforts of the Whithorn Trust to publicise Whithorn's unique contribution to Scottish history more widely, not least for the benefit of its present-day inhabitants.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4853, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme for Thursday 17 September, which is tomorrow.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 17 September 2009— delete 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Scottish Road Safety Framework and insert 2.55 pm Ministerial Statement: Budget followed by Scottish Government Debate: Scottish Road Safety Framework—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4854, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 23 September 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Broadcasting followed by Public Petitions Committee Debate: Inquiry into the Public Petitions Process followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 24 September 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Stage 1 Debate: Tobacco and Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Bill  followed by Financial Resolution: Tobacco and Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 30 September 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by SPCB Question Time 2.50 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 1 October 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and Law Officers 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4855, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a stage 2 timetable for the Arbitration (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Arbitration (Scotland) Bill at Stage 2 be completed by 9 October 2009.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

Order. I apologise, Mr Finnie, but I must ask members who are entering the chamber to respect the fact that we are winding up a debate and that other members would like to listen to the speeches.

No, he will not; he does not have time.

The point is now on the record. I ask Ross Finnie to wind up on behalf of the committee. Mr Finnie you have a very tight eight minutes.

We come to open speeches. I have a little bit of flexibility, but members should keep their speeches to around six minutes.

Wind up, please.

No, the minister must wind up.

Good afternoon. As always, our first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Father Jim McGarry, of St Clare's church, Easterhouse, Glasgow.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-4835, in the name of Christine Grahame, on pathways into sport and physical activity. We have little spare time in the debate, so I ask members to stick to the time allocations that are made to them.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-4810.1, in the name of Paul Martin, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4810, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the fire and rescue framework, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-4810.2, in the name of Robert Brown, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4810, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the fire and rescue framework, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The third question is, that motion S3M-4810, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the fire and rescue framework, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament welcomes the Scottish Government's commitment to a fire and rescue service that is modern and effective, with the principal aim of reducing risk, effectively responding to incidents and improving the safety of local communities; notes that the consultation document, Draft Fire and Rescue Framework for Scotland 2009, has been developed in a spirit of partnership with COSLA and all key stakeholders, and notes that the Scottish Government is committed to working with local government to protect the public from fire and to reduce Scotland's poor record of fire fatalities and recognises the tremendous contribution and crucial role played by firefighters in Scotland and the need for consistent and rigorous enforcement of health and safety standards in fire and rescue services right across Scotland; recognises the vital work of fire and rescue services across Scotland, including the contribution of those firefighters on the retained duty system who provide a flexible and cost effective community service, particularly in rural, remote and island parts of Scotland; welcomes local flexibility in service delivery but notes the concerns of the Fire Brigades Union Scotland at the lack of strategic direction for the fire and rescue services, supported by clear and enforceable standards and responsibilities, and calls on the Scottish Government to ensure that the Fire and Rescue Advisory Unit and the Ministerial Advisory Group work effectively with fire and rescue authorities to deliver effective compliance with agreed and consistent objectives under the national framework.

The final question is, that S3M-4526, in the name of Andrew Welsh, on strategic budget scrutiny, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Finance Committee's 2nd Report 2009 (Session 3): Strategic Budget Scrutiny (SP Paper 283).

Order. My apologies, Ms Baillie, but there is too much extraneous conversation taking place.

Question 5 has been withdrawn.

Question 10 was lodged by Ken Macintosh but he is not in the chamber.

I am afraid I must conclude questions on finance and sustainable growth; I will allow a few seconds for members to change places for the next item of business.

I have received an unusually large number of significant constituency question requests from back benchers. I ask all members, in particular front benchers, to keep questions and answers as brief as they can do, so that I can accommodate as many of those requests as possible.

Briefly, please.

Question, please.

I repeat my call for brevity.

I am disappointed that, despite my gentle plea for brevity, First Minister's question time has so far taken 22 minutes—longer than ever before. I am, therefore, going to instigate discussions with all relevant parties to see how I can best protect the ability of back benchers to have an input to the questions. I am now unable to invite any supplementary questions from some important back benchers.

I am sorry, but for the first time in my role as Presiding Officer we are unable to get to question 6. That concludes questions to the First Minister.

Before we move to the next item of business, members will want to join me in welcoming to the gallery Charlie Parker MLA, the Speaker of the Nova Scotia Legislature, and his delegation. [ Applause. ]

We come to the open debate. I repeat that we have some flexibility with time, so members should feel free to take interventions.

Good morning. The first item of business this morning is a debate on motion S3M-4810, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the fire and rescue framework. We have a little leeway in the debate, but members should stick broadly to the times that they are given. Thirteen minutes is your guideline, minister.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-4811, in the name of Michael McMahon, on the Children's Hearings Legal Representation (Scotland) Amendment Rules 2009, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 60, Against 65, Abstentions 1.  Motion disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-4797.2, in the name of Cathy Jamieson, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4797, in the name of Shona Robison, on dementia strategy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 62, Against 62, Abstentions 2. In accordance with convention, I vote against the amendment.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-4797.1, in the name of Ross Finnie, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4797, in the name of Shona Robison, on dementia strategy, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-4797, in the name of Shona Robison, on dementia strategy, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament recognises the work that is being taken forward by the Scottish Government to establish dementia as a national priority, working in partnership with the NHS, local government, voluntary sector organisations such as Alzheimer's Scotland, the Scottish Dementia Working Group, regulatory and scrutiny bodies including the Mental Welfare Commission, the Social Work Inspection Agency and the Care Commission and experts from the Dementia Services Development Centre at the University of Stirling, the Royal College of Psychiatrists, the Royal College of General Practitioners and the Royal College of Nursing to improve the care, treatment and support available to those with dementia and their carers and calls on the Scottish Government to work with these stakeholders to ensure that the highest standards of care are achieved for those with dementia in care homes, in the community and in hospital and to publish a dementia strategy for Scotland no later than April 2010.

I am grateful to the minister for that clarification, and I consider the matter closed.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4804, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 16 September 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Health and Sport Committee Debate: Pathways into Sport and Physical Activity followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 17 September 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Diageo 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Europe, External Affairs and Culture; Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Scottish Road Safety Framework followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 23 September 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 24 September 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time  2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4806, also in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on the stage 2 timetable for the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill at Stage 2 be completed by 30 October 2009.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

We come to closing speeches. I call Robert Brown. I must hold you to about three minutes, Mr Brown.

Before calling the next member, by way of fair notice I inform all closing speakers that they will each have to reduce their speaking times by one minute.

As the member knows, what members say in the chamber is not a matter for me to rule on. I am not in possession of all the facts and figures and I must therefore leave the matter until the member receives the letter from the minister. We are now eating seriously into the time for this debate.

The member must close now.

I warn members that the closing speech from Labour may have to be curtailed.

I remind all members to speak through the chair and not to each other directly.

You must conclude, minister.

I say to the minister that as I extended his time, I might have to reduce his time for winding up.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4805, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on suspension of standing orders.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that, for the purposes of allowing up to 60 minutes to debate motion S3M-4811 on Wednesday 9 September 2009, the second and third sentences of Rule 10.4.4 of Standing Orders be suspended.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4803, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 9 September 2009— delete followed by Public Petitions Committee Debate: Inquiry into Public Petitions Process followed by Scottish Government Debate: Dementia Strategy and insert followed by Debate on the Children's Hearings (Legal Representation) (Scotland) Amendment Rules 2009 (SSI 2009/211)  followed by Scottish Government Debate: Dementia Strategy—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-4811, in the name of Michael McMahon, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on consideration of a Scottish statutory instrument, the Children's Hearings (Legal Representation) (Scotland) Amendment Rules 2009 (SSI 2009/211).  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that nothing further be done under the Children's Hearings (Legal Representation) (Scotland) Amendment Rules 2009 (SSI 2009/211).—[ Michael McMahon .]

We are extremely tight for time and I have no time to take out of the next debate, so members must adhere strictly to the times that they are given.

Good afternoon. As always, our first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Elaine Duncan, the chief executive of the Scottish Bible Society.

I remind all members that remarks should be directed through the chair and not made directly to each other. Question 2 was not lodged.

Through the chair, please.

Question, please.

I call question 2.

As we were unable to call her in yesterday's debate, I will take a supplementary question from Margo MacDonald.

We started late, so I will also allow question 6.

Order.

That concludes the morning part of the debate, which will continue this afternoon.

I ask for that to be the last such interruption—I asked for there to be no interruptions, and I ask for that now to be respected.

Order.

Order. There is a whole debate to come. We can all make the points later that members apparently wish to make now.

The next item of business is the debate on the Scottish Government's programme.

Good morning. The first item of business is a statement by Nicola Sturgeon on influenza A(H1N1). The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of her 10-minute statement, so there should be no interruptions or interventions.

The cabinet secretary will now take questions, for which we have almost exactly 20 minutes, before we move to the next item of business.

We come to open questions. We have pretty limited time, so I stress one question and one brief answer, please, if at all possible.

The next item of business is a statement by Alex Salmond on the Scottish Government's programme. The First Minister's statement will be followed immediately by a debate. There should therefore be no interventions or interruptions during the statement, which may last up to 30 minutes.

There are six questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-4748.1.1, in the name of Bill Aitken, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-4748.1, in the name of Richard Baker, on the decision on Abdelbaset Ali Mohmed al-Megrahi, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 73, Against 50, Abstentions 1.  Amendment agreed to.

The second question is, that amendment 4748.1.2, in the name of Robert Brown, which also seeks to amend amendment S3M-4748.1, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 73, Against 50, Abstentions 1.  Amendment agreed to.

The third question is, that amendment S3M-4748.1, in the name of Richard Baker, as amended, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4748, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 73, Against 50, Abstentions 1.  Amendment, as amended, agreed to.

The fourth question is, that motion S3M-4748, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the decision on Abdelbaset Ali Mohmed al-Megrahi, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 73, Against 50, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the decisions by the Cabinet Secretary for Justice to reject the application by the Libyan Government to transfer Abdelbaset Ali Mohmed Al Megrahi under the prisoner transfer agreement between the United Kingdom and Libya and to release Mr Al Megrahi on compassionate grounds; believes that the process of making this crucial decision was mishandled by the Cabinet Secretary for Justice; believes that it was wrong for the Cabinet Secretary for Justice to meet Abdelbaset Ali Mohmed Al Megrahi in prison while considering his application for compassionate release to Libya and that this potentially sets an inappropriate precedent; also believes that it was unacceptable that the media was made aware of the decision a week before it was formally announced; does not accept that the Cabinet Secretary for Justice received or sought sufficient medical advice to make his judgement on Megrahi's prognosis; further believes that the Cabinet Secretary for Justice did not sufficiently explore options to take account of Megrahi's illness other than compassionate release to Libya, in particular the opportunities for compassionate release within Scotland; believes that the announcement should have been made to the Parliament rather than to a press conference; considers that justice and compassion for the victims' families have not been served by this process; recognises the ability of both the Scottish police and the NHS in Scotland on the basis of past performance to have supported the release of Mr Al Megrahi to an appropriate location and regrets that this was not adequately explored; recognises that Scotland's international reputation has been damaged not simply by the decision to release Megrahi on compassionate grounds to Libya but also because of the way that taking the decision was mishandled, and, given the mishandling of this process by the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, does not agree with his decision to return Megrahi to Libya on compassionate release.

The fifth question is, that motion S3M-4734, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill.

The final question is, that motion S3M-4757, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on membership of the Committee of the Regions and the regional chamber of the Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of the Council of Europe, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament endorses the Scottish Government's proposal to nominate, as a representative of the Parliament, Jamie Hepburn MSP as a full member on the UK delegation to the regional chamber of the Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of the Council of Europe, and Stewart Maxwell MSP and Irene Oldfather MSP as full members and Nicol Stephen MSP and Ted Brocklebank MSP as alternate members on the UK delegation to the Committee of the Regions for the remainder of the current session to 2012, and notes that the representation from local government to the Committee of the Regions will be Councillors Corrie McChord and Roger Knox as full members and Councillors Graham Garvie and Sandy Park as alternate members.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is a statement by John Swinney on progress on the Diageo task force. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his 15 minute statement. Therefore, there should be no interventions or interruptions during it.

I point out to those in the public gallery that, however tempting it is to do so, they should not applaud or otherwise contribute to the business before Parliament. The cabinet secretary will now take questions on his statement.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-4734, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on stage 1 of the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill. I am delighted to report that, for once, we have considerable flexibility around the time for debate, so I do not need to be ruthless in holding members to their time allocations.

No. The member is just finishing.

We come to the open debate. Members will have got the picture that time is extremely tight, so I warn those who will speak later that they might get foreshortened.

I call Sandra White.

That is a matter for the minister to respond to as he sees appropriate.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4754, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 2 September 2009 9.30 am Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Decision on Abdelbaset Ali Mohmed Al Megrahi 2.00 pm Ministerial Statement: Progress on Diageo Taskforce followed by Stage 1 Debate: Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill  followed by Membership of the Committee of the Regions and the Regional Chamber of the Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of the Council of Europe followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 3 September 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Influenza A (H1N1)  followed by First Minister's Statement: Scottish Government's Programme followed by Scottish Government Debate: Scottish Government's Programme 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Justice and Law Officers; Rural Affairs and the Environment 2.55 pm Continuation of Scottish Government Debate: Scottish Government's Programme followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 9 September 2009 2.00 pm Time for Reflection  followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Public Petitions Committee Debate: Inquiry into Public Petitions Process followed by Scottish Government Debate: Dementia Strategy followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 10 September 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Fire and Rescue Framework 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Finance Committee Debate: Strategic Budget Scrutiny followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 16 September 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 17 September 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Europe, External Affairs and Culture; Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-4748, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the decision on Abdelbaset Ali Mohmed al-Megrahi.

Order.

That is entirely a matter for the Labour Party, from which I have received no request to lodge such an amendment.

Just as the previous point of order was a matter for the Labour Party, that point is a matter for the Government party. It is up to that party who it chooses to sum up the debate. I cannot order that to happen.

You are correct that that would be in order, but I have received no such request. The debate is heavily subscribed and we have already eaten considerably into the time that is available for it. I must insist that members stick rigidly to the time that is allocated to them. I call Kenny MacAskill to speak to and move the motion in his name.

Good morning. The first item of business is time for reflection, and our time for reflection leader today is the Rev David Cameron.

Good afternoon. The only item of business today is a statement by the Cabinet Secretary for Justice regarding the decision on Mr Abdelbaset Ali Mohmed al-Megrahi. This topic is of the utmost seriousness, and the eyes of many people around the globe are on the Parliament today. Although I know that today's business will be understandably emotive, I respectfully remind members that we all have a part to play in maintaining the sense of dignity and decorum that is expected of us. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interruptions or interventions during it. This will be a 20-minute statement.

As the cabinet secretary indicated, and as I said earlier, he will now take questions on the issues that were raised in his statement. It would be extremely helpful if members who wish to ask questions would press their request-to-speak buttons now.

We come to open questions. Thirty members want to ask questions and I am keen to ensure that every member who wishes to ask a question can do so. I must therefore insist that questions are very brief and that the answers are as brief as possible.

Briefly, please.

I must ask for there to be no applause from the public gallery; it is against the rules of the Parliament.

If we are to get through the questions of all those members who wish to ask them, they must make them briefer than they have been so far. I must insist on one question per member, without too much preamble.

I said one question per member. Thank you, Mr Paterson.

Come to a question, please.

I ask members to be extremely brief because we are getting very short of time.

I thank all members for the forbearance and patience that they have shown during this extended session.  Meeting closed at 15:42.

Seven questions will be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-4490.1, in the name of Michael Russell, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4490, in the name of Michael McMahon, on the Calman commission report, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 47, Against 72, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-4490, in the name of Michael McMahon, on the Calman commission report, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 69, Against 49, Abstentions 1.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament warmly welcomes the Calman Commission on Scottish Devolution's report, Serving Scotland Better: Scotland and the United Kingdom in the 21st Century , which is based firmly on evidence and engagement with the people of Scotland; thanks the chair and members of the commission for their work on behalf of the Parliament and the UK Government; agrees that the commission's report is a comprehensive response to the remit approved by the Parliament on 6 December 2007; welcomes the establishment of the steering group to take forward the report's recommendations to strengthen devolution and enable the Parliament, through new powers and responsibilities, to serve the people of Scotland better in the United Kingdom; calls on the Scottish Government to make fully available the resources of the Scottish administration to cooperate in this respect, and calls on the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body to continue to allocate appropriate resources and funding to enable the Parliament to support the work of the steering group and consider the recommendations that apply to the Parliament.

The third question is, that motion S3M-4432, in the name of Gil Paterson, on hybrid bills, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee's 7th Report 2009 (Session 3), Hybrid Bills (SP Paper 299), and agrees that changes to Standing Orders set out in Annexe A to the report be made with effect from 26 June 2009.

The next question is, that motion S3M-4465, in the name of Jim Mather, on the Arbitration (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Arbitration (Scotland) Bill.

The next question is, that motion S3M-4454, in the name of Alex Salmond, on the Holocaust (Return of Cultural Objects) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Holocaust (Return of Cultural Objects) Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 26 January 2009, relating to the return from public museum and gallery collections of cultural objects stolen during the Nazi era, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, should be considered by the UK Parliament.

The next question is, that motion S3M-4504, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on committee membership, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that Bill Kidd be appointed to replace Andrew Welsh on the Public Audit Committee.

The final question is, that motion S3M-4505, in the name of Bruce  Crawford, on substitution on committees, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that Andrew Welsh be appointed to replace Bill Kidd as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee.

That concludes decision time. I wish every member a refreshing summer recess.  Meeting closed at 17:03.

Question 4 is withdrawn.

Question 6 is withdrawn.

Question 11 was withdrawn.

I think that that is more a point of information than a point of order, but it is now on the record.

Order.

I will take one constituency question from Marilyn Livingstone.

It is a good job that it is the last day of term.

We come to open debate. As I indicated earlier, I have a little flexibility, but speeches should be around six minutes.

Order.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-4490, in the name of Michael McMahon, on the Calman commission report. We have a little flexibility of time, so members should feel free to take interventions if they wish to do so. I will be able to add on time.

Order.

Order.

The first question is, that motion S3M-4464, in the name of John Swinney, on the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill be passed.

The second question is, that motion S3M-4486, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 (Exclusions and Exceptions) (Scotland) Amendment Order 2009 be approved.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4484, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 2 September 2009 9.30 am Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 2.30 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 3 September 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Justice and Law Officers; Rural Affairs and the Environment 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 9 September 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 10 September 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth  2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of a further business motion, S3M-4485, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a timetable for stage 1 of the Interpretation and Legislative Reform (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Interpretation and Legislative Reform (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 16 January 2010.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-4486, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 (Exclusions and Exceptions) (Scotland) Amendment Order 2009 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

Order. There is an awful lot of background noise and I would prefer less of it.

I call the minister to wind up.

Group 22 is on promotion of water conservation and water-use efficiency. Amendment 136, in the name of Des McNulty, is the only amendment in the group.

Group 23 is on the energy performance of the Scottish civil estate. Amendment 139, in the name of Cathy Peattie, is grouped with amendment 140.

Group 24 is on waste regulations. Amendment 85, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendments 87, 88, 3, 4 and 89.

I quite understand, minister.

If you wait for just a few seconds, Mr McNulty, you will be right. The Deputy Presiding Officer is taking over from me in the chair.

Group 19 is on energy efficiency. Amendment 134, in the name of Lewis Macdonald, is the only amendment in the group.

Amendment 135, in the name of Sarah Boyack, is in a group on its own.

Group 21 is on permitted development rights. Amendment 71, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendments 72 to 84, 144 and 145.

I call the minister to wind up on amendment 67. You can have three minutes, minister.

Group 18 is on district heating. Amendment 133, in the name of Lewis Macdonald, is the only amendment in the group.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is the continuation of stage 3 proceedings on the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill. I remind members that they should have in front of them the bill as amended at stage 2; the marshalled list, which was revised yesterday; and the groupings, which I agreed. As was the case this morning, the division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for  five minutes for the first division of the afternoon, and the period of voting for that division will be 30 seconds. Thereafter, I will allow a vote of one minute for the first division after a debate. All other divisions will last 30 seconds.

We continue where we left off. Group 17 is on council tax and non-domestic rates. Amendment 67, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendments 67A to 67D, 67F, 67E, 125, 125A, 125B, 126, 68, 127 to 129, 69, 130, 70, 131, 132 and 93.

I remind members that if amendment 96 is agreed to, amendments 97, 9, 10, 98 and 99 will be pre-empted.  Amendment 96 not moved.   Amendments 97, 9, 10, 98 and 99 moved—[Stewart Stevenson]—and agreed to.  [Amendment 100 moved—[Sarah Boyack]—and agreed to.]

Group 3 is on the setting of annual targets. Amendment 11, in the name of Alison McInnes, is grouped with amendments 12 to 18. I draw members' attention to the additional information on pre-emptions in the group, which is in the groupings paper.

Order.

We move now to the division on amendment 6.

The result of the division is: For 2, Against 119, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 6 disagreed to.

We move to group 2. Amendment 94, in the name of Sarah Boyack, is grouped with amendments 94A, 7, 8, 95 to 97, 9, 10, 98 to 101, 108, 114, 119, 120 and 143. I remind members that, if they wish to participate in a debate on a group of amendments, they should press their request-to-speak buttons when I call the grouping. I draw members' attention to the additional information in the groupings paper on pre-emptions in this group.

I call the minister to move amendment 94A.

The next item of business is stage 3 proceedings on the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill. In dealing with amendments, members should have the bill as amended at stage 2—that is, Scottish Parliament bill 17A. They should also have the marshalled list, which was revised yesterday—that is, SP bill 17A-ML revised—and the groupings, which I, as Presiding Officer, have agreed. The division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for five minutes for the first division this morning and the first division this afternoon. The period of voting for the first division will be 30 seconds. Thereafter, I will allow a voting period of one minute for the first division after a debate, and 30 seconds for all other divisions.

We start with group 1. Amendment 6, in the name of Patrick Harvie, is the only amendment in the group.

The question is, that amendment 6 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division. As this is the first division, there will be a five-minute suspension.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4483, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme for this week.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees— (a) the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 24 June 2009— delete 2.30 pm Continuation of Stage 3 Proceedings: Climate Change (Scotland) Bill and insert 1.45 pm Continuation of Stage 3 Proceedings: Climate Change (Scotland) Bill and (b) the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 25 June 2009— after followed by Stage 1 Debate: Arbitration (Scotland) Bill insert followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Holocaust (Return of Cultural Objects) Bill - UK Legislation — [ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4488, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 3 consideration of the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that, during Stage 3 of the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill, debate on groups of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limits indicated, each time limit being calculated from when the Stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the Stage in the morning and afternoon being called) or otherwise not in progress: Groups 1 and 2: 45 minutes Groups 3 to 6: 1 hour 40 minutes Groups 7 to 11: 2 hours 30 minutes Groups 12 to 16: 3 hours 10 minutes Groups 17 to 19: 4 hours Groups 20 to 24: 4 hours 50 minutes Groups 25 to 28: 5 hours 30 minutes.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

Good morning. When I led the parliamentary delegation to the United States during Scotland week, we were very warmly received in the Brick church in the city of New York. I am therefore delighted to introduce our time for reflection leader today: the Rev Michael Lindvall, who is the senior minister of the Brick Presbyterian church.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-4243, in the name of Trish Godman, on behalf of the Review of SPCB Supported Bodies Committee, on its proposal for a committee bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to the proposal for a Committee Bill, under Rule 9.15, contained in the Review of SPCB Supported Bodies Committee's 1st Report, 2009 Review of SPCB Supported Bodies (SP Paper 266).

The second question is, that motion S3M-4397, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Convention Rights Proceedings (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Convention Rights Proceedings (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill be passed.

The Convention Rights Proceedings (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill is passed. [ Applause. ] The final question is, that motion S3M-4421, in the name of Michael Russell, on the energy, commitment and creativity of Scotland's festivals and their contribution to the financial success and quality of life in Scotland, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament recognises the international success of the Edinburgh festivals, along with Scotland's other festivals, their contribution to the Scottish economy, their role in the cultural life of the nation and the positive messages that they promote about Scotland's cultural confidence and ambition in this Year of Homecoming.

Order.

I am grateful for having received prior notice of Mike Rumbles's point. I regret to say that it is not a point of order, because it applies to parts of the code of conduct that do not represent obligations on members. However, on reflection, the minister might want to consider whether his response to Mr Rumbles was quite as constructive as it might have been.

Good morning. The first item of business is consideration of motion S3M-4395, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, which is to agree to treat the Convention Rights Proceedings (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill as an emergency bill.

I have to assume that the cabinet secretary knows what the question was about. The content of her reply is not for me to determine.

Question 5 has been withdrawn.

Darian—[ Laughter. ] Sorry. Sandra White.

Question 4 has been withdrawn.

I call Alasdair Morgan.

Sorry. I meant to call David Whitton.

Question 7 was lodged by Helen Eadie, but I do not think that she is in the chamber, which is unfortunate, shall we say.

Order.

Mr Wilson, I do not disagree with you, but you must ask the question as tabled on the paper.

Order.

That concludes general questions. Before we come to our next item of business, I am sure that members will wish to join me in welcoming to the gallery the ambassador to the United Kingdom from the Netherlands, His Excellency Mr Pim Waldeck. Your Excellency, you are most welcome. [ Applause. ]

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-4396, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Convention Rights Proceedings (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill. We have a little time—a little flexibility—available in the debate.

The next item of business is consideration of six Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motions S3M-4413 to S3M-4418 inclusive, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Licensing (Mandatory Conditions) (Scotland) Regulations 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Environmental Liability (Scotland) Regulations 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Renewables Obligation (Scotland) Amendment Order 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Planning etc. (Scotland) Act 2006 (Consequential Amendments) Order 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Town and Country Planning (Charges for Publication of Notices) (Scotland) Regulations 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Adoption (Disclosure of Information and Medical Information about Natural Parents) (Scotland) Regulations 2009 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The next item of business is consideration of a further Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-4419, on the designation of a lead committee.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Subordinate Legislation Committee be designated as the lead committee and that the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee be designated as secondary committee in consideration of the Interpretation and Legislative Reform (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The questions on the motions will be put at decision time.

There are seven questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-4387, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the Scottish Local Government (Elections) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Scottish Local Government (Elections) Bill be passed.

The second question is, that motion S3M-4388, in the name of Mike Pringle, on the Scottish parliamentary contributory pension fund, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament appoints Bill Aitken MSP as a Fund trustee of the Scottish Parliamentary Contributory Pension Fund, further to his nomination for such appointment by the Parliamentary corporation.

The third question is, that motion S3M-4389, in the name of Mike Pringle, on the Scottish parliamentary contributory pension fund, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament appoints Ross Finnie MSP as a Fund trustee of the Scottish Parliamentary Contributory Pension Fund, further to his nomination for such appointment by the Parliamentary corporation.

The fourth question is, that motion S3M-4390, in the name of Mike Pringle, on the Scottish parliamentary contributory pension fund, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament appoints David Stewart MSP as a Fund trustee of the Scottish Parliamentary Contributory Pension Fund, further to his nomination for such appointment by the Parliamentary corporation.

The fifth question is, that motion S3M-4391, in the name of Mike Pringle, on the Scottish parliamentary contributory pension fund, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament appoints Alasdair Morgan MSP as a Fund trustee of the Scottish Parliamentary Contributory Pension Fund, further to his nomination for such appointment by the Parliamentary corporation.

I propose to ask a single question on motions S3M-4413 to S3M-4418, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments. As no members object, the sixth question is, that motions S3M-4413 to S3M-4418, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of SSIs, be  agreed to.  Motions agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Licensing (Mandatory Conditions) (Scotland) Regulations 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Environmental Liability (Scotland) Regulations 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Renewables Obligation (Scotland) Amendment Order 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Planning etc. (Scotland) Act 2006 (Consequential Amendments) Order 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Town and Country Planning (Charges for Publication of Notices) (Scotland) Regulations 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Adoption (Disclosure of Information and Medical Information about Natural Parents) (Scotland) Regulations 2009 be approved.

The final question is, that motion S3M-4419, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the designation of a lead committee, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Subordinate Legislation Committee be designated as the lead committee and that the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee be designated as secondary committee in consideration of the Interpretation and Legislative Reform (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1.

Before I put the question, let me say that I consider Mr Smith's speech to be perfectly within the allowable parameters. The question is, that S3M-4411, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a timetable for stage 1 of the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 18 December 2009.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4412, in the name of Bruce Crawford on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out an extension of the timetable for stage 1 of the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be extended to 30 October 2009.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The question on the motions will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-4408, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which seeks to make a substitution in standing orders for the purpose of allowing the Parliament to meet at 9 am on Thursday 25 June 2009.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that "9:00" be substituted for "9:15" in Rule 2.2.3 for the purpose of allowing the meeting of the Parliament on Thursday 25 June 2009 to begin at 9.00 am.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4409, also in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which seeks to suspend standing orders for the purpose of members' business on Thursday 25 June 2009.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that Rule 5.6.1(c) of Standing Orders be suspended for the purpose of Members' Business on Thursday 25 June 2009.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of a further business motion, S3M-4410, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 24 June 2009 9.15 am Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Climate Change (Scotland) Bill 2.30 pm Continuation of Stage 3 Proceedings: Climate Change (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 25 June 2009 9.00 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Debate: Calman Commission Report followed by Standards, Procedures and Public  Appointments Committee Debate: Hybrid Bills 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time followed by Members' Business 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Ministerial Statement: End Year Flexibility followed by Stage 1 Debate: Arbitration (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Wednesday 2 September 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Tuesday 3 September 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4411, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a timetable for stage 1 of the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 18 December 2009.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The cabinet secretary will now take questions on issues raised in her statement. We have just over 20 minutes for such questions, after which I must move to the next item of business.

We move to open questions. If we have brief questions and brief answers, we will get everybody in.

The next item of business is consideration of motions S3M-4388 to S3M-4391 inclusive, in the name of Mike Pringle, on behalf of the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body, on the appointment of fund trustees of the Scottish parliamentary contributory pension fund.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4407, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme for this afternoon.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 17 June 2009— after followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Scottish Local Government (Elections) Bill insert followed by Ministerial Statement: Repossessions Group Final Report—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a statement from Fiona Hyslop on the school building programme. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of her 15-minute statement and therefore there should be no interventions or interruptions during it.

Cabinet secretary, I must interrupt you. I asked that there be no interruptions or interventions. That applies as much to applause as to sedentary interventions. I would be grateful if we could please hear the rest of the statement in relative silence. Thank you.

Excuse me again, cabinet secretary. I have asked for the statement to be heard in relative silence. I hope that that will continue to be the case—I would very much appreciate that.

The cabinet secretary will now take questions on issues raised in her statement. We have around 30 minutes for questions, after which we must move to the next item of business. A considerable number of members have indicated that they wish to ask questions.

An unprecedented number of members want to ask questions, so I ask for brevity in questions and responses. There should be one question per member.

I think that there were three questions; I would be grateful if the cabinet secretary could give one reply.

Order.

I call Andy Kerr, to be followed by Elizabeth Smith. [ Interruption. ]

Order.

I call Patricia Ferguson, to be followed by Bob Doris.

That is not really a point of order. You have clarified the point that you believe you made, which is now on the record.

Order.

That concludes the statement and questions on the school building programme. I apologise to the members whom I was unable to call. Four members were still waiting to ask questions.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-4387, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the Scottish Local Government (Elections) Bill.

Good afternoon. We are very pleased to have with us, as our time for reflection leaders, Amy Stirling and Samuel MacKay, who are first-year pupils at Selkirk high school.

There are six questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-4344, in the name of Annabel Goldie, on Scotland needs a general election, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

I did not think that we would be. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 78, Against 42, Abstentions 0.  Motion agreed to , That the Parliament believes that the interests of Scotland and the United Kingdom would be best served by holding a general election for a new House of Commons as soon as possible.

That is not a point of order. The vote was a vote on a motion that was debated properly in the chamber. The next question is, that amendment S3M-4348.3, in the name of Elaine Murray, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4348, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on the national waste strategy, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-4348.2, in the name of John Scott, which also seeks to amend motion S3M-4348, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on the national waste strategy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 78, Against 40, Abstentions 2.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-4348.4, in the name of Liam McArthur, which also seeks to amend motion S3M-4348, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on the national waste strategy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 56, Against 64, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-4348.1, in the name of Robin Harper, which also seeks to amend motion S3M-4348, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on the national waste strategy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 65, Against 54, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-4348, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on the national waste strategy, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 79, Against 1, Abstentions 39.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament notes Scotland's achievement of its share of the 2010 landfill diversion target 18 months early; encourages the Scottish Government to continue working with stakeholders to further improve recycling rates, increase reuse and do more on waste prevention; recognises however that the provisions of the EU-revised Waste Framework Directive (2008/98/EC) are required to be transposed into Scots law by 12 December 2010; notes the forthcoming consultation on the new National Waste Management Plan; believes that the new plan must fully address the waste hierarchy of prevention, reuse, recycling, recovery and disposal, as described in the National Waste Plan 2003 and the revised EU framework directive; notes that, in order to meet medium and long-term targets, the issue of developing further waste infrastructure must be tackled, as a priority, to better address the management, reduction, recycling and disposal of commercial and industrial waste in Scotland, and believes that, given the good progress being made so far, there should be no necessity for any large-scale waste-to-energy plants to be built in Scotland and that reuse, reducing waste creation and recycling are the best way forward.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Could you come to the point of order, please, Mr Whitton?

Order.

First, I point out that, strictly, members have three minutes in which to make a point of order. Mr Whitton's speech was 15 seconds longer than that—I recommend against that in future. Nonetheless, I thank Mr Whitton for giving me notice of his point of order, which has allowed me carefully to consider the transcript of this morning's debate, when I was not in the chair. I simply remind all members of my previous ruling that the words "lies", "lying" and "liar" should not be used in the chamber in relation to other members—and preferably not at all. I am disappointed that the word "lie" has been used again today more than once. There is something of a growing tendency in that direction. I simply ask again that all members cease that practice forthwith. All that I can say in reply to Mr Whitton's second point is that, as I have said many times before, it is not my role as Presiding Officer to establish the veracity or otherwise of statements made in the chamber by any member, be they a minister or otherwise.

Do you have a point of order, Mr Welsh?

Order.

The member has made a point, but I am not clear about whether it was a point of order for me. His fact is now a matter of public record.

Order. Could members who have just come into the chamber please be quiet?

I again ask members who have just entered the chamber—and, indeed, those who have been here for a while—to be quiet, please.

Before I call the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth, I point out that, as I am sure members know, the matter is still in the courts and therefore some aspects of it will be sub judice. I hope that members will be careful not to encroach on those aspects.

Order.

I am keen to bring in supplementaries wherever possible. If we are to make progress on the number of questions that we get through, both questions and answers will have to be briefer than they have been thus far.

Question, please.

Questions 6 and 7 have been withdrawn.

Order.

Several members want to ask important constituency questions. I ask members to keep the questions and answers as brief as possible, so that I can get as many of the questions in as possible.

First Minister, I must remind you that I have always asked for proper names to be used in the chamber, please.

Question 4 was not lodged.

Question, please.

That concludes general questions. Before we come to First Minister's question time, members will wish to join me in welcoming to the gallery His Excellency Iztok Jarc, the ambassador of the Republic of Slovenia. [ Applause. ]

Order.

Order. There is so much noise that the minister cannot hear a member trying to make an intervention. I really suggest that you keep the noise level down.

Order. Mr Henry, if you wish to take part in the debate, I suggest that you press your request-to-speak button and queue up to do so.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Order, order.

Good morning. The first item of business is a statement by Nicola Sturgeon on influenza A(H1N1). The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of her 10-minute statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions.

The cabinet secretary will now take questions on the issues raised in her statement. We have exactly 20 minutes for such questions, after which we must move on to the next item of business.

We move to open questions. We are very tight for time, so I ask for strictly one question per person, please.

As briefly as possible, please.

Hugh Henry will ask the final question.

I apologise to Jamie Hepburn and Dr Richard Simpson, but I am unable to call them because we must move to the next item of business.

Our next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-4344, in the name of Annabel Goldie, on Scotland needs a general election. I point out to members straight away that we are very tight for time in this debate. Members will be held strictly to the time that is allocated to them. I call Annabel Goldie to speak to and move the motion. Miss Goldie, you have 13 minutes.

There are just two questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-4057, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Sexual Offences (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 121, Against 0, Abstentions 1.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Sexual Offences (Scotland) Bill be passed.

If no member objects, I propose to ask a single question on motions S3M-4341 to S3M-4343, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments. The question is, that motions S3M-4341 to S3M-4343, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of SSIs, be agreed to.  Motions agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (Cash Searches: Constables in Scotland: Code of Practice) Order 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (Investigations: Code of Practice) (Scotland) Order 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005 (Consequential Provisions) Order 2009 be approved.

That concludes decision time. If members who are leaving the chamber did so quietly, it would make a change.

The next item of business is consideration of three Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motions S3M-4341 to S3M-4343, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (Cash Searches: Constables in Scotland: Code of Practice) Order 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (Investigations: Code of Practice) (Scotland) Order 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005 (Consequential Provisions) Order 2009 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on the motions will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4338, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which seeks to make a substitution in rule 2.2.3, to allow the Parliament to meet at 8.45 tomorrow morning. I ask any member who wishes to speak against the motion to press their request-to-speak button and I call Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-4338.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that "8:45" be substituted for "9:15" in Rule 2.2.3 for the purpose of allowing the meeting of the Parliament on Thursday 11 June 2009 to begin at 8.45 am.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

George Foulkes has indicated a desire to speak.

We are grateful to hear that. No member has asked to speak against the motion. The question is, that motion S3M-4338, in the name of Bruce Crawford, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4339, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a revised business programme for tomorrow.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 11 June 2009— delete 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party Debate: Scotland Needs a General Election and insert 8.45 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Influenza A (H1N1)  followed by Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party Debate: Scotland Needs a General Election—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4340, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of  the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 17 June 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: School Buildings Programme followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Scottish Local Government (Elections) Bill followed by Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body Debate: Nomination of Pension Trustees for the Scottish Parliamentary Pension Scheme followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 18 June 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Debate on a Government Motion to treat the proposed Convention Rights Proceedings (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill as an Emergency Bill followed by Stage 1 Debate: proposed Convention Rights Proceedings (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill followed by Review of SPCB Supported Bodies Committee Debate 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning; Europe, External Affairs and Culture 2.55 pm Committee of the Whole Parliament: Stage 2 Debate: proposed Convention Rights Proceedings (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: proposed Convention Rights Proceedings (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill followed by Scottish Government Debate: Festivals' Contribution to Scotland's Success followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 24 June 2009 9.15 am Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Climate  Change (Scotland) Bill 2.35 pm Continuation of Stage 3 Proceedings: Climate Change (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 25 June 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time followed by Members' Business 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is stage 3 proceedings on the Sexual Offences (Scotland) Bill. Members should have with them the bill as amended at stage 2—that is, Scottish Parliament bill 11A; the marshalled list—that is, SP bill 11A-ML; and the groupings, which I, as Presiding Officer, have agreed. The division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for five minutes for the first division of the afternoon. The period of voting for the first division will be 30 seconds. Thereafter, I will allow a voting period of one minute for the first division after a debate, and 30 seconds for all other divisions. I remind members that, if they wish to speak to any grouping, they should press their request-to-speak buttons when the group is announced.

We start with group 1. Amendment 1, in the name of Margaret Curran, is the only amendment in the group.

I call Margaret Curran to wind up the debate on amendment 1.

Amendment 2, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendments 10, 21 to 47 and 69 to 71.

The cabinet secretary will now take questions on the issues that were raised in his statement. As I have said, we have about 30 minutes for questions, after which I must move to the next item of business.

After Liam McArthur's question, we will come to open questions.

We come to open questions. Time is limited, so it will be strictly one question per member.

Order.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4330, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 3 consideration of the Sexual Offences (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that, during Stage 3 of the Sexual Offences (Scotland) Bill, debate on groups of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limits indicated, each time limit being calculated from when the Stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the Stage being called) or otherwise not in progress: Groups 1 to 5: 35 minutes Groups 6 to 9: 55 minutes Groups 10 to 13: 1 hour 10 minutes.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a statement by Richard Lochhead on a thriving rural Scotland: the future role of Government support to agriculture and food. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, which will last for 15 minutes, so there should be no interventions or interruptions during it.

As always on a Wednesday, the first item of business is time for reflection. I am very pleased to say that our time for reflection leader this afternoon is the Right Reverend Brian Smith, the Bishop of Edinburgh.

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-4300, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, and motion S3M-4301, on designation of a lead committee.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Waste Batteries (Scotland) Regulations 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Finance Committee be designated as lead committee and that the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, the Health and Sport Committee and the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee be designated as secondary committees in consideration of the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The questions on the motions will be put at decision time.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-4286, in the name of Patrick Harvie, on the Offences (Aggravation by Prejudice) (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Offences (Aggravation by Prejudice) (Scotland) Bill be passed.

I am delighted to say that the bill is agreed. [ Applause. ] The second question is, that motion S3M-4300, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Waste Batteries (Scotland) Regulations 2009 be approved.

The third question is, that motion S3M-4301, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the designation of a lead committee, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Finance Committee be designated as lead committee and that the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, the Health and Sport Committee and the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee be designated as secondary committees in consideration of the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4297, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which seeks to suspend standing orders to allow two members' business debates to take place on Thursday 11 June.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that, for the purposes of Members' Business on Thursday 11 June 2009, "at the end of First Minister's Question Time and at the end of the meeting following Decision Time" be substituted for "at the end of the meeting following Decision Time" in Rule 5.6.1(c) of Standing Orders.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4298, also in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 10 June 2009 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: A Thriving Rural Scotland: The Future Role of Government Support to Agriculture and Food followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Sexual Offences (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 11 June 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time followed by Members' Business 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Ministerial Statement: National Qualifications followed by Scottish Government Debate: National Waste Strategy  followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 17 June 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body Debate: Nomination of Pension Trustees for the Scottish Parliamentary Pension Scheme followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Scottish Local Government (Elections) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 18 June 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning; Europe, External Affairs and Culture 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

Questions are to the First Minister.

Order.

Final question from Annabel Goldie.

Order, Mr Swinney.

Order.

Order. First Minister, the answer "yes" will do.

First Minister. Mary Scanlon. [ Laughter. ]

Order. The member has a right to make a point of order.

That is entirely a matter for the First Minister and is not a point of order for me.

I am not sure that this is meant to be questions to all members, but I will allow the minister to respond.

Good afternoon. As always on a Wednesday, our first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is the Venerable K Sri Rewatha Thero, Scotland's Buddhist Vihara.

There are nine questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-4245.1, in the name of Richard Baker, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4245, in the name of Robert Brown, on a missing children alert system, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-4245, in the name of Robert Brown, on a missing children alert system, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament supports the establishment of strong cross-Europe working to ensure that there are effective, linked "amber alert" systems in place to bring European-wide attention to missing children; understands that early action is critical in locating missing and abducted children and that the experience of those countries that have alert systems in place, such as the United States of America, is extremely positive; welcomes the formal adoption of the written declaration on Emergency Cooperation In Recovering Missing Children as a resolution of the European Parliament in April 2009 but regrets that European countries currently fail to cooperate effectively when recovering missing children and that progress has been slow, and calls on the Scottish Government to work proactively and constructively with the UK Government and to encourage Scottish police forces to collaborate with their UK and European counterparts to ensure that all missing children alert systems and cross-border cooperation policies, including the 116 000 European hotline, are operational as soon as possible to bind the country effectively into the European system.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-4246.2, in the name of Jim Mather, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4246, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, on supporting Scottish business, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 63, Against 56, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-4246.1, in the name of John Park, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4246, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, on supporting Scottish business, as amended, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-4246, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, on supporting Scottish business, as amended, be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 105, Against 14, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the serious difficulties faced by the Scottish businesses struggling to access the funds that they need during the economic downturn, with the double squeeze of late payment and tighter lending a critical concern for small businesses in particular; notes that the Welsh Assembly Government is using European Investment Bank (EIB) funding to help small businesses bridge funding gaps, supporting the expansion of 800 businesses and creating up to 15,000 jobs across Wales; further notes that the Scottish Investment Bank, announced by the First Minister on 21 April 2009, will initially bring together approximately £150 million in public sector resource to support company growth in Scotland; also notes that, following this first step, the Scottish Government will look to enhance the scale and impact of such financial support to growing Scottish businesses including the potential to secure significant additional funds from the European Investment Bank through the establishment of a Joint European Resources for Micro to Medium Enterprises (JEREMIE) fund for Scotland, and considers that, among other measures that the Scottish Government has introduced, its small business bonus scheme has helped the tens of thousands of Scottish firms now exempt from paying local business rates, and calls on the Scottish Government to provide detailed information about the Scottish Investment Bank proposal announced by the First Minister at the STUC conference on 21 April 2009.

The next question is, that motion S3M-4250, in the name of Alex Johnstone, on the reappointment of the Commissioner for Public Appointments in Scotland, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament nominates Karen Carlton to Her Majesty The Queen for reappointment for a second term as the Commissioner for Public Appointments in Scotland from 1 June 2009.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-4244.1, in the name of Richard Baker, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4244, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on cashback for communities, investing the proceeds of crime back into our communities, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-4244.2, in the name of Robert Brown, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4244, on cashback for communities, as amended, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The final question is, that motion S3M-4244, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on cashback for communities, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament welcomes the fact that, since its launch in January 2008, the CashBack for Communities programme has provided positive opportunities and activities for over 100,000 young people in Scotland; recognises that providing healthy and fun activities not only gives young people something to do, but can help in reducing crime and antisocial behaviour by diverting the small minority who cause trouble away from such behaviour; welcomes the fact that the CashBack programme has been funded through £12 million recovered from criminals using the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002; commends the significant efforts of partners in the CashBack programme including Youthlink, Scottish Football Association, Scottish Rugby Union, Basketballscotland, Scottish Sports Futures, sportscotland, Scottish Screen and the Scottish Arts Council, as well as the very many local projects and volunteers that are making the scheme a success; believes that every effort should be made to ensure further progress in recovering assets from those who profit from crime, and believes that funds obtained through the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 should continue to be focussed on projects in communities affected by crime and in activities that provide diversion from offending, and calls on the Scottish Government to promote closer working and engagement between safer neighbourhood and community police teams and young people in efforts to prevent and tackle crime and antisocial behaviour and to ensure that the CashBack money is distributed fairly so that the whole of Scotland can reap the benefits of the scheme.

Order. I ask members to settle down.

Order. I ask members to cut down on the background noise.

Order. The minister should be closing now.

As Mr Gray is aware, it is not for me to rule on the veracity of ministerial answers. If any member wishes to come to the chamber in light of what has been said, they are entirely free to do so.

As the member knows, matters for business in the chamber are decided by the Parliamentary Bureau. Any such request will be considered accordingly. I have no more to say on the matter.

The First Minister wishes to respond.

It is someone's. I would be grateful if members would check their communications equipment.

I am sorry to interrupt, Mr Doris, but the question was on housing in Midlothian. I am afraid that supplementary questions must refer to that.

No. The subject is houses in Midlothian, Mr Doris. I am afraid that we must move on.

Order.

Order.

Order. Iain Gray has a final question.

Order.

Order. Iain Gray: one final, brief question.

Order.

Order. First Minister—

First Minister, I know that you could not hear me, but I must stop you. When I ask for order in the chamber, I expect to get it. I allow as much latitude as possible for members to support or decry what is being said, but when I ask for order, I expect to get it.

I will take a constituency question from Frank McAveety.

I will take a further constituency question from Trish Godman.

That is an entirely reserved matter, but I will allow the cabinet secretary to comment.

Members have previously been cautioned against using unparliamentary language, even when it appears in a quotation. I caution members against doing so in future.

Ask a question please, Mr Harper.

Order. I am sorry, minister. There is far too much background noise in the chamber.

I call Cathie Craigie to speak, after which we will come to wind-up speeches.

We come the open debate. I will not give time limits at this point.

Good morning. The first item of business is a Liberal Democrat debate on motion S3M-4245, in the name of Robert Brown, on a missing children alert system. We are reasonably relaxed about timings—seven minutes is just a broad guideline, Mr Brown.

This is one of those occasions on which I am happy for members' speeches to overrun.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first is, that motion S3M-4217, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on influenza A(H1N1), be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament acknowledges the work of NHS Scotland, local authorities and other stakeholders in handling the recent outbreak of Influenza A (H1N1); commends NHS boards and Health Protection Scotland for the success so far of the containment strategy in limiting the spread of the virus by quickly and effectively treating confirmed cases, tracing contacts and dealing with possible and probable cases; accepts that we must maintain a high state of preparedness given the potential seriousness for the nation's health and economy of a full-scale pandemic, and supports the collaborative approach of the Scottish Government and all its partners, both within Scotland and beyond, in minimising the spread of A (H1N1).

The next question is, that motion S3M-4239, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Scottish Public Services Ombudsman Act 2002 (Amendment) Order 2009 be approved.

The final question is, that motion S3M-4240, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of an SSI, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Crime (International Co-operation) Act 2003 (Designation of Participating Countries) (Scotland) (No. 2) Order 2009 be approved.

The question on the motion will be put at decision time. The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion number S3M-4240, on the approval of an SSI.

The question on the motion will be put at decision time. I commend the Minister for Parliamentary Business for the thorough way in which he moved those motions.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-4239, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4238, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a business programme.

The cabinet secretary will now take questions on the issues that have been raised in his statement. We have around 20 minutes for such questions.

We move to open questions. Time is against us, so I am going to have to hold each member strictly to one question.

I will take a little time out of the next debate to take a final question from Joe FitzPatrick.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-4217, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on influenza A(H1N1).

Our next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4237, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme for this afternoon.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees— (a) the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 27 May 2009— after 2.30 pm Time for Reflection - Andy Brookes, National Prayer Breakfast followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions insert followed by Ministerial Statement: Open Prisons and (b) the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 28 May 2009— delete 2.55 pm CashBack for Communities: Investing the proceeds of crime back into our communities and insert 2.55 pm Commissioner for Public Appointments in Scotland - Reappointment followed by CashBack for Communities: Investing the proceeds of crime back into our communities—[ Bruce Crawford .]

I thought that a member wished to speak against the motion, but they did not.  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a statement by Kenny MacAskill on open prisons. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, which will last for 10 minutes, so there should be no interventions or interruptions during it.

Good afternoon. As always on a Wednesday, our first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Andy Brookes from the National Prayer Breakfast.

There are 14 questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-4188.2, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, which seeks to amendment motion S3M-4188, in the name of Claire Baker, on student hardship, be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 47, Against 71, Abstentions 0.  The amendment is therefore carried. I beg your pardon, the amendment falls. [ Laughter. ] And there are 13 more to go.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-4188.1, in the name of Margaret Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4188, in the name of Claire Baker, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 15, Against 103, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-4188, in the name of Claire Baker, on student hardship, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 69, Against 49, Abstentions 0.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament calls for a cross-party approach on tackling hardship among the poorest students in Scotland; believes that students have been severely let down by the SNP's broken promises, actions and inaction in power; further believes that the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning's efforts have been misplaced in focussing solely on reducing graduate debt rather than  student hardship while student demand for hardship and childcare funds increases, commercial borrowing among students continues and student support levels in Scotland fall far behind the rest of the United Kingdom; notes the open letter to the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning signed by NUS, the main opposition parties and student leaders across Scotland calling for the Scottish Government to increase levels of student support through increased loans and for a new direction from the Scottish Government; further notes that on the 12 March 2009, through motion S3M-3675 as amended, the Parliament rejected all of the proposals contained in the Supporting a Smarter Scotland consultation, which closed in April 2009, for not adequately addressing student hardship, and calls on the Scottish Government to work with the main opposition parties on their joint approach to tackling student hardship by using the available resources to provide £7,000 in support for the poorest students, a £500 increase in grant for the poorest students, an increase in support of £200 for all students through the non-means-tested loan and almost £2 million to discretionary funds for childcare and hardship funding.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-4187.2, in the name of Jim Mather, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4187, in the name of John Park, on supporting employment in Scotland, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-4187.1, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, which also seeks to amend motion S3M-4187, in the name of John Park, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 55, Against 63, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-4187, in the name of John Park, on supporting employment in Scotland, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament is concerned that 34,000 extra Scots were out of a job in the last year and that many live under the threat of redundancy; recognises that government support for business and individuals is vital in the current climate; calls on the Scottish Government to examine the ProAct scheme developed by the Welsh Assembly Government, which supports businesses on short-time working, to establish whether or not a scheme would benefit Scotland's economic recovery; further recognises the seriousness of the economic situation in Scotland; believes that the Scottish Government should bring forward a new and revised economic recovery programme prior to summer recess, and calls for such a plan to outline how the Scottish Government intends to deliver the extra 7,800 apprenticeship places agreed for 2009 and the 75,000 training places announced by the First Minister on 18 April 2009.

Before I come to the next question, I understand that Mr Harper has indicated that he wishes to withdraw amendment S3M-4186.1. Mr Harper, will you confirm that that is the case?

The amendment can be withdrawn only with the full agreement of Parliament. If any member objects to Mr Harper's amendment being withdrawn, I will have to put the question on the amendment to the chamber. Does any member object to the amendment being withdrawn?

The next question is, that amendment S3M-4186.2, in the name of Elaine Murray, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4186, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on the importance of aquaculture to the Scottish economy, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-4186.3, in the name of John  Scott, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4186, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on the importance of aquaculture to the Scottish economy, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-4186.4, in the name of Liam McArthur, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4186, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on the importance of aquaculture to the Scottish economy, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-4186, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on the importance of aquaculture to the Scottish economy, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the publication of A Fresh Start - the renewed Strategic Framework for Scottish Aquaculture and its key themes; promotes the continued development of an ambitious, sustainable, profitable, thriving and growing Scottish aquaculture industry; recognises the economic importance of the industry to Scotland as a whole and many coastal communities in particular; acknowledges the vital role to be played by aquaculture production, processing and associated businesses during the economic downturn; further recognises that, if the industry is to attract, retain and develop people for a long-term career in aquaculture, the Scottish Government must ensure that a range of suitable training opportunities are made available; supports efforts to promote the many positives of the industry and to advance the enviable international reputation of quality Scottish aquaculture products, built on high environmental standards and the principles of sustainable development; encourages Marine Scotland to work with others to deliver a transparent, streamlined and proportionate regulatory framework that encourages shellfish and finfish industries while at the same time ensuring that adverse impacts on biodiversity and other users of the marine and freshwater environment are minimised and managed; welcomes proactive and effective engagement with other aquaculture-producing countries through sharing knowledge and promoting best practice and Scotland's role as a major contributor to international cooperation on research; acknowledges the continued engagement of the shellfish and finfish industries and other stakeholders in the development and implementation of the Strategic Framework for Scottish Aquaculture, and notes the importance of the 6,200 Scottish jobs supported by the aquaculture industry in maintaining the environmental, economic and social fabric in communities often located in Scotland's most remote and fragile areas.

The next question is, that legislative consent motion S3M-4124, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Coroners and Justice Bill, UK Legislation, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Coroners and Justice Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 14 January 2009, relating to the EU Services Directive, criminal memoirs and the Scottish system of investigation of deaths and fatal accident inquiries into  deaths abroad of members of the armed forces and others, so far as these provisions relate to matters within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, should be considered by the UK Parliament.

The next question is, that motion S3M-4180, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Community Right to Buy (Definition of Excluded Land) (Scotland) Order 2009 be approved.

The final question is, that motion S3M-4181, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of an SSI, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Local Government and Housing Act 1989 Amendment (Scotland) Order 2009 be approved.

The final item of business is a members' business debate on motion S3M-3563, in the name of John Wilson, on the Strathclyde Police prolific offender programme. The debate will be concluded without any question being put.  Motion debated,  That the Parliament congratulates Strathclyde Police on the success of the Prolific Offender Programme, aimed specifically at drug and alcohol offenders, which has resulted in a 30% reduction in offending rates, particularly regarding shop lifting, housebreaking and prostitution; welcomes the inclusion of counselling, education and housing opportunities as part of the rehabilitation process under this pioneering initiative aimed at improving community safety, and notes that since 2007 over 194 people have been involved in the initiative while 95 people remain engaged in the programme.

Order. There is too much noise.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-4180, on the approval of the draft Community Right to Buy (Definition of Excluded Land) (Scotland) Order 2009.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Community Right to Buy (Definition of Excluded Land) (Scotland) Order 2009 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time. The next item of business is consideration of another Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-4181, on the approval of the draft Local Government and Housing Act 1989 Amendment (Scotland) Order 2009.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Local Government and Housing Act 1989 Amendment (Scotland) Order 2009 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

Mr McLetchie has indicated that he would like to speak. You have up to three minutes.

The next item of business is a debate on legislative consent motion S3M-4124, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Coroners and Justice Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation.

All speeches from now on should be of no more than six minutes.

Question 4 was not lodged.

Question 6 was withdrawn.

That concludes questions on Europe, external affairs and culture.

Mr Fraser, you are well aware that that is not a point of order for me.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-4186, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on the importance of aquaculture to the Scottish economy. I remind members that we are tight for time, so Presiding Officers will have to be strict in enforcing the time limit for each member.

Order.

Order.

I will take a constituency question from Michael McMahon.

I will take a further constituency question from Christina McKelvie.

Question 3 was to have been asked by Margaret Mitchell but she does not appear to be in the chamber. Members are aware of my feelings on the subject. They will be made known to her.

Order. Far too many conversations are taking place in the chamber.

Before we move to questions to the First Minister, I know that members will wish to join me in welcoming to the gallery the Speaker of the House of Assembly of the Parliament of South Australia, the hon Jack Snelling MP. Mr Speaker, you are most welcome. [ Applause. ]

Although I am always grateful when members give the chair a little bit more time, I should say that we are not that desperate, so members should feel free to take up the time that they have been offered.

We come to closing speeches. I ask members to keep reasonably close to the times that they have been given.

Could you close, please?

You must close, please.

All contributions should be around four minutes from now on, please.

Good morning. The first item of business is a Labour Party debate on motion S3M-4188, in the name of Claire Baker, on student hardship. We have little flexibility on time—I stress the word "little".

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4178, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 27 May 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Influenza A (H1N1)  followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 28 May 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Liberal Democrats Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: CashBack for Communities: Investing the proceeds of crime back into our communities followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 3 June 2009 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.05 pm General Question Time 2.25 pm First Minister's Question Time 2.55 pm Themed Question Time Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and Law Officers 3.35 pm Stage 3 Proceedings: Offences (Aggravation by Prejudice) (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time  followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4179, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 2 of the Scottish Local Government (Elections) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Scottish Local Government (Elections) Bill at Stage 2 be completed by 5 June 2009.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

There is just one question to be put as a result of today's business. The question is, that motion S3M-4059, in the name of Adam Ingram, on the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Bill be passed.

The question is, that amendment 4 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 49, Against 72, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

I invite the minister to move amendments 5 to 12 en bloc.  Amendments 5 to 12 moved—[Adam Ingram].

Does any member object to a single question being put on amendments 5 to 12?

As a result, the questions will be put one at a time.  Amendments 5 to 7 agreed to.

The question is, that amendment 8 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 46, Against 73, Abstentions 2.  Amendment 8 disagreed to.  Amendments 9 and 10 agreed to.

The question is, that amendment 11 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 47, Against 71, Abstentions 1.  Amendment 11 disagreed to.

The question is, that amendment 12 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 46, Against 69, Abstentions 1.  Amendment 12 disagreed to.

Amendment 13, in the name of Adam Ingram, is in a group on its own.

The question is, that amendment 20 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 72, Against 47, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 20 agreed to.

Amendment 4, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendments 5 to 12 and 21.

I apologise to Ms Baker, who was quite right to move amendment 18 when she did. I ask her to wind up the debate.

The question is, that amendment 18 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 71, Against 48, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 18 agreed to.

Amendment 19, in the name of Karen Whitefield, is in a group on its own.

The question is, that amendment 19 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 73, Against 47, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 19 agreed to.

Amendment 20, in the name of Ken Macintosh, is in a group on its own.

Order.

The question is, that amendment 2 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 79, Against 42, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 2 agreed to.  Amendment 3 moved—[Adam Ingram].  Amendments 3A and 3B moved—[Margaret Smith]—and agreed to.  Amendment 3, as amended, agreed to.  Amendment 17 not moved.

Amendment 18, in the name of Claire Baker, is in a group on its own.

The amendment will be moved later.

We move to the division on amendment 15.

The result of the division is: For 69, Against 48, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 15 agreed to.  Amendment 16 moved—[Margaret Smith].

The question is, that amendment 16 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 70, Against 47, Abstentions 1.  Amendment 16 agreed to.

Amendment 1, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendments 2, 3, 3A, 3B and 17.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-4184, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for the stage 3 consideration of the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) (Bill).  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that, during Stage 3 of the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Bill, debate on groups of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limits indicated, that time limit being calculated from when the Stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the Stage being called) or otherwise not in progress: Groups 1 to 3: 45 minutes Groups 4 to 7: 1 hour 25 minutes Groups 8 to 10: 1 hour 55 minutes.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is stage 3 proceedings on the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Bill. In dealing with amendments, members should have the bill as amended at stage 2—SP bill 16A—the marshalled list and the groupings, which I have agreed. The division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for five minutes for the first division this afternoon. The period of voting for the first division will be 30 seconds. Thereafter, I will allow a voting period of one minute for the first division after a debate and 30 seconds for all other divisions.

Amendment 15, in the name of Margaret Smith, is grouped with amendment 16.

Before I call the Minister for Children and Early Years to respond, I remind members that if they wish to participate in the debate on any of the groups, they should press  their request-to-speak buttons when the group is called. I call Ken Macintosh.

I call Margaret Smith to wind up.

Do you wish to press or withdraw amendment 15?

The question is, that amendment 15 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division. I suspend proceedings for five minutes.

Good afternoon. As always on a Wednesday, our first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leaders today are Liam Beattie, a secondary 6 pupil at Hawick high school and a member of the Scottish Youth Parliament, and Rachel Connolly, an S6 pupil at Hawick high school.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-3964, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the Scottish Local Government (Elections) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Scottish Local Government (Elections) Bill.

The second question is, that motion S3M-3629, in the name of John Swinney, on the Scottish Local Government (Elections) Bill financial resolution, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Scottish Local Government (Elections) Bill, agrees to any increase in expenditure of a kind referred to in paragraph 3(b)(iii) of Rule 9.12 of the Parliament's Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.

The third question is, that amendment S3M-4131.1, in the name of Pauline McNeill, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4131, in the name of Michael Russell, on Scotland's engagement in the United States of American and Canada, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The final question is, that motion S3M-4131, in the name of Michael Russell, on Scotland's engagement in the United States of America and Canada, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament recognises the importance of Scotland's relationship with the United States of America and Canada; notes the contribution of the Scottish Government, the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body and all those who were involved in the development of Scotland Week over the last eight years in North America; expresses its gratitude for the significant contribution of the Scottish diaspora in helping to promote Scotland's rich cultural heritage, and encourages the Scottish Government to promote Scotland's cultural diversity in a modern Scotland and to continue to develop a more joined-up approach to the promotion of Scotland in Canada and the United States of America by working in partnership with all relevant organisations in the public and private sector in order to ensure that Scotland derives real social and economic benefits from such activities.

Order. I am sorry to interrupt you, minister. Can we have less noise in the chamber, please.

I hope that the minister will forgive me for pointing out that I did take part in the homecoming Scotland run, when I managed to summon up enough energy to hold one end of the finishing tape; the Deputy First Minister held the other end.

Question 9 was not lodged.

I call the cabinet secretary—sorry, the minister.

Questions 11 and 12 were not lodged.

Question 14 was not lodged and question 15 has been withdrawn.

I can take some time out of the next debate, so I call David Stewart.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-4131, in the name of Michael Russell, on Scotland's engagement with the United States of America and Canada. I remind members that, because the stage 3 debate on the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill was concluded yesterday, this afternoon's debate is scheduled to finish at 5 o'clock. I call Michael Russell to speak to and move the motion. Minister, you have a reasonably flexible 11 minutes.

I call Annabel Goldie to ask question 2.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-3629, in the name of John Swinney, on the Scottish Local Government (Elections) Bill financial resolution.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Scottish Local Government (Elections) Bill, agrees to any increase in expenditure of a kind referred to in paragraph 3(b)(iii) of Rule 9.12 of the Parliament's Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

Question 1 was not lodged.

I advise members that a supplementary question really should be one question, not four.

The member is fully aware that ministers are responsible for the contents of their answers.

That concludes general questions. Before we come to questions to the First Minister, I know that the chamber will wish to join me in welcoming two distinguished guests to the gallery: His Excellency Fakhraddin Gurbanov, the ambassador of Azerbaijan; and His Excellency Kairat Abusseitov, the ambassador of Kazakhstan. [ Applause. ]

I have been informed that one speaker will not be taking part in the debate, so we are not quite as tight for time as we were. Nonetheless, we do not have a lot of time available.

I say for the benefit of members who arrived slightly late that we are short of time this morning, so questions and answers should be as brief as possible.

Order.

Order.

We come to open questions. We should have only one question per member, please. I will stick rigorously to that.

That is three questions.

Order.

Order, Mr McLetchie.

I am sorry, but members must ask one question only. I ruled against one member on that point, and I must be fair to all members.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-3964, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the Scottish Local Government (Elections) Bill. I remind members that time is extremely tight, so they must stick rigorously to their allocated time.

Good morning. We have a great deal of business to get through today, so I emphasise that "brevity" would be a useful watchword for members around the chamber. The first item of business is a statement by Nicola Sturgeon on influenza A(H1N1). The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of her 10-minute statement, so there should be no interruptions or interventions.

As always, the cabinet secretary will take questions on the issues that have been raised in the statement. We have around 20 minutes for those questions, after which I will have to move on to the next item of business.

We come to open questions. I stress that there is one question per member.

Dr Simpson, I stressed that each member had one question.

That is one question, Dr Simpson.

Before I call the Dave Thompson, I will on this occasion allow Dr Simpson to put his second question because the member who was to put the subsequent question is not in the chamber.

The next item of business is a statement by Kenny MacAskill, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, on community courts. As always, the cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement and there should therefore be no interventions or interruptions. I remind members that we are very tight for time today; we have a lot of business to fit in. Brevity in both questions and answers should be the watchword of the day.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-4123, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Scotland Act 1998 (Modification of Schedule 4) Order 2009 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

As stage 3 of the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill has been completed, there are two questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-4058, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill be passed.

The final question is, that motion S3M-4123, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Scotland Act 1998 (Modification of Schedule 4) Order 2009 be approved.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4136, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 20 May 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 21 May 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Europe, External Affairs and Culture Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Importance of Aquaculture to the Scottish Economy followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Coroners and Justice Bill - UK Legislation followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 27 May 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 28 May 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business  11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4121, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a timetable for stage 1 of the Marine (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Marine (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 30 October 2009.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4122, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a timetable for stage 2 of the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill at Stage 2 be completed by 12 June 2009.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

Order. I am sorry, minister. It is the height of discourtesy for members who have not taken part in the debate to come wandering into the chamber and just start talking among themselves. Kindly refrain from doing so.

I thank all members for their co-operation in allowing us to conclude consideration of the bill this afternoon.

I am grateful for the extra time. We come to closing speeches.

We move to group 11. Amendment 46, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendment 47.

We move to the division on amendment 4.

The result of the division is: For 58, Against 56, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

We now come to group 10. Amendment 13, in the name of Karen Gillon, is grouped with amendment 14.

Order. I am sorry, Ms Gillon, but there are far too many conversations taking place in the chamber. I ask members to concentrate on business.

Before I put the question on amendment 13, I remind members who might have come into the chamber late that, if they wish to take part in discussions on groupings, they should press their request-to-speak buttons when the grouping is announced. I think that one or two members were disappointed that they did not get to speak on this grouping. The question is, that amendment 13 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 56, Against 55, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 13 agreed to.  Amendment 14 moved—[Karen Gillon].

The question is, that amendment 14 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 56, Against 56, Abstentions 0. I have to use my casting vote. In line with convention, I vote against the amendment.  Amendment 14 disagreed to.

We come to group 4. Amendment 31, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendment 32. I see that the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment is to speak to the amendments.

We move to group 5. Amendment 34, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendments 56, 58 and 62.

We come to group 6. Amendment 35, in the name of the minister, is the only amendment in the group.

We now come to group 7. Amendment 37, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendments 43, 45, 49 to 51, 57 and 63.

We come to group 7. Amendment 38, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendment 39.

We come to group 9. Amendment 4, in the name of Peter Peacock, is the only amendment in the group.

The question is, that amendment 4 be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

There will be a division. I suspend proceedings for five minutes.

In group 3, amendment 27, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendments 28 to 30, 5, 33, 65, 36, 40, 41, 9, 42, 44, 7, 17, 18, 60 and 64.

The next item of business is stage 3 proceedings on the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill. In dealing with amendments, members should have the bill as amended at stage 2—that is, SP bill 15A; the marshalled list—that is, SP bill 15A-ML; and the groupings, which I have agreed. The division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for five minutes for the first division this afternoon. The period of voting for the first division will be 30 seconds. Thereafter, I will allow a voting period of one minute for the first division after a debate and 30 seconds for all other divisions.

We go straight to group 1. Amendment 19, in the name of Elaine Murray, is grouped with amendment 10.

I remind members that, if they wish to participate in a discussion on a group of amendments, they should press their request-to-speak buttons when the group is announced.

We come to group 2. Amendment 26, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendment 8.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4111, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 3 consideration of the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that, during Stage 3 of the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill, debate on groups of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limits indicated, each time limit being calculated from when the Stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the Stage being called) or otherwise not in progress: Groups 1 and 2: 20 minutes Groups 3 to 8: 1 hour 5 minutes Groups 9 to 13: 1 hour 45 minutes Groups 14 to 18: 2 hours 25 minutes.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4134, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, seeking a suspension of standing orders to allow the Parliament to meet at 9 o'clock on Thursday 14 May 2009.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that "9:00" be substituted for "9:15" in Rule 2.2.3 for the purpose of allowing the meeting of the Parliament on Thursday 14 May 2009 to begin at 9.00 am.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-4135, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme for Thursday 14 May 2009.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Thursday 14 May 2009 9.00 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Influenza A (H1N1)  followed by Ministerial Statement: Community Courts followed by Stage 1 Debate: Scottish Local Government (Elections) Bill  followed by Financial Resolution: Scottish Local Government (Elections) Bill 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Scotland's Engagement in the United States of America and Canada followed by Stage 3 Debate: Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - S3M-3894 Cathy Jamieson: RNID Hearing Matters Campaign—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

Good afternoon. The first item of business, as always, is time for reflection. We felt that it would be more than suitable, on this particular occasion, which is as close as possible to the 10 th anniversary of the first sitting of our Parliament, to have as our time for reflection leader the Very Rev Gilleasbuig Macmillan, the minister of St Giles Cathedral.

There are 12 questions to be put as a result of today's business. Members should note that the question on motion S3M-3963, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, on the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill, and those on the two amendments to that motion, will be put before the questions on this morning's business. Members should also be aware that, if motion S3M-4065.3, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on community courts, is agreed to, amendments S3M-4065.1 and S3M-4065.2, in the names of Richard Baker and Robert Brown respectively, will fall. The first question is, that amendment S3M-3963.2, in the name of Sarah Boyack, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3963, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, on the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-3963.1, in the name of Alison McInnes, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3963, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, on the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 57, Against 62, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The third question is, that motion S3M-3963, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, on the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill and, in so doing, further agrees that unambiguous quantified targets for the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions for the period between 2010 and 2019 are needed so that the current government and governments elected in 2011 and 2015 can be held to account for delivering early action on tackling climate change.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-4067.3, in the name of Keith Brown, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4067, in the name of Elizabeth Smith, on school discipline, be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 48, Against 71, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-4067.1, in the name of Ken Macintosh, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4067, in the name of Elizabeth Smith, on school discipline, be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 89, Against 16, Abstentions 14.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-4067.2, in the name of Margaret Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4067, in the name of Elizabeth Smith, on school discipline, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 78, Against 41, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-4067, in the name of Elizabeth Smith, on school discipline, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 102, Against 16, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament deplores the rise in the number of exclusions from Scottish schools attributable to weapon attacks by pupils; supports all appropriate measures to uphold the rights of teachers to teach and pupils to learn in a disciplined environment; notes the significant steps made by the previous administration to achieve this including the setting up of the Discipline Task Group, the removal of restrictions on head teachers to exclude pupils if necessary, the use of special units, support for teacher training, reduced class sizes and more classroom assistants; calls on the Scottish Government to address the recent decline in teacher numbers and support staff, including behaviour support staff, and to work in partnership with key stakeholders to put in place a framework for a discipline code in every school incorporating rights and responsibilities for head teachers, teachers, parents and pupils, and further believes that the Scottish Government should engage closely with pupils, staff, the voluntary sector and other partner organisations to improve formal and non-formal learning opportunities for young people to ensure that they are not excluded from education.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-4065.3, in the name of Fergus Ewing, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4065, in the name of Bill Aitken, on community courts, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 46, Against 73, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-4065.1, in the name of Richard Baker, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4065, in the name of Bill Aitken, on community courts, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 73, Against 46, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-4065.2, in the name of Robert Brown, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4065, in the name of Bill Aitken, on community courts, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 73, Against 46, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-4065, in the name of Bill Aitken, on community courts, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 73, Against 46, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament notes with regret the decision of the Scottish Government not to proceed with the establishment of a community court in Glasgow; recognises that community courts based on the New York City model in Midtown can address patterns of offending behaviour by providing for swift and effective summary justice coupled with a range of rehabilitation services to break the cycle of reoffending, notes that the independent business plan in March 2009 anticipated numerous benefits from a community court project, including improved community safety, greater offender accountability and reduced rates of reoffending; believes that the cancellation of the community court project also undermines the Scottish Government's own stated commitment to replace short-term prison sentences with tough and effective community sentences; calls on the Scottish Government to continue to work with the Community Justice Project Board, and further believes that the Scottish Government should reverse its decision and seek to progress plans for a community court in Glasgow.

The final question is, that motion S3M-3923, in the name of John Swinney, on the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill financial resolution, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any expenditure or increase in expenditure of a kind referred to in Rule 9.12.3(b)(ii) or (iii)  of the Parliament's Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.

That is not a point of order for me. It will up to the bureau what business it agrees to discuss on Tuesday.

I will respond to the points of order that were raised earlier today, as I promised to do. Regarding Margo MacDonald's point of order, I have studied the transcript carefully and, while I am absolutely satisfied that Mr Gray's remarks were not aimed at any individual in particular, I take this opportunity to remind all members that the words "lies", "lying" or "liar" should not be used in this chamber in relation to other members—and preferably not at all. Regarding Mr McConnell's point of order, having studied the transcript very carefully I can rule only that it is not a point of order for me and it is therefore not a matter on which I can rule; I can only advise Mr McConnell that, if he wishes to pursue the matter further, he should take it up directly with the First Minister.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-3923, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution for the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any expenditure or increase in expenditure of a kind referred to in Rule 9.12.3(b)(ii) or (iii) of the Parliament's Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.—[ Stewart Stevenson .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

Order. I am sorry to interrupt, minister. Members who have just come into the chamber should do others the common courtesy of allowing them to hear what is being said by members who have taken part in this two-day debate.

Order. I have already asked members to be quiet. Would they please do that?

Questions 3 and 4 were not lodged.

Question 7 has been withdrawn.

I ask the member to come to the point of order.

I will answer one point of order before I come to another. I have no evidence that what Ms Marwick says is the case. The withdrawal of a question is a matter for the individual member but, although members are perfectly entitled to do that, I hope that it is not a course that they take lightly.

I am afraid that that is another spurious point of order. However, I understand where the member is coming from, and Ms Baker will be informed of the content of these points of order.

Thank you—that is a fair point.

I hope that members understand that I will take only one supplementary per question. We lost five minutes to points of order, and I want to get through as many questions as possible.

We can just squeeze in question 7 if it is kept brief.

For the sake of people in the public gallery, I should explain that the next item of business is a continuation of yesterday's debate on motion S3M-3963, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, on the general principles of the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill. Speeches should be no longer than six minutes. I will allow a couple of seconds for the ministers to change places. If he is ready, I call Jim Mather. You have six minutes.

Order.

I will take a constituency question from Elaine Smith.

Before we come to question 5, I point out that Mr Al Megrahi has an active appeal against his conviction. Where he serves his sentence is not under appeal, but whether he is guilty of the crime is sub judice and, therefore, supplementary questions should not stray on to the subject of the appeal itself—whether the evidence or the accused's guilt or innocence—as that would be in breach of rule 7.5.1 of standing orders.

We will have a very brief final question from Mike Rumbles.

Very briefly, please.

That concludes First Minister's question time—

One thing on which I would agree with Mr McConnell at this stage is that there was quite a lot of noise in the chamber. I, too, did not entirely pick up the question. If I may, I will look at the matter and come back to the chamber later after considering it.

There is no such concept in this Parliament. The word "lie" does not come into it. As members know, they may not accuse other members of lying.

I will not have the accusation made in this chamber that anyone is lying. Will you please withdraw that accusation?

Order.

Order.

Briefly, minister.

I am not sure that that has a lot to do with the pensioners parliament, minister, but feel free to respond.

That concludes general questions. Before we come to questions to the First Minister, I am sure that members will wish to join me in welcoming to the gallery the Honourable Maria Antònia Munar, the President of the Parliament of the Balearic Islands, and her delegation. They are most welcome. [ Applause. ]

That concludes the Conservative debates. We are a few seconds early for general question time, but everybody is here so we will proceed.

I will not give you extra time: you have up to four and a half minutes.

We would be grateful if the member returned to the subject of the debate.

Once Dr McKee has done that, I would be grateful if he returned to the subject of the debate.

You were supposed to have four minutes, but I can give you another minute.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-4067, in the name of Elizabeth Smith, on school discipline. We have a little flexibility on speaking times, but it is not measureless.

There are no decisions to be taken today.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4062, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out an extension to the timetable for stage 1 of the Scottish Local Government (Elections) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Scottish Local Government (Elections) Bill at Stage 1 be extended to 15 May 2009. —[Bruce Crawford.]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4061, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 13 May 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 14 May 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 1 Debate: Scottish Local Government (Elections) Bill followed by Financial Resolution: Scottish Local Government (Elections) Bill 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Scotland's Engagement in the United States of America and Canada followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 20 May 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection  followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 21 May 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Europe, External Affairs and Culture; Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

That concludes this afternoon's debate on the general principles of the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill. The debate will conclude tomorrow afternoon. I remind members who were not here earlier that I am using my discretion under rule 11.3.3 of the standing orders to allow the questions on motion S3M-3963, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, and on the two amendments to be put at decision time tomorrow night.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4060, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme for this afternoon.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees (a) the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 6 May 2009— After  2.30 pm Time for Reflection - Haroon Ahmed, Scottish Inter Faith Council followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions insert followed by Ministerial Statement: Influenza A(H1N1) and (b) the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 7 May 2009— after 2.55 pm Continuation of Stage 1 Debate: Climate Change (Scotland) Bill insert followed by Financial Resolution: Climate Change (Scotland) Bill—[ Michael McMahon .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a statement by Nicola Sturgeon on the influenza A(H1N1) virus. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of her statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions. It will be a 10-minute statement.

The cabinet secretary will now take questions on matters that were raised in her statement. We have around 20 minutes for such questions, after which I must move to the next item of business, which is already oversubscribed.

We come to open questions. There are less than 10 minutes for seven members to ask questions, so members should ask no more than one question each, please.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-3963, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, on the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill. I am using my discretion under rule 11.3.3 of standing orders to allow the question on the motion, together with the questions on the two amendments, to be put at decision time tomorrow night. Accordingly, members are reminded that the debate will be concluded tomorrow afternoon.

Good afternoon. The first item of business, as always, is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Haroon Ahmed from the Scottish Inter Faith Council.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-4022, on committee membership.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that Rhoda Grant be appointed to replace Jackie Baillie on the Health and Sport Committee.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time. We have a further Parliamentary Bureau motion to consider. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-4023, on substitution on committees.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that Jackie Baillie be appointed to replace Johann Lamont as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Equal Opportunities Committee.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on the motion will also be put at decision time.

There are 12 questions to be put as a result of today's business. Members should please note that if amendment S3M-4007.1, in the name of Keith Brown, on education, is agreed to, amendment S3M-4007.2, in the name of Rhona Brankin, will fall. Similarly, if amendment S3M-4004.3, in the name of Andy Kerr, on budget implications for Scotland, is agreed to, amendment S3M-4004.2, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, will fall. The first question is, that amendment S3M-4007.1.1, in the name of Elizabeth Smith, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-4007.1, in the name of Keith Brown, on education, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 80, Against 41, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-4007.1, in the name of Keith Brown, as amended, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4007, in the name of Margaret Smith, on education, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 62, Against 57, Abstentions 2.  Amendment, as amended, agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-4007.2, in the name of Rhona Brankin, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4007—[ Interruption. ] I beg members' pardon. That amendment has been pre-empted, as I clearly explained to everybody earlier—forgive me. The next question is, that motion S3M-4007, in the name of Margaret Smith, on education, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 62, Against 57, Abstentions 2.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament notes that, on the second anniversary of the election of the Scottish Government, spending on education has risen by more than 40% since the advent of devolution; further notes that, despite a decade of investment, standards of attainment and achievement have only been maintained while key international competitors have improved; welcomes the recent report by HM Inspectorate of Education, Improving Scottish Education 2005-2008 , highlighting the need for further and faster improvement in our education system; believes that the focus on inputs under previous administrations masked the lack of significant improvement on standards of attainment and achievement; further believes that the reform of the curriculum is a critical step in improving standards of attainment, and calls on the Scottish Government to maintain progress towards implementation of the Curriculum for Excellence, and calls on the Scottish Government to bring forward detailed proposals by the start of the 2009-10 academic year as to how it will implement amendment S3M-3164.1, which recognised the need for the Scottish Government to ensure that pupils in Scotland are properly tested in the basic skills of literacy and numeracy by the end of primary 7 and which was given unanimous support by the Parliament on 7 January 2009.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-4006.1, in the name of Alex Johnstone, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4006, in the name of Liam McArthur, on the economy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 18, Against 63, Abstentions 40.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-4006, in the name of Liam McArthur, on the economy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 63, Against 1, Abstentions 57.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the UK Budget and the plans to increase fuel duty; recognises the high premium over the national average paid for fuel at filling stations in remote rural and particularly island areas and the financial and social impact that this has on individuals and businesses; believes that increased fuel duty will have a damaging effect on the economy and competitiveness in these areas, not least due to the limited public transport alternatives; notes that current EU law allows fuel duty to be cut by up to 2.4p per litre and that this power is already used in France, Portugal and Greece, and calls on the Scottish Government to work with the UK Government and the European Commission before the final passage of the Finance Bill to construct a derogation under the EU energy products directive, or otherwise, to permit variable rates of duty for specified remote rural areas to bring down the price of fuel at the pump to that available in other parts of the United Kingdom.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-4004.3, in the name of Andy Kerr, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4004, in  the name of John Swinney, on budget implications for Scotland, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 42, Against 80, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-4004.1, in the name of Derek Brownlee, which seeks to amend motion  S3M-4004, in the name of John Swinney, on budget implications for Scotland, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 63, Against 43, Abstentions 16.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-4004.2, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, which seeks to amend motion S3M-4004, in the name of John Swinney, on budget implications for Scotland, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 19, Against 103, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

Order. The next question is, that motion S3M-4004, in the name of John Swinney, on budget implications for Scotland, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 64, Against 43, Abstentions 15.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament expresses its deep concern at the contents of the Chancellor of the Exchequer's Budget last week; recognises that this is a product of poor financial management of the UK economy in recent years that will leave unprecedented burdens of debt for many years to come; acknowledges the significant pressure that the reduction of planned budgets of £500 million will have on public services; calls on the Scottish Government to bring forward budget proposals for 2010-11 that will support a sustainable economy and effective public services and include an assessment of the carbon impact of its budget; notes the research by the Centre for Public Policy for Regions (CPPR) that predicts that in real terms the Scottish Government Departmental Expenditure Limit (DEL) will be between £2.1 billion and £3.8 billion lower in 2013-14 than in 2009-10; further notes the comments of John McLaren of CPPR that "the prospects beyond 2013-14 are also not good and although positive real terms growth rates are likely to return, they are unlikely to be very large until UK net debt as a share of GDP falls, possibly not until the 2030s", and calls on the Scottish Government to prepare contingency plans on how such changes to the Scottish DEL will be managed.

The next question is, that motion S3M-4022, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on committee membership, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that Rhoda Grant be appointed to replace Jackie Baillie on the Health and Sport Committee.

The final question is, that motion S3M-4023, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on substitution on committees, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that Jackie Baillie be appointed to replace Johann Lamont as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Equal Opportunities Committee.

I do not think that that was a question, but I am happy if the minister wants to comment.

Order.

Before we come to questions to the First Minister, I invite members to join me in welcoming the  Spanish ambassador to the United Kingdom, His Excellency Carles Casajuana i Palet.

I remind all members to speak through the chair, not directly to each other.

You should close now.

I must ask the minister to speak to the terms of the motion. It is up to the members who lodge the motion to dictate its terms.

The first item of business this morning is a debate on motion S3M-4007, in the name of Margaret Smith, on education. We have some time in hand, so we can be a little flexible on speaking times.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3999, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 6 May 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 1 Debate: Climate Change (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 7 May 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Justice and Law Officers; Rural Affairs and the Environment 2.55 pm Stage 1 Debate: Climate Change (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 13 May 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 14 May 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-4000, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which seeks to suspend standing orders for the purposes of consideration of the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that Rule 9.5.3A of Standing Orders be suspended for the purposes of consideration of the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today's business. Members should note that if amendment S3M-3994.3, in the name of Mary Mulligan, is agreed to, the amendments in the name of Jamie McGrigor and Ross Finnie will fall. The first question is, that amendment S3M-3994.3, in the name of Mary Mulligan, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3994, in the name of Alex Neil, on housing, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 42, Against 81, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-3994.1, in the name of Jamie McGrigor, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3994, in the name of Alex Neil, on housing, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 16, Against 107, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The third question is, that amendment S3M-3994.2, in the name of Ross Finnie, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3994, in the name of Alex Neil, on housing, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

Before I read out the result, I should say that I am sure that someone said "no". However, the result of the division is: For 124, Against 0, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The final question is, that motion S3M-3994, in the name of Alex Neil, on housing, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

I definitely heard a "no" then. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 108, Against 16, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the steps being taken by the Scottish Government to accelerate and increase the supply of affordable housing in response to the current economic downturn; recognises the record investment being made this year; further notes that housing associations still have to secure through borrowing a significant proportion of the money required to build new housing and are facing challenges from the financial sector; further recognises the particular need for more high quality affordable housing in the rental sector and the economic imperative of action to support Scotland's beleaguered building industry; also notes the Scottish Government's initiative to kick-start a new generation of council house building and the increasing contribution that this is enabling local authorities to make in meeting housing need, which complements the high level of social housing built by housing associations over the last 10 years, and supports proposals in the consultation on the draft Housing (Scotland) Bill to reform the right to buy to encourage council house building and to safeguard Scotland's stock of social housing for the benefit of future generations of tenants.

That concludes decision time. As always, it would be appreciated if members who are leaving the chamber would do so quietly.

Minister, you must close.

As the cabinet secretary has indicated, she will now take questions on any issues that are raised by her statement. We have around 30 minutes for such questions.

We come to open questions. I cannot go beyond 19 minutes past 3—the next debate is already oversubscribed. Please keep questions and answers as brief as possible.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3998, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme for this afternoon.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 29 April 2009— after 2.30 pm Time for Reflection - Father Eoin Patten, St Mirin's Cathedral, Paisley followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions insert followed by Ministerial Statement: Swine Flu/AH1N1—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a statement by Nicola Sturgeon, on swine flu AH1N1. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of her statement. Therefore, there should be no interventions or interruptions.

Good afternoon. As always, our first item of business is time for reflection. I am pleased to welcome our time for reflection leader, who is Father Eoin Patten of St Mirin's Cathedral, Paisley.

There are up to eight questions to be put as a result of today's business. Members should note that if amendment S3M-3947.2, in the name of Ted Brocklebank, on the Scottish newspaper industry, is agreed to, amendment S3M-3947.1, in the name of Iain Smith, will fall. The first question is, that amendment S3M-3947.2, in the name of Ted Brocklebank, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3947, in the name of David Whitton, on the Scottish newspaper industry, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 13, Against 53, Abstentions 42.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3947.1, in the name of Iain Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3947, in the name of David Whitton, on the Scottish newspaper industry, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 26, Against 40, Abstentions 42.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-3947, in the name of David Whitton, on the Scottish newspaper industry, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 82, Against 13, Abstentions 13.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament recognises the threat to the Scottish economy from the current crisis facing Scotland's newspaper and media industries; notes that local newspapers are facing particular difficulties in the current economic climate; opposes any moves towards compulsory redundancies such as those imposed by Trinity Mirror at the Daily Record and Sunday Mail ; calls for all newspaper and media organisations considering restructuring, reorganisation or redundancy to engage in meaningful negotiations with the relevant workforce representatives in order to minimise the economic impact of any job cuts, and calls on the Scottish Government to hold urgent talks with Trinity Mirror management in order to prevent compulsory job cuts.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3938.2, in the name of Gavin Brown, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3938, in the name of Des McNulty, on west of Scotland transport infrastructure, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 55, Against 53, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3938.3, in the name of Robert Brown, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3938, in the name of Des McNulty, on west of Scotland transport infrastructure, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 54, Against 0, Abstentions 54.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-3938, in the name of Des McNulty, on west of Scotland transport infrastructure, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 56, Against 52, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the need for investment in transport infrastructure in the west of Scotland, particularly in the Greater Glasgow travel-to-work area, to ensure the continued competitiveness of the area; therefore regrets the previous Labour-led administration's disappointing record on delivering improvements to key road links connecting the west of Scotland, notably the substantial delays and cost overruns in upgrading the M8 and M74; welcomes the fact that the Edinburgh Airport Rail Link project pioneered by the previous Labour-led administration has been cancelled, thereby freeing up investment for the crucial Edinburgh to Glasgow Rail Improvement Programme; calls on the Scottish Government to ensure the clear prioritisation of transport projects both in the west of Scotland and elsewhere; welcomes the significant opportunity presented by the 2014 Glasgow Commonwealth Games for the creation of legacy transport infrastructure projects in the west of Scotland, including the proposed redevelopment of Dalmarnock station as a key public transport hub for the Games and the area, offering speedy direct rail links to the main Games venues and to Celtic Park from Lanarkshire, the city centre and the west in particular, as well as a high standard of pedestrian and cyclist pathways through the area; supports the work of Clyde Gateway in developing the project, and urges the Scottish Government to give the Dalmarnock station project its full backing.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3948.1, in the name of Frank McAveety, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3948, in the name of Shona Robison, on the Glasgow 2014 legacy plan, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The final question is, that motion S3M-3948, in the name of Shona Robison, on the Glasgow 2014 legacy plan, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament welcomes the forthcoming meeting to take place in Glasgow between the Minister for Public Health and Sport, Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport Andy Burnham, Secretary of State for Scotland Jim Murphy and Glasgow City Council leader Steven Purcell to discuss the release of a substantial sum of National Lottery funding towards supporting a legacy for the 2014 Commonwealth Games in Glasgow; welcomes this new spirit of cooperation and calls on the Scottish Government to work with the UK Government to maximise the benefit of sporting events in Scotland and the wider United Kingdom, especially the 2014 Commonwealth Games and 2012 Olympic Games, in terms of encouraging sporting participation and harnessing the talents of Scots; notes Glasgow City Council's own 2014 legacy plan and calls on the Scottish Government to work with other local authorities to produce their own legacy plans to meet shared aspirations on tackling obesity and low levels of participation; supports the work of the Scottish Government and its partners, including the Convention of Scottish Local  Authorities, Glasgow City Council, local authorities across Scotland, NHS boards, public bodies and the third sector, in planning for a legacy for the people of Scotland from these Games; agrees that the Interim Games Legacy Plan, published on 18 December 2008, set the right context for that planning with its emphasis on health, physical activity and sport and its coverage of volunteering, education and learning, culture, sustainability, business, skills, tourism and Scotland's international profile; commends the real opportunity that the hosting of the Games offers for regenerating the east end of Glasgow, and further agrees that, following the launch of the full Games Legacy Plan in the summer, the Scottish Parliament can play a part by encouraging individuals, groups, communities and businesses to get involved so that Scotland's legacy from the 2014 Games can be lasting and positive.

Question 2 has been withdrawn.

I was going to call question 8, but John Farquhar Munro is not in the chamber. We will move to question 9.

Rather like in your answer to the supplementary to the previous question, a simple "yes" would suffice, minister.

It is going to be a busy day, minister.

I will take a constituency question from Michael Matheson.

Through the chair please, Mr McNeil.

"Could he make sure?", Mr McNeil.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-3947, in the name of David Whitton, on the Scottish newspaper industry. I inform members that we are very tight for time in both this morning's debates.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-3944, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Health Care and Associated Professions (Miscellaneous Amendments and Practitioner Psychologists) Order 2009 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

There are six questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-3924, in the name of Gil Paterson, on behalf of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee, on "The Scottish Parliamentary Pensions Act (asp 1): Proposed Standing Order Rule Changes", be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee's 3rd Report 2009 (Session 3), The Scottish Parliamentary Pensions Act (asp 1): Proposed Standing Order Rule Changes ( SP Paper 230), and agrees that changes to Standing Orders set out in Annexe A to the report be made with effect from 24 April 2009.

The next question is, that motion S3M-3925, in the name of Gil Paterson, on behalf of the SPPA Committee, on "Members' Bills—cut-off date for introduction", be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee's 1st Report 2009 (Session 3), Members' Bills - cut-off date for introduction (SP Paper 205), and agrees that the changes to Standing Orders set out in Annexe A to the report be made with effect from 24 April 2009.

The next question is, that motion S3M-3926, in the name of Gil Paterson, on behalf of the SPPA Committee, on "Review of equal opportunities in the work of committees", be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee's 4th Report 2009 (Session 3), Review of equal opportunities in the work of committees (SP Paper 244), and agrees that the changes to Standing Orders set out in Annexe A to the report be made with effect from 24 April 2009.

The next question is, that motion S3M-3922, in the name of Karen Whitefield, on behalf of the selection panel, on the appointment of the Commissioner for Children and Young People in Scotland, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament nominates Tam Baillie to Her Majesty The Queen for appointment as the Commissioner for Children and Young People in Scotland.

The next question is, that motion S3M-3883, in the name of Patrick Harvie, on behalf of the Transport, Infrastructure  and Climate Change Committee, on its report on its inquiry into the potential benefits of high-speed rail services, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee's 1st Report, 2009 (Session 3): Report on the Inquiry into the potential benefits of high-speed rail services (SP Paper 219).

The final question is, that motion S3M-3944, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Health Care and Associated Professions (Miscellaneous Amendments and Practitioner Psychologists) Order 2009 be approved.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3942, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.

Thank you for explaining that so clearly.  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3943, also in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out an extension to the deadline for consideration of the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill at stage 1.

The cabinet secretary will now take questions on the issues that were raised in her statement.

I did not want to interrupt that question or the answer, because they were on a serious subject. However, I remind all members—and perhaps Mr Finnie in particular—that I have always asked that questions be addressed through the chair and for members not to ask other members direct questions. We come to open questions. As a number of members wish to ask questions, brevity will be important.

Thank you. That concludes our brief debate on motion S3M-3922, on behalf of the selection panel, on the announcement of the nomination for the Commissioner for Children and Young People in Scotland.

The next item of business is a statement by Nicola Sturgeon, providing an update on the Vale of Leven inquiry. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of her statement, so, as always, there should be no interventions or interruptions during it. It will be a 10-minute statement.

Our recent visit has obviously rubbed off on Ms Marwick. In the  National Assembly of Québec, the speaker is called "Mr President". I offer no further comment.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-3922, in the name of Karen Whitefield, on behalf of the selection panel, on the announcement of the nomination for the Commissioner for Children and Young People in Scotland.

Tricia Marwick has indicated that she would like to speak. I can offer her up to five minutes.

Again, no one has indicated that they wish to speak in the debate, so we will move to the next item.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-3926, in the name of Gil Paterson, on behalf of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee, on its review of equal opportunities in the work of committees. Again, I optimistically ask whether any member wishes to contribute to the debate; if they do, they should press their request-to-speak buttons. Again, I call on the convener of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee, Gil Paterson, to speak to and move the motion—take your time, Mr Paterson.

No other members have indicated that they wish to speak, so we will move to the next item.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-3925, in the name of Gil Paterson, on behalf of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee, on members' bills—cut-off date for introduction. If anyone else wishes to speak in the debate, I ask them to press their request-to-speak buttons now. Again, I call on Gil Paterson to speak to and move the motion.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3941, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme for this afternoon.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 22 April 2009— after followed by Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee Debate: Review of Equal Opportunities in the Work of Committees insert followed by Announcement of Nomination of the Commissioner for Children and Young People in Scotland followed by Ministerial Statement: Update on Vale of Leven Inquiry—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-3924, in the name of Gil Paterson, on behalf of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee, on "The Scottish Parliamentary Pensions Act (asp 1): Proposed Standing Order Rule Changes".

Good afternoon. Welcome back from the Easter recess. The first item of business this afternoon, as always, is time for reflection. I am pleased to say that our time for reflection leader is Rabbi Mendel Jacobs from Newton Mearns in Glasgow.

The next item of business is decision time. There are eight questions to be put as a result of today's business. Members should note that if amendment S3M-3849.2, in the name of Paul Martin, on the antisocial behaviour framework, is agreed to, amendment S3M-3849.1, in the name of Bill Aitken, will fall. The first question is, that amendment S3M-3848.3, in the name of Cathy Jamieson, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3848, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on hospital waiting times, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 92, Against 31, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3848.1, in the name of Mary Scanlon, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3848, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 31, Against 91, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3848.2, in the name of Ross Finnie, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3848, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 31, Against 89, Abstentions 3.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-3848, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on hospital waiting times, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 91, Against 16, Abstentions 15.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament welcomes the most recent progress that has been made in reducing waiting times for patients; applauds the commitment, dedication and hard work of all NHS staff who have contributed to delivering these significant improvements for the people of Scotland; notes the progress made by the previous administration; while welcoming the extension of the waiting times guarantee to include child and adolescent mental health services, calls on the Scottish Government to consider extending the range of specialties to include adult mental health services; further calls on the Scottish Government to ensure sufficient resources to bring NHSScotland in line as soon as possible with the NHS in England where a "whole journey" national waiting time standard of 18 weeks was delivered by December 2008, and notes that this compares to a target of 18 months introduced by the previous Conservative administration.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3849.2, in the name of Paul Martin, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3849, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the antisocial behaviour framework, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 44, Against 79, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3849.1, in the name of Bill Aitken, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3849, in the name of Fergus Ewing, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 79, Against 44, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3849.3, in the name of Robert Brown, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3849, in the name of Fergus Ewing, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 63, Against 58, Abstentions 2.  Amendment agreed to.

The final question is, that motion S3M-3849, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the antisocial behaviour framework, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 79, Against 44, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the publication of the new Antisocial Behaviour Framework, Promoting Positive Outcomes: Working Together to Prevent Antisocial Behaviour in Scotland, which has been developed in partnership with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities (COSLA) and other national partners; further notes that the success of the Antisocial Behaviour etc. (Scotland) Act 2004 has not been universal; agrees that antisocial behaviour blights the quality of people's lives and should not be tolerated but believes that prevention is better than cure when it comes to protecting communities from disorder and encourages communities to report all incidents of crime and disorder so that they can be properly addressed; appreciates the wealth of good practice followed in some areas of Scotland and the importance of replicating it as widely as possible; welcomes the framework's emphasis on addressing the causes of antisocial behaviour, such as drug and alcohol addiction and deprivation, and on improving life chances; supports the promotion of the new prevention, early intervention, enforcement and rehabilitation (PIER) model, including the use of acceptable behaviour contracts pioneered by Liberal Democrats in Islington, and regards increased community involvement and empowerment as vital components of success in action to tackle antisocial behaviour.

That concludes decision time. I ask members who are leaving the chamber to do so quietly.

Questions 11 and 12 have been withdrawn.

As members are aware, the Parliamentary Bureau agreed last night to a change in the normal format of questions to the First Minister in recognition of the tragic helicopter accident in the North Sea yesterday afternoon. Iain Gray will ask the first diary question. That will be followed by supplementary questions from the main party leaders, after which I will suspend the meeting until 2.15.

As I intimated earlier, the minister will now take questions. It will be helpful if members who wish to ask questions would press their request-to-speak buttons. I come first to Pauline McNeill.

We have already come to the end of the time that was allocated for our first item of business, but there is some flexibility, as the following debate is undersubscribed. I am keen to get back benchers in, but I beg members to ask one short question, which should be followed by one short answer.

Ken Macintosh has the final question.

I am grateful to members and the minister for ensuring that everybody who wanted to ask a question was able to do so.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-3848, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on hospital waiting times. Cabinet secretary, you have around 11 minutes, but we have a little flexibility.

Thank you for your point of order, Lord Foulkes. First Minister's question time has not been suspended. One question will be put to the First Minister—that is what the bureau agreed. Contrary to what you said, no bureau member questioned the form that First Minister's question time will take today, although the bureau discussed alternatives. At the end of the day, however, the matter is for the bureau. That will remain the case in the future.

I note the points that you make, Lord Foulkes, but the bureau unanimously agreed the matter, so I suggest that you take up the issue with your business manager. In this instance, Parliament is represented through the bureau. I repeat: the decision is one for the bureau, the points that you have made are valid, and I suggest that you take them up with your business manager. We should move on with the business of the day.

Your points are noted, Lord Foulkes. The matter may be raised at the bureau. The bureau is the right place for such a discussion.

We now move to our first item of business, which is a statement by Michael Russell on Creative Scotland. As always, the minister will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-3832, in the name of Tricia Marwick, on behalf of the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body, on the appointment of the Scottish Parliamentary Standards Commissioner, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees, under section 1(2) of the Scottish Parliamentary Standards Commissioner Act 2002, to appoint Stuart Allan as the Scottish Parliamentary Standards Commissioner.

The second question is, that motion S3M-3822, in the name of Andrew Welsh, on behalf of the Finance Committee, on its inquiry into methods of funding capital investment projects, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Finance Committee's 8th Report, 2008 (Session 3): Inquiry into methods of funding capital investment projects (SP Paper 182).

The final question is, that legislative consent motion S3M-3753, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the Apprenticeships, Skills, Children and Learning Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Apprenticeships, Skills, Children and Learning Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 4 February 2008, relating to the management of Career Development Loans and the Managing Information Across Partners programme, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament or alter the executive competence of the Scottish Ministers, should be considered by the UK Parliament.

The next item of business is consideration of legislative consent motion S3M-3753, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the Apprenticeships, Skills, Children and Learning Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Apprenticeships, Skills, Children and Learning Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 4 February 2008, relating to the management of Career Development Loans and the Managing Information Across Partners programme, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament or alter the executive competence of the Scottish Ministers, should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[ Fiona Hyslop .]

The question will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3844, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 22 April 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee Debate: 3rd Report 2009 followed by Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee Debate: 1st Report 2009 followed by Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee Debate: 4th Report 2009 followed by Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee Debate: Inquiry into the Potential Benefits of High-speed Rail Services followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 23 April 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning; Europe, External Affairs and Culture 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Glasgow 2014 Legacy Plan followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 29 April 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions  5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 30 April 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3845, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised timetable for stage 2 of the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Bill at Stage 2 be extended to 1 May 2009.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3846, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 2 of the Offences (Aggravation by Prejudice) (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Offences (Aggravation by Prejudice) (Scotland) Bill at Stage 2 be completed by 1 May 2009.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

We come to back-bench questions. We will get everybody in as long as everybody is fairly short and sharp.

If I am to fit everybody in, I will need short questions and short answers from now on.

The next item of business is a statement by the First Minister on the Dunfermline Building Society. The First Minister will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions during it.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3843, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme for this afternoon.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 1 April 2009— delete followed by Finance Committee Debate: Inquiry into Methods of Funding Capital Investment Projects and insert followed by Ministerial Statement: Dunfermline Building Society followed by Finance Committee Debate: Inquiry into Methods of Funding Capital Investment Projects followed by Ministerial Statement: The Scottish Government's Response to Audit Scotland's Report on Drug/Alcohol Services—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-3832, in the name of Tricia Marwick, on behalf of the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body, on the announcement of the appointment of the Scottish Parliamentary Standards Commissioner.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is the Rev Frank Campbell, from Ale and Teviot United Church in Roxburgh.

There are seven questions to be put as a result of today's business. Members should note that, if amendment S3M-3796.3, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the national health service and the independent sector, is agreed to, amendment S3M-3796.1, in the name of Dr Richard Simpson, will fall. The first question is, that amendment S3M-3796.3, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3796, in the name of Mary Scanlon, on the NHS and the independent sector, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 45, Against 67, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3796.1, in the name of Dr Richard Simpson, which also seeks to amend motion S3M-3796, in the name of Mary Scanlon, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 84, Against 16, Abstentions 12.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3796.2, in the name of Ross Finnie, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3796, in the name of Mary Scanlon, on the NHS and the independent sector, as amended, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-3796, in the name of Mary Scanlon, on the NHS and the independent sector, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 96, Against 16, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament welcomes the success of the Scottish Regional Treatment Centre at Stracathro with its high level of patient approval and welcomes the Scottish Regional Treatment Centre's contribution to maintaining Stracathro Hospital as both a local and regional resource; notes the success of the nationalisation of the HCI hospital in Clydebank, now the Golden Jubilee National Hospital, and recognises the contribution of both these units and their staff in achieving the continuing reduction in waiting times, while ensuring that the use of the private sector does not destabilise local NHS provision or undermine the recruitment and retention of NHS staff.

The next question is,  that amendment S3M-3778.2, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3778, in the name of Bill Aitken, on alcohol strategy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 82, Against 17, Abstentions 12.  Amendment agreed to.

The sixth question is, that amendment S3M-3778.1, in the name of Robert Brown, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3778, in the name of Bill Aitken, on alcohol strategy, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 28, Against 84, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The final question is, that motion S3M-3778, in the name of Bill Aitken, on alcohol strategy, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 80, Against 3, Abstentions 28.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament welcomes the decision of the Scottish Government to incorporate its proposals for reform of the law relating to the sale of alcohol into a new health Bill, which will facilitate democratic accountability and greater parliamentary and public scrutiny of its proposals; calls on the Scottish Government to place greater emphasis on a much more rigorous application of the existing licensing laws and to recognise that any changes can be introduced only on the basis of a wider and meaningful consultation with the licensed trade and Scotland's communities, and believes that any measures taken to tackle harmful drinking and underage drinking must be workable and properly targeted so that, while the responsible, sensible majority of moderate drinkers are not unnecessarily penalised, wider issues of excess consumption contributing to huge costs to Scottish society are effectively addressed.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3808, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, which sets out a timetable for stage 2 of the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Bill at Stage 2 be extended to 24 April 2009.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

Question 6 was not lodged.

The next item of business is a subject debate on supporting economic recovery.

Order, Mr Kerr.

Come to a conclusion, please.

I will take a constituency question from Angela Constance.

I will take a further question from Jamie McGrigor.

Order.

You must close now.

The remaining speakers were advised that they would have about four  minutes each. I can now advise them that we have a bit of flexibility available, so members should feel free to take interventions if they wish to do so.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-3796, in the name of Mary Scanlon, on the national health service and the independent health care sector.

There are eight questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-3755, in the name of Gil Paterson, on behalf of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee, on the "Review of Section 6 of the Code of Conduct (Cross-Party Groups)", be agreed.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to amend the Code of Conduct for Members of the Scottish Parliament by replacing Section 6 (in Volume 2) with Section 6 as set out in Annex A of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee's 11th Report 2008 (Session 3), Review of Section 6 of the Code of Conduct (Cross-Party Groups) (SP Paper 186), with effect from 27 March 2009.

The next question is, that motion S3M-3756, in the name of Gil Paterson, on behalf of the SPPA committee, on "Changes to the Code of Conduct arising from the Reimbursement of Members' Expenses Scheme", be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to amend the Code of Conduct for Members of the Scottish Parliament by replacing Section 7.2.6 and Section 9.1.6(c) (in Volume 2) with Section 7.2.6 and Section 9.1.6(c) as set out in Annex A of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee's 2nd Report 2009 (Session 3), Changes to the Code of Conduct arising from the Reimbursement of Members' Expenses Scheme (SP Paper 217), with effect from 27 March 2009.

The next question is, that motion S3M-3757, in the name of Gil Paterson, on behalf of the SPPA committee, on the "Review of Section 8 of the Code of Conduct", be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 100, Against 8, Abstentions 2.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to amend the Code of Conduct for Members of the Scottish Parliament by replacing Section 8 and Section 9.1.6(b) (in Volume 2) with Section 8 and Section 9.1.6(b) as set out in Annex A of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee's 9th Report 2008 (Session 3), Review of Section 8 of the Code of Conduct (SP Paper 176), with effect from 27 March 2009.

The next question is, that motion S3M-3766, in the name of David McLetchie, on behalf of the selection panel on the appointment of the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament nominates Jim Martin to Her Majesty The Queen for appointment as the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman.

The next question is, that motion S3M-3707, in the name of John Swinney, on the Local Government Finance Act 1992 (Scotland) Amendment Order 2009, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 99, Against 0, Abstentions 14.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Local Government Finance Act 1992 (Scotland) Amendment Order 2009 be approved.

I propose to ask a single question on motions S3M-3785 to S3M-3794, on approval of Scottish statutory instruments and a code of practice. I ask members to indicate if they object to my doing so. I see that no members object. The question is, therefore, that motions S3M-3785 to S3M-3794, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of SSIs and a code of practice, be agreed to.  Motions agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Advice and Assistance and Civil Legal Aid (Financial Conditions and Contributions) (Scotland) Regulations 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Bankruptcy and Diligence etc. (Scotland) Act 2007 (Inhibition) Order 2009 be approved.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982 (Licensing of Booking Offices) Order 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Community Care (Personal Care and Nursing Care) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002 (Amendment to schedule 1) Order 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Housing Support Grant (Scotland) Order 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Licensing of Animal Dealers (Young Cats and Young Dogs) (Scotland) Regulations 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Renewables Obligation (Scotland) Order 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Victim Statements (Prescribed Courts) (Scotland) Order 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Scottish Government Code of Practice for the Welfare of Equidae (SG 2009/20) be approved.

The next question is, that motion S3M-3783, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the remit and duration of the Review of SPCB Supported Bodies Committee, be agreed.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to amend the remit and duration of the Review of SPCB Supported Bodies Committee as follows— Remit: To consider and report on whether alterations should be made to the terms and conditions of the office-holders and the structure of the bodies supported by the SPCB; to consider how any proposals, including the addition of any new functions, for future arrangements should be taken forward, including by way of a Committee Bill, and to make recommendations accordingly. Duration: Until the Parliament has concluded consideration of the committee's report and any Bill which may follow thereon.

The final question is, that motion S3M-3784, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the designation of a secondary committee, be agreed.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to designate the Health and Sport Committee as secondary committee for the purpose of considering Part 9, section 129 and Part 10, section 140 of the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1.

The next item of business is consideration of 10 Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motions S3M-3785 to S3M-3794.

I am absolutely certain that I do not want you to move them individually.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Advice and Assistance and Civil Legal Aid (Financial Conditions and Contributions) (Scotland) Regulations 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Bankruptcy and Diligence etc. (Scotland) Act 2007 (Inhibition) Order 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982 (Licensing of Booking Offices) Order 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Community Care (Personal Care and Nursing Care) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002 (Amendment to schedule 1) Order 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Housing Support Grant (Scotland) Order 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Licensing of Animal Dealers (Young Cats and Young Dogs) (Scotland) Regulations 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Renewables Obligation (Scotland) Order 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Victim Statements (Prescribed Courts) (Scotland) Order 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the Scottish Government Code of Practice for the Welfare of Equidae (SG 2009/20) be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The questions on those motions will be put at decision time. The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motion S3M-3783, on the remit and duration of the Review of SPCB Supported Bodies Committee.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees to amend the remit and duration of the Review of SPCB Supported Bodies Committee as follows— Remit: To consider and report on whether alterations should be made to the terms and conditions of the office- holders and the structure of the bodies supported by the SPCB; to consider how any proposals, including the addition of any new functions, for future arrangements should be taken forward, including by way of a Committee Bill, and to make recommendations accordingly. Duration: Until the Parliament has concluded consideration of the committee's report and any Bill which may follow thereon.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on that motion will be put at decision time. The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motion S3M-3784, on the designation of a secondary committee.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees to designate the Health and Sport Committee as secondary committee for the purpose of considering Part 9, section 129 and Part 10, section 140 of the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on that motion will also be put at decision time

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3780, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 1 April 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Announcement of Appointment of Scottish Parliamentary Standards Commissioner followed by Finance Committee Debate: Inquiry into Methods of Funding Capital Investment Projects followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Apprenticeships, Skills, Children and Learning Bill - UK Legislation followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 2 April 2009 9.00 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Creative Scotland followed by Scottish Government Debate: Hospital Waiting Times 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Antisocial Behaviour Framework followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 22 April 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time  followed by Members' Business Thursday 23 April 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning; Europe, External Affairs and Culture 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3781, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, seeking to allow the meeting of Parliament on Thursday 2 April to begin at 9 am.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that "9:00" be substituted for "9:15" in Rule 2.2.3 to allow the meeting of the Parliament on Thursday 2 April 2009 to begin at 9.00 am.—[Bruce Crawford.]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3782, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out the timetable for stage 1 of the Tobacco and Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Tobacco and Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 25 September 2009.—[Bruce Crawford.]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-3757, in the name of Gil Paterson, on behalf of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee, on the "Review of Section 8 of the Code of Conduct". This debate will be slightly longer.

The next item of business will be a probably equally brief debate on motion S3M-3756, again in the name of Gil Paterson, on behalf of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee, on "Changes to the Code of Conduct arising from the Reimbursement of Members' Expenses Scheme".

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3779, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme for this afternoon.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 25 March 2009— after followed by Announcement of Appointment of Scottish Public Services Ombudsman insert followed by Ministerial Statement: Improving Access to New Medicines in the NHS and Guidance for Patients Seeking Additional Private Care—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

Thank you for the point of order. The matter raises complex issues that are new to us as a Parliament. I therefore think that it would be appropriate for the Parliamentary Bureau to meet this afternoon to discuss those issues, if we can all agree a time. I have no difficulty with that whatever. We will be in touch with the business managers on that.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-3755, in the name of Gil Paterson, on behalf of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee's report, "Review of Section 6 of the Code of Conduct (Cross-Party Groups)".

Good afternoon. Our first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is the Rev Dr W Graham Monteith, who is secretary to the Scottish Churches' Disability Agenda Group.

There are 13 questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-3727.3, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3727, in the name of Sarah Boyack, on forestry, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-3727.2, in the name of John Scott, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3727, in the name of Sarah Boyack, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The third question is, that amendment S3M-3727.4, in the name of Jim Hume, which also seeks to amend motion S3M-3727, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The fourth question is, that motion S3M-3727, in the name of Sarah Boyack, on forestry, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the unanimous recommendation of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee that the Scottish Government drop proposals for leasing up to 25% of the Forestry Commission estate for a period of 75 years; notes that the Forestry Commission makes a major contribution to the economy of Scotland and can also make a major contribution towards helping Scotland meet its climate change targets; welcomes the decision of the Scottish Government to amend the Climate Change Bill to remove the relevant clauses; calls on the Scottish Government to bring forward its review of the operation of the Scotland Rural Development Programme urgently, including reviewing the level awarded for grants, and to pursue proposals for joint ventures to deliver renewables projects in the Forestry Commission estate; considers that all forestry proposals in future must be part of an integrated land-use strategy, and further calls on the Scottish Government to introduce a comprehensive sustainable land-use strategy, taking into account the strategic economic, social and environmental impacts and benefits of forestry, agriculture, recreation and other land uses and setting out, where appropriate, the contribution each can make in dealing with the consequences of climate change.

The fifth question is, that amendment S3M-3726.1.1, in the name of Bill Aitken, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-3726.1, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on police numbers, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 16, Against 61, Abstentions 46.  Amendment disagreed to.

The sixth question is, that amendment S3M-3726.1, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3726, in the name of Richard Baker, on police numbers, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 47, Against 60, Abstentions 16.  Amendment disagreed to.

The seventh question is, that amendment S3M-3726.2, in the name of Robert Brown, which also seeks to amend motion S3M-3726, in the name of Richard Baker, on police numbers, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 58, Against 65, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The eighth question is, that motion S3M-3726, in the name of Richard Baker, on police numbers, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament believes that the Scottish Government must ensure that there are 17,265 full-time equivalent police officers by March 2011, calculated on the basis currently used by the Chief Statistician in the  reporting of the official Police Officer Quarterly Strength Statistics, for the SNP's stated manifesto pledge for 1,000 more police officers to be met.

The ninth question is, that amendment S3M-3728.1, in the name of Rhona Brankin, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3728, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on science in Scotland, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 58, Against 64, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The 10 th question is, that amendment S3M-3728.3, in the name of Elizabeth Smith, which also seeks to amend motion S3M-3728, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 77, Against 46, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The 11 th question is, that amendment S3M-3728.2, in the name of Alison McInnes, which also seeks to amend motion S3M-3728, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The 12 th question is, that motion S3M-3728, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on science in Scotland, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament welcomes the publication of the Scottish Government's strategic framework for science, Science for Scotland , on 27 November 2008; agrees with its vision for Scotland as a nation of world-class scientific achievement, a magnet for talent and for investment and a powerhouse of technology, innovation, enterprise and increasing sustainable economic growth; supports the strong message that Science for Scotland sends out to Scotland and the world about this vision; agrees that maintaining a strong science base in Scotland is vital because it will underpin economic growth, help improve public services, enhance quality of life and help solve the world's most pressing problems; notes the detailed ambitions and commitments made around the five themes of Science for Scotland about developing individuals, scientific research, economic and business demand, international profile and connections in Scotland and government; further notes that Science for Scotland calls to action many bodies and sectors of the economy and asks them to work with the Scottish Government to help progress the aspirations of Science for Scotland , further notes the concern that some secondary schools in Scotland are reducing the availability of SQA Highers and Advanced Higher courses in science subjects; regrets that, although half a million women in the United Kingdom are qualified in either science, engineering or technology, less than a third work in those sectors, noting in particular the high fall-off rate at postdoctoral research level; calls on the Scottish Government to include within its strategy for science specific action to improve the participation and employment of women in the science sector and asks the Scottish Government to monitor and report to the Parliament on the progress being made.

The final question is, that legislative consent motion S3M-3652, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 118, Against 2, Abstentions 1.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Bill, introduced in the House of Lords on 14 January 2009, relating to the power of detention for individuals subject to an outstanding arrest warrant and their enforcement, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, should be considered by the UK Parliament.

I must suspend the sitting until 5 o'clock.

Question 11 was not lodged.

Order. Miss Goldie, I have warned members before that I do not like the use of nicknames in the chamber. I ask all members to abide by that wish.

I will take a constituency question from Michael McMahon. [ Interruption. ] I beg your pardon—I meant Michael Matheson.

Exactly.

I will take a further constituency question from John Lamont.

Question, please.

Order.

Robert Brown—very briefly.

Order.

I am afraid that I am not entirely aware of what Ms MacDonald is referring to. I will consider her point of order, but at this time I am afraid that I am unable to give an answer.

I ask Peter Peacock to be brief.

I ask the minister to be equally brief, if possible.

All remaining speeches should be of about four minutes but we have a little flexibility, so members should feel free to take interventions if they wish to do so.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-3727, in the name of Sarah Boyack, on forestry.

The next item of business is consideration of motions S3M-3719 to S3M-3722, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Budget (Scotland) Acts 2007 and 2008 Amendment Order 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Regulation of Care (Scotland) Act 2001 (Minimum Frequency of Inspections) Order 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Regulation of Care (Fitness to Register, Provide and Manage Care Services) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Representation of the People (Postal Voting for Local Government Elections) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2009 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The next item of business is consideration of motions S3M-3723 to S3M-3725, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on committee remits.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the remit of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee be amended to— To consider and report on (a) further and higher education, lifelong learning, schools, pre-school care, skills and other matters falling within the responsibility of the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning; and (b) matters relating to culture and the arts falling within the responsibility of the Minister for Culture, External Affairs and the Constitution. That the Parliament agrees that the remit of the Health and Sport Committee be amended to— To consider and report on (a) health policy and the NHS in Scotland and other matters falling within the responsibility of the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing; and (b) matters relating to sport falling within the responsibility of the Minister for Public Health and Sport. That the Parliament agrees that the remit of the Local Government and Communities Committee be amended to— To consider and report on (a) the financing and delivery of local government and local services and planning; and (b) housing, regeneration, anti-poverty measures and other matters falling within the responsibility of the Minister for Housing and Communities.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The questions on the motions will be put at decision time.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-3694, in the name of Patrick Harvie, on the Offences (Aggravation by Prejudice) (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Offences (Aggravation by Prejudice) (Scotland) Bill.

The next question is, that motion S3M-3653, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Welfare Reform Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Welfare Reform Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 14 January 2009, relating to a Right to Control for disabled people, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, should be considered by the UK Parliament.

The next question is, that motion S3M-3614, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the Marine and Coastal Access Bill, which is UK legislation, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the UK Marine and Coastal Access Bill introduced in the House of Lords on 4 December 2008, relating to the marine policy statement, marine planning, marine licensing, marine conservation zones and enforcement powers, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, or alter the executive competence of the Scottish Ministers, should be considered by the UK Parliament.

The next question is, that motions S3M-3719 to S3M-3722, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments, be agreed to.  Motions agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Budget (Scotland) Acts 2007 and 2008 Amendment Order 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Regulation of Care (Scotland) Act 2001 (Minimum Frequency of Inspections) Order 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Regulation of Care (Fitness to Register, Provide and Manage Care Services) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Representation of the People (Postal Voting for Local Government Elections) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2009 be approved.

The final question is, that motions S3M-3723 to S3M-3725, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on committee remits, be agreed to.  Motions agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the remit of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee be amended to— To consider and report on (a) further and higher education, lifelong learning, schools, pre-school care, skills and other matters falling within the responsibility of the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning; and (b) matters relating to culture and the arts falling within the responsibility of the Minister for Culture, External Affairs and the Constitution. That the Parliament agrees that the remit of the Health and Sport Committee be amended to— To consider and report on (a) health policy and the NHS in Scotland and other matters falling within the responsibility of the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing; and (b) matters relating to sport falling within the responsibility of the Minister for Public Health and Sport. That the Parliament agrees that the remit of the Local Government and Communities Committee be amended to— To consider and report on (a) the financing and delivery of local government and local services and planning; and (b) housing, regeneration, anti-poverty measures and other matters falling within the responsibility of the Minister for Housing and Communities.

The question is, that motion S3M-3717, in the name of Bruce Crawford, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 97, Against 18, Abstentions 0.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 25 March 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee Debate: Review of Section 6 of the Code of Conduct (Cross-Party Groups)  followed by Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee Debate: Changes to the Code of Conduct Arising from the Reimbursement of Members' Expenses Scheme followed by Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee Debate: Review of Section 8 of the Code of Conduct followed by Announcement of Appointment of Scottish Public Services Ombudsman followed by Scottish Government Debate: Local Government Finance Act 1992 (Scotland) Amendment Order 2009 followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 26 March 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and Law Officers  2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Supporting Economic Recovery followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 1 April 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 2 April 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3718, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau—[ Interruption. ] If members want to know what this is about, it would be as well for them to listen. The motion sets out a timetable for stage 1 of the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 9 October 2009.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3717, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 25 March 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee Debate: Review of Section 6 of the Code of Conduct (Cross-Party Groups)  followed by Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee Debate: Changes to the Code of Conduct Arising from the Reimbursement of Members' Expenses Scheme followed by Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee Debate: Review of Section 8 of the Code of Conduct followed by Announcement of Appointment of Scottish Public Services Ombudsman followed by Scottish Government Debate: Local Government Finance Act 1992 (Scotland) Amendment Order 2009 followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 26 March 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and Law Officers 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Supporting Economic Recovery followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 1 April 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection  followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 2 April 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

Jeremy Purvis has indicated that he wishes to speak against the motion.

The next item of business is consideration of legislative consent motion S3M-3653, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Welfare Reform Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Welfare Reform Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 14 January 2009, relating to a Right to Control for disabled people, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[ Nicola Sturgeon. ]

The question will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of legislative consent motion S3M-3614, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the Marine and Coastal Access Bill, which is also United Kingdom legislation.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the UK Marine and Coastal Access Bill introduced in the House of Lords on 4 December 2008, relating to the marine policy statement, marine planning, marine licensing, marine conservation zones and enforcement powers, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, or alter the executive competence of the Scottish Ministers, should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[ Richard Lochhead. ]

The question will be put at decision time.

There are eight questions to be put as a result of today's business. Members should note that if amendment S3M-3674.3, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, on the Aberdeen crossrail is agreed to, amendment S3M-3674.2, in the name of Alex Johnstone, will fall. Similarly, if amendment S3M-3675.3, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on a minimum income guarantee for students, is agreed to, amendment S3M-3675.1, in the name of Claire Baker, will fall. The first question is, that amendment S3M-3674.3, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3674, in the name of Alison McInnes, on the Aberdeen crossrail, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 46, Against 72, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3674.1, in the name of Des McNulty, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3674, in the name of Alison McInnes, on the Aberdeen crossrail, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 72, Against 46, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3674.2, in the name of Alex Johnstone, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3674, in the name of Alison McInnes, on the Aberdeen crossrail, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 62, Against 56, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-3674, in the name of Alison McInnes, on the Aberdeen crossrail, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 62, Against 56, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament affirms its support for the Aberdeen Crossrail project, a vital infrastructure link for the region and for the wider national transport network in Scotland, which would provide a frequent cross-city rail service; notes the comments of NESTRANS, previously chaired by Alison McInnes MSP, in its regional transport strategy, that "it is clear that improved rail services can only realistically be delivered on an incremental basis and in a way that capitalises on existing planned investment"; welcomes the recent improvements to the timetable, meaning that there is now a significantly better service north of Aberdeen than was the case when Nicol Stephen MSP and Tavish Scott MSP were ministers for transport; considers that proposals contained in the Strategic Transport Projects Review to improve services north and south of Aberdeen must be progressed as a priority as a key means of securing better crossrail services; welcomes the forthcoming opening of Laurencekirk station and considers that plans to open Kintore station should now be taken forward; further considers that local agencies should work together to build strong cases for the opening of stations at Newtonhill and Altens; notes with regret the very poor stewardship of rail projects under successive Liberal Democrat transport ministers, notably the significant cost overruns and delays that blighted the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine line and the managerial paralysis at the heart of the Edinburgh Airport Rail Link, and regrets the additional investment for projects such as Aberdeen Crossrail that has been lost as a result of this mismanagement.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3675.3, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3675, in the name of Margaret Smith, on a minimum income guarantee for students, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 46, Against 72, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3675.1, in the name of Claire Baker, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3675, in the name of Margaret Smith, on a minimum income guarantee for students, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 56, Against 47, Abstentions 15.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-3675, in the name of Margaret Smith, on a minimum income guarantee for students, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 70, Against 48, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament recognises the importance of the higher and further education sector; notes the outcome of the New Horizons: responding to the challenges of the 21st century report and the need to involve key stakeholders in discussions about the funding of the university sector; believes that Scotland's students have been let down by the SNP government's failure to deliver on its manifesto pledge to dump student debt; notes the Supporting a Smarter Scotland consultation on student support and rejects all of its proposals for not adequately addressing student hardship; expresses serious concern at reports of childcare and hardship funds being stretched to breaking point across colleges and universities in Scotland; recognises the calls of the NUS and other student representatives for a £7,000 minimum income guarantee but believes that a £7,000 minimum income for all students in Scotland is unachievable with the funds allocated for student support by the Scottish Government in this spending review period, and calls on the Scottish Government to come forward with new proposals that focus the available resources at the poorest students to genuinely address student hardship in Scotland.

The final question is, that motion S3M-3543, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Health Boards (Membership and Elections) (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Health Boards (Membership and Elections) (Scotland) Bill be passed.

That was a noble effort, cabinet secretary, but I have no choice other than to suspend the meeting for 30 seconds.

Very briefly, Mr Harper.

I do not accept that the question falls within the responsibility of the Minister for Culture, External Affairs and the Constitution. Therefore, I call question 9.

In a moment of rare pleasure, I can call question 10.

Richard Baker can ask a very brief supplementary question.

I ask the minister to give an equally brief response.

Understandably, question 3 has been withdrawn. I propose instead to allow Mike Rumbles to ask two supplementary questions.

I will take further supplementary questions from Trish Godman and Patrick Harvie.

We started slightly late, so I will take a brief supplementary question from Dr Richard Simpson.

Order. There are far too many conversations taking place in the chamber. I would like to hear what is going on.

Mr O'Donnell, you have 40 seconds left.

Thank you for the point of order. As you are aware, I was not in the chair at the time; it was my deputy. I will reflect on the matter in discussion with my deputy and consider whether any further action is required.

We come now to closing speeches.

Order.

The remaining speeches should be of about four minutes' duration, but I have enough flexibility to allow members to take interventions—I will be able to add on a little time should they choose to do so.

I was so overtaken by the atmosphere of mirth in the chamber this morning that I missed my footing. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-3674, in the name of Alison McInnes, on Aberdeen crossrail.

Members should be careful about the language that they use in the chamber.

There are two questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-3542, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the Damages (Asbestos-related Conditions) (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 98, Against 16, Abstentions 0.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Damages (Asbestos-related Conditions) (Scotland) Bill be passed.

The second question is, that motion S3M-3669, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the designation of a lead committee, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Justice Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1.

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motion S3M-3669, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on the designation of a lead committee.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Justice Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1.

The question on that motion will be put at decision time. I am sure that members will join me in welcoming to the gallery the ambassador of the Republic of Moldova, the high commissioner of New Zealand, the high commissioner of Sri Lanka and the deputy high commissioner of Jamaica. They are all most welcome. [ Applause. ]

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3664, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees— (a) the following programme of business— Wednesday 18 March 2009 2.15 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body Question Time followed by Ministerial Statement: Broadcasting followed by Stage 1 Debate: Offences (Aggravation by Prejudice) (Scotland) Bill followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Welfare Reform Bill - UK Legislation followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Marine and Coastal Access Bill - UK Legislation followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 19 March 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Scotland's Science Framework followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Bill - UK Legislation followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 25 March 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion  followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 26 March 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and Law Officers 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business (b) that the period for members to submit their names for selection for Question Times on 23 April 2009 ends at 12 noon on Wednesday 1 April 2009; (c) that the period for lodging First Minister's Questions for First Minister's Question Time on 7 May 2009 ends at 4.00 pm on Thursday 30 April 2009, and (d) that the period for lodging First Minister's Questions for First Minister's Question Time on 28 May 2009 ends at 4.00 pm on Thursday 21 May 2009.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motions S3M-3665, S3M-3666 and S3M-3668, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out timetables for the consideration of bills.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Arbitration (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 26 June 2009. That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 26 June 2009. That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Bill at Stage 2 be completed by 3 April 2009.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motions agreed to.

The next item of business is stage 3 proceedings on the Damages (Asbestos-related Conditions) (Scotland) Bill. In dealing with amendments, members should have the bill, which is SP bill 12; the marshalled list, which is SP bill 12-ML2; and the groupings, which I have agreed. The division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for five minutes for the first division this afternoon. The period of voting for the first division will be 30 seconds. Thereafter, I will allow a voting period of one minute for the first division after a debate and 30 seconds for all other divisions.

Amendment 1, in the name of the Minister for Community Safety, is grouped with amendments 2 to 8.

Amendment 9, in the name of Derek Brownlee, is in a group on its own.

The cabinet secretary will now take questions on the issues that were raised in his statement. We have about 20 minutes for such questions, after which I will move to the next item of business.

Will the person whose phone is on kindly turn it off, please?

Order. Somebody has a telephone turned on. Will you please turn it off?

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3676, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme for this afternoon.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 11 March 2009— after 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions insert followed by Ministerial Statement: Compensation Payments for Prisoners.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3651, in the name of Bruce Crawford, setting out a timetable for stage 3 consideration of the Damages (Asbestos-related Conditions) (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that, during Stage 3 of the Damages (Asbestos-related Conditions) (Scotland) Bill, debate on groups of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limit indicated, that time limit being calculated from when the Stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the Stage being called) or otherwise not in progress: Groups 1 and 2: 40 minutes.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a statement by Kenny MacAskill on compensation payments for prisoners. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions during it.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is, as always on a Wednesday afternoon, time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Ibrahim Issa, the director of the Hope Flowers school in Bethlehem.

We have eight questions to consider as a result of today's business. Members should note that if amendment S3M-3609.3, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on Scottish Government failures, be agreed to, then amendment S3M-3609.1, in the name of Mike Rumbles, will fall. The first question is, that amendment S3M-3609.3, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3609, in the name of Johann Lamont, on Scottish Government failures, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 45, Against 74, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3609.1, in the name of Mike Rumbles, also seeking to amend motion S3M-3609, in the name of Johann Lamont, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 72, Against 47, Abstentions 1.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-3609, in the name of Johann Lamont, on Scottish Government failures, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 72, Against 47, Abstentions 1.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament notes that SNP manifesto promises have been broken on a wide range of issues including health, housing, community safety and education; further notes the absence of a credible strategy to address the needs of people facing difficult economic circumstances and to tackle poverty and disadvantage; regrets that the Scottish Government prefers to focus its attention on the powers it does not have in order to pursue its party's agenda of separation; urges the Scottish Government to examine how it might effectively use the powers at its disposal to meet the needs of people by sustaining economic activity and employment and supporting communities across Scotland, and calls on the Scottish Government to concentrate its efforts on economic recovery and abandon its divisive plans for a Referendum Bill for the remainder of its term of office.

The fourth question is, that amendment S3M-3584.2, in the name of Des McNulty, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3584, in the name of Duncan McNeil, on behalf of the Local Government and Communities Committee, on "National Planning Framework for Scotland 2: Proposed Framework", be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3584.1.1, in the name of Alison McInnes, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-3584.1, in name of David McLetchie, on national planning framework 2, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 65, Against 54, Abstentions 1.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3584.1, as amended, in the name of David McLetchie, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3584, in the name of Duncan McNeil, on "National Planning Framework for Scotland 2: Proposed Framework", be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 64, Against 14, Abstentions 42.  Amendment, as amended, agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-3584, in the name of Duncan McNeil, on behalf of the Local Government and Communities Committee, on "National Planning Framework for Scotland 2: Proposed Framework", as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 62, Against 16, Abstentions 41.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Local Government and Communities Committee's 5th Report, 2009 (Session 3): National Planning Framework for Scotland 2: Proposed Framework (SP Paper 218), together with the Official Report of the Parliament's debate on the report, should form the Parliament's response to the Scottish Government on the Proposed Framework; supports the inclusion of the high-speed rail link between Scotland and London on the list of designated national developments; recommends that the Scottish Government ensures that both interim and long-term targets for reducing emissions are fully taken into account in land use and energy policies; considers that local and national land use planning must facilitate walking and cycling in urban as well as rural areas; endorses the recommendation of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee that the Scottish Government removes any technology-specific references from candidate national developments 8 and 9; calls on the Scottish Government to amend the descriptions of these national developments to reflect this in the final version of the National Planning Framework for Scotland 2, and reaffirms that in accordance with paragraph 152 of the National Planning Framework for Scotland 2 proposed framework document it does not support the construction of new nuclear power stations in Scotland.

The final question is, that motion S3M-3513, in the name of John Swinney, on the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions in the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Bill, which repeal Sections 14-20 of the Political Parties, Elections and Referendums Act 2000 and those which amend the construction contracts legislation in Part 2 of the Housing Grants, Construction and Regeneration Act 1996, introduced in the House of Lords on 4 December 2008, should, insofar as they relate to matters within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament or alter the executive competence of the Scottish Ministers, be considered by the UK Parliament.

The next item of business is consideration of legislative consent motion S3M-3513, in the name of John Swinney, on the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation. I invite John Swinney to move the motion.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions in the Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Bill, which repeal Sections 14-20 of the Political Parties, Elections and Referendums Act 2000 and those which amend the construction contracts legislation in Part 2 of the Housing Grants, Construction and Regeneration Act 1996, introduced in the House of Lords on 4 December 2008, should, insofar as they relate to matters within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament or alter the executive competence of the Scottish Ministers, be considered by the UK Parliament.—[ John Swinney .]

That concludes the debate. I have no option other than to suspend the meeting until 5 o'clock.

Would you ask a question please?

I will decide that.

We have a debate on the national planning framework later, so I will move on.

Briefly please, minister.

Question 14 has been withdrawn.

You were right the first time, First Minister.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Order in the chamber.

As I have repeated many times in the chamber, ministers are responsible for the content of their answers. There is no other answer that I can give you.

Question 1 was not lodged.

Before we move to the next question, I advise George Foulkes that I have had enough of his sedentary interventions today. If they continue, I will have no option other than to take steps that I do not wish to take.

That is entirely for me to judge. In my opinion, the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing was answering the question that was put to her.

Question, please.

Someone has a mobile or a BlackBerry on—can everyone please check?

I am afraid that we are out of time and must move to the next item of business.

Order.

I am sorry, Ms Curran, but we are tight for time and you cannot take any interventions.

Order. I am sorry to interrupt, Ms Jamieson. I have already commented on the unnecessary nature of some of the exchanges that are taking place. I would be grateful if that ruling was observed.

Order.

Order. The point has been made.

The cabinet secretary has made it clear that she will not take an intervention, so sit down please.

With respect, the cabinet secretary seems to be making it clear that she is not taking an intervention.

I am not sure that that is a point of order. It is entirely up to Presiding Officers to decide how they conduct the debate. We are trying to fit in as many members as possible, and I have made quite clear my view on some of the sedentary interventions that have been made. Points of order such as this will reduce the possibility of our calling some members to speak.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-3609, in the name of Johann Lamont, on Scottish Government failures.

Order. Only one member should speak in the debate at one time, but several other debates seem to be going on, for which all sides are to blame.

Order.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Michael McMahon to move motion S3M-3602, on the designation of a lead committee.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Health and Sport Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Tobacco and Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1.—[ Michael McMahon .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-3506, in the name of Adam Ingram, on the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Bill.

The second question is, that motion S3M-3512, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Policing and Crime Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions in the Policing and Crime Bill, introduced to the House of Commons on 18 December 2008, relating to football banning orders, extradition and the proceeds of crime, insofar as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament or alter the executive competence of the Scottish Ministers, should be considered by the UK Parliament.

The third question is, that motion S3M-3602, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the designation of a lead committee, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Health and Sport Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Tobacco and Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-3512, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Policing and Crime Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions in the Policing and Crime Bill, introduced to the House of Commons on 18 December 2008, relating to football banning orders, extradition and the proceeds of crime, insofar as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament or alter the executive competence of the Scottish Ministers, should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[ Kenny MacAskill .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of a business motion. I ask Michael McMahon to move S3M-3600, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 11 March 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Damages (Asbestos-related Conditions) (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 12 March 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Liberal Democrat Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Europe, External Affairs and Culture; Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Health Boards (Membership and Elections) (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 18 March 2009 2.15 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body Question Time followed by Stage 1 Debate: Offences (Aggravation by Prejudice) (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 19 March 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Michael McMahon .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of a further business motion. I ask Michael McMahon to move motion S3M-3601, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 2 of the Sexual Offences (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Sexual Offences (Scotland) Bill at Stage 2 be completed by 1 May 2009.—[ Michael McMahon .]  Motion agreed to.

I must ask you to close, minister.

You may carry on until I tell you to stop, Mr Macintosh. [ Laughter. ] I can happily give you another two or three minutes.

I advise members that I have just been informed that a bit of time is available in the debate. Members should feel free to take interventions, if they wish. If that becomes a problem, time can be added for speeches.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. I am genuinely delighted to welcome today, to lead our time for reflection, my good friend the Rt Hon the Lord Elis-Thomas, the Presiding Officer of the National Assembly for Wales.

I am particularly pleased that Lord Elis-Thomas was able to come to Parliament today, as it is the closest possible sitting day to St David's day.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-3506, in the name of Adam Ingram, on the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Bill. I must ask members to stick pretty closely to the times that they are given. I call Adam Ingram to speak to and move the motion. Minister, you have 13 minutes.

There are eight questions to be put as a result of today's business. Members should note that if amendment S3M-3828.3, in the name of Sarah Boyack, is agreed to, amendment S3M-3528.2, in the name of Robin Harper, will fall. The first question is, that motion S3M-3128, in the name of Jackie Baillie, on the Disabled Persons' Parking Places (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Disabled Persons' Parking Places (Scotland) Bill be passed.

I am delighted to say that the Disabled Persons' Parking Places (Scotland) Bill is passed. [ Applause. ] The next question is, that amendment S3M-3528.3, in the name of Sarah Boyack, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3528, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the marine bill consultation, be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 40, Against 61, Abstentions 16.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3528.1, in the name of John Scott, which also seeks to amend motion S3M-3528, on the marine bill consultation, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3528.4, in the name of Liam McArthur, which also seeks to amend motion S3M-3528, on the marine bill consultation, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3528.2, in the name of Robin Harper, which also seeks to amend motion S3M-3528, on the marine bill consultation, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-3528, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the marine bill consultation, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the Scottish Government's commitment to deliver a Scottish Marine Bill to accommodate environmentally sustainable economic development and improve the stewardship of the marine environment; acknowledges the positive response to the consultation, Sustainable Seas for All , the widespread support for the proposals and the concerns that remain; considers that the forthcoming marine legislation must fully take into account the interests of commercial fisheries and recreational sea anglers and could provide an appropriate vehicle for tackling the severe decline in breeding sea bird populations, and calls on the Scottish Government to publish its conclusions on the consultation and bring forward a dedicated Scottish Marine Bill as soon as possible to ensure that Scotland does not fall behind the rest of the United Kingdom in the sustainable management of its seas and coast.

The next question is, that motion S3M-3534, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on committee membership, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that— Stuart McMillan be appointed to replace Dave Thompson on the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee; Willie Coffey be appointed to replace Sandra White on the Equal Opportunities Committee; Michael Matheson be appointed to replace Alex Neil on the European and External Relations Committee; Sandra White be appointed to replace Keith Brown on the European and External Relations Committee; Stewart Maxwell be appointed to replace Stuart McMillan on the Justice Committee; Anne McLaughlin be appointed to replace Stuart McMillan on the Public Audit Committee; Anne McLaughlin be appointed to the Public Petitions Committee.

The final question is, that motion S3M-3535, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on substitution on committees, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that— Shirley-Anne Somerville be appointed to replace Willie Coffey as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Equal Opportunities Committee; Kenneth Gibson be appointed to replace Roseanna Cunningham as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Finance Committee; Linda Fabiani be appointed to replace Sandra White as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Public Audit Committee.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Michael McMahon to move motion S3M-3534, on committee membership.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that— Stuart McMillan be appointed to replace Dave Thompson on the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee; Willie Coffey be appointed to replace Sandra White on the Equal Opportunities Committee; Michael Matheson be appointed to replace Alex Neil on the European and External Relations Committee; Sandra White be appointed to replace Keith Brown on the European and External Relations Committee; Stewart Maxwell be appointed to replace Stuart McMillan on the Justice Committee; Anne McLaughlin be appointed to replace Stuart McMillan on the Public Audit Committee; Anne McLaughlin be appointed to the Public Petitions Committee.—[ Michael McMahon .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time. The next item is consideration of a further Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Michael McMahon to move motion S3M-3535, on substitution on committees.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that— Shirley-Anne Somerville be appointed to replace Willie Coffey as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Equal Opportunities Committee; Kenneth Gibson be appointed to replace Roseanna Cunningham as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Finance Committee; Linda Fabiani be appointed to replace Sandra White as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Public Audit Committee.—[ Michael McMahon .]

The question on that motion, too, will be put at decision time.

Order. Far too many conversations are taking place around the chamber. I am sorry, minister; please continue.

Question 1 was lodged by Mike Pringle, whom I do not see in the chamber. I will inform him accordingly.

No, I am afraid that you cannot. Question 2 has not been lodged.

Question 8 is withdrawn.

Question 2 was not lodged.

Question 6 has been withdrawn.

Question 9. I call Richard Baker. [ Interruption. ] This is the second time today that a member has not been present in the chamber to ask their question. That constitutes a discourtesy to other members, because members who want to ask supplementaries are unable to do so if the member is not here to ask the original question. I apologise to Jim Hume, but I must move on to the next item of business, which is heavily oversubscribed.

The next item of business is a statement by Fiona Hyslop providing an update on the skills strategy. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of her statement, so there should be no interruptions during it.

Thank you. Members might wish to know that I have written this morning, on behalf of the Parliament, to David and Samantha Cameron.

I will take a constituency question from Margaret Curran.

Mary Scanlon.

I am pleased to hear it.

Given that virtually no additional time is available in the debate, I ask members to stick strictly to the guidance that is given to them.

Good morning. The first item of business is a statement by John Swinney on the Financial Services Advisory Board. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions.

The cabinet secretary will now take questions on his statement.

We come to open questions.

Please be brief, Ms MacDonald.

I will allow a final question from Jack McConnell.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-3128, in the name of Jackie Baillie, on the Disabled Persons' Parking Places (Scotland) Bill.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-3621, in the name of Margaret Mitchell, on behalf of the Equal Opportunities Committee, on unpaid carers, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament notes evidence gathered by the Equal Opportunities Committee on unpaid carers at its meetings on 25 March and 7 October 2008, which highlighted that there were around 660,000 unpaid carers in Scotland, a figure that represented one in eight of the population; recognises the valuable contribution that unpaid carers make in saving the Scottish economy £7.6 billion a year; further notes that around 40% of unpaid carers surveyed reported that their access to services was poor or that available services did not meet their needs, and calls on the Scottish Government to take into consideration the evidence gathered when developing the forthcoming Scottish Government/COSLA carers strategy.

The second question is, that motion S3M-3439, in the name of Bill Aitken, on behalf of the Justice Committee, on the report on its inquiry into community policing, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Justice Committee's 18th Report, 2008 (Session 3): Report on Inquiry into Community Policing (SP Paper 155).

The final question is, that motion S3M-3521, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the designation of a lead committee, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 99, Against 15, Abstentions 0.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Arbitration (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1.

Minister, you should close as soon as possible.

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

The question is, that motion S3M-3520, in the name of Bruce Crawford, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Michael McMahon to move motion S3M-3521, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the designation of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee as the lead committee in consideration of the Arbitration (Scotland) Bill at stage 1.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Arbitration (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1.—[ Michael McMahon .]

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3520, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 4 March 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 1 Debate: Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Bill followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Policing and Crime Bill - UK Legislation followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 5 March 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Local Government and Communities Committee Debate: National Planning Framework 2 followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Local Democracy, Economic Development and Construction Bill - UK Legislation followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 11 March 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Damages (Asbestos-related Conditions) (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time  followed by Members' Business Thursday 12 March 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Europe, External Affairs and Culture; Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Stage 3 Proceedings: Health Boards (Membership and Elections) (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Michael McMahon. ]

Patrick Harvie has indicated that he wishes to speak against the motion. Mr Harvie, you have up to five minutes.

We come to closing speeches.

I allowed opening speakers a little flexibility because of the warm and generous messages of condolence that they were conveying. I am afraid that I no longer have any flexibility on time, so I ask members to keep within their four-minute limit.

Good afternoon and welcome back. As always, the first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Father Noel Colford from Holy Cross, Brodick, on the Isle of Arran.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-3261, in the name of Margaret Mitchell, on behalf of the Equal Opportunities Committee, on unpaid carers. We have no time to spare in the debate and, therefore, members should stick to the times that they are allocated.

The next item of business is consideration of a parliamentary bureau motion. I invite Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-3438, on committee membership.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that— Maureen Watt be appointed to replace Roseanna Cunningham on the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee; Linda Fabiani be appointed to replace Alex Neil on the Finance Committee.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

There are eight questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-3428.2, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3428, in the name of Cathy Jamieson, on health care associated infections, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 79, Against 45, Abstentions 3.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3428.1, in the name of Ross Finnie, which also seeks to amend motion S3M-3428, in the name of Cathy Jamieson, on health care associated infections, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 63, Against 62, Abstentions 2.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-3428, in the name of Cathy Jamieson, on health care associated infections, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 63, Against 63, Abstentions 0. I will therefore have to use my casting vote and, as always, I will vote against the amended motion.  Motion, as amended, disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3427.1, in the name of Jamie McGrigor, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3427, in the name of Mary Mulligan, on housing, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 33, Against 94, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-3427, in the name of Mary Mulligan, on housing, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the growing crisis in Scottish housing with rising numbers of repossessions, the continuing challenge of homelessness and the falling number of houses being built; calls on the Scottish Government to ensure the urgent and effective implementation of the accelerated spending programme, introduce a realistic housing association grant formula and negotiate with the housing association movement a range of flexible models of procurement, and further calls on the Scottish Government to examine, as a matter of urgency, alternative means of expediting the provision of land and infrastructure and the regeneration of communities.

The next question is, that motion S3M-3308, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Sexual Offences (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Sexual Offences (Scotland) Bill.

The next question is, that motion S3M-3417, in the name of John Swinney, on the Sexual Offences (Scotland) Bill financial resolution, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Sexual Offences  (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any expenditure of a kind referred to in paragraph 3(b)(iii) of Rule 9.12 of the Parliament's Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.

The final question is, that motion S3M-3438, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on committee membership, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that— Maureen Watt be appointed to replace Roseanna Cunningham on the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee; Linda Fabiani be appointed to replace Alex Neil on the Finance Committee.

First Minister, I am sorry to interrupt. I know this is a relatively light-hearted debate, but I like members to be called by their full names. Thank you.

As the amendment in the name of Murdo Fraser was not moved, the question is simply that motion S3M-3431, in the name of the First Minister, on the appointment of junior Scottish ministers, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 48, Against 0, Abstentions 79.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that Roseanna Cunningham, Alex Neil and Keith Brown be appointed as junior Scottish Ministers.

Order.

I call Margo MacDonald. You have no more than four minutes, Ms MacDonald.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-3417, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution to the Sexual Offences (Scotland) Bill. I call Kenny MacAskill to move the motion.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Sexual Offences (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any expenditure of a kind referred to in paragraph 3(b)(iii) of Rule 9.12 of the Parliament's Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.—[ Kenny MacAskill .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-3431, in the name of the First Minister, on the appointment of junior Scottish ministers. Members should note that the question on amendment S3M-3431.1, in the name of Murdo Fraser, and the question on the motion, will be put at the conclusion of this debate rather than at decision time. I remind members that one-minute warnings are no longer given.

This is Iain Gray's final question.

We will have one final brief question from Iain Gray.

A question, please.

No—a question, please, Miss Goldie. I must press you.

Come to a question, please, Miss Goldie.

Before we move to questions to the First Minister, I invite members to join me in welcoming to the gallery His Excellency Jan Winkler, the Czech Republic's ambassador to the United Kingdom. [ Applause. ]

As members will have picked up, there is a little flexibility on timings. I know that they will not abuse it.

I invite our new member for Glasgow, Anne McLaughlin, to take the oath of allegiance.  The following member took the oath:  Anne McLaughlin (Glasgow) (SNP)

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-3428, in the name of Cathy Jamieson, on health care associated infections. I remind members that one-minute warnings are no longer given during debates in the chamber.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-3424, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Non-Domestic Rating (Petrol Filling Stations, Public Houses and Hotels) (Scotland) Order 2009 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-3419, the motion of condolence in the name of Alex Salmond, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament expresses its deep regret and sadness at the death of Bashir Ahmad MSP; offers its sympathy and condolences to Bashir's family and friends, and believes that as the first Scots-Asian Member of the Scottish Parliament, and a man of faith and dignity, his contribution to Scotland's democratic process and community relations over many years leaves a hugely positive legacy for all of Scotland.

The second question is, that motion S3M-3386, in the name of John Swinney, on the Local Government Finance Act 1992 (Scotland) Order 2009, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 99, Against 1, Abstentions 15.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Local Government Finance Act 1992 (Scotland) Order 2009 be approved.

The final question is, that motion S3M-3424, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Non-Domestic Rating (Petrol Filling Stations, Public Houses and Hotels) (Scotland) Order 2009 be approved.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3420, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 12 February 2009— (a) delete 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions and insert 9.10 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Member's Oath/Affirmation - Anne McLaughlin and (b) after followed by Financial Resolution: Sexual Offences (Scotland) Bill insert followed by Appointment of Ministers—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3421, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 25 February 2009 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Equal Opportunities Committee Debate: Unpaid Carers followed by Justice Committee Debate: Community Policing Report followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 26 February 2009 9.00 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Financial Services Advisory Board (FiSAB)  followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Disabled Persons' Parking Places (Scotland) Bill  11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Justice and Law Officers; Rural Affairs and the Environment followed by Ministerial Statement: Skills Strategy followed by Scottish Government Debate: Marine Bill Consultation followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 4 March 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 1 Debate: Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 5 March 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3422, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, to allow the Parliament to meet at 9.10 tomorrow and at 9 o'clock on Thursday 26 February.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees— (a) that "9:10" be substituted for "9:15" in Rule 2.2.3 to allow the meeting of the Parliament on Thursday 12 February 2009 to begin at 9.10 am; and (b) that "9:00" be substituted for "9:15" in Rule 2.2.3 to allow the meeting of the Parliament on Thursday 26 February 2009 to begin at 9.00 am.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3423, in the name of Bruce Crawford, setting out a timetable for stage 1 of the Scottish Local Government (Elections) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Scottish Local Government (Elections) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 8 May 2009.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

Order.

I repeat my request for members who have not yet pressed their request-to-speak buttons to do so.

That is a matter for the cabinet secretary, who has made his speech to Parliament, but I will reflect on what the member has said.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-3386, in the name of John Swinney, on the Local Government Finance Act 1992 (Scotland) Order 2009. I invite all members who wish to speak in the debate to press their request-to-speak buttons. I remind members that the one-minute warning is no longer being given.

The next item of business is one that we would all prefer not to be holding: a motion of condolence following the death of Bashir Ahmad MSP. One of my early duties as Presiding Officer was to introduce Her Majesty the Queen to the members of this third session of the Scottish Parliament at a reception that she gave for us in the Palace of Holyroodhouse. With 43 new members, getting everyone's name right was not the easiest of tasks. As I approached one group at that reception, I noticed two men who were resplendent in the national dress of Pakistan, but I completely failed to recognise Bashir Ahmad as one of them. We sorted it out quietly between us and I duly introduced him to Her Majesty. Later, I went back and apologised to him for my error. Many members—including myself—would possibly have been none too pleased if that had happened to them, and might quite justifiably have made their feelings known in no uncertain terms. Bashir, however, went to great lengths to put me at ease, to the extent that it almost seemed that he was apologising to me rather than the other way around. That, I suspect, was the very essence of Bashir Ahmad: unassuming, forgiving, patient and kind. He seemed to me to be the very epitome of the gentle man, in every sense. I also suspect that he harboured not one ounce of malice towards anyone else, politically or otherwise, and it was clear to me that that absence of malice was accompanied by modesty that was anything but false. Yet, that gentle, modest and unassuming man has blazed a trail in becoming the first Asian MSP to grace the benches of our Scottish Parliament. Those who will follow his lead will do so in the certain knowledge that their forerunner set the finest of examples—one that they would do well to emulate. In saying goodbye to Bashir, Parliament is saying goodbye to a good friend who made a great mark on this place in a sadly curtailed term of office. Our thoughts and prayers are very much with his wife and family, many of whom we are honoured to have with us in the gallery today. I call on the First Minister to speak to and move the motion of condolence.

I am minded to accept a motion without notice from the First Minister, Alex Salmond.  Motion moved,  That motion S3M-3419 be taken at this meeting of Parliament.—[Alex Salmond.]  Motion agreed to.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Vinesh Chandrasegaran, a member of the Scottish Interfaith Youth Council, the Sri Sathya Sai Service Organisation and the Art of Living Foundation.

There are 10 questions to be put as a result of today's business. I ask members to note that, if amendment S3M-3383.2, in the name of Andy Kerr, on borrowing powers for the Scottish Parliament, is agreed to, amendment S3M-3383.1, in the name of Derek Brownlee, will fall. The first question is, that amendment S3M-3383.2, in the name of Andy Kerr, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3383, in the name of Tavish Scott, on borrowing powers for the Scottish Parliament, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 42, Against 80, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3383.1, in the name of Derek Brownlee, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3383, in the name of Tavish Scott, on borrowing powers for the Scottish Parliament, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 16, Against 64, Abstentions 42.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-3383, in the name of Tavish Scott, on borrowing powers for the Scottish Parliament, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 66, Against 0, Abstentions 56.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament believes that the acquisition of borrowing powers would enhance the autonomy and accountability of the Scottish Parliament and improve the Scottish Government's ability to respond to changing economic circumstances; notes that borrowing powers would allow the Scottish Government to phase the funding of major capital projects such as the new Forth Replacement Crossing sensibly and efficiently, and therefore welcomes the Scottish Government's commitment to give permission for civil servants to engage fully with the Commission on Scottish Devolution to assist the delivery of borrowing powers for the Scottish Parliament.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3384.2, in the name of John Park, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3384, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, on a financial sector jobs task force, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3384.1, in the name of Derek Brownlee, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3384, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, on a financial sector jobs task force, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-3384, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, on a financial sector jobs task force, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament notes the importance of the financial services industry to the Scottish economy; believes that the Financial Services Advisory Board (FiSAB), set up to be the custodian and advocate of the strategy for the industry in Scotland during a time of economic boom, should now be given more powers and a new purpose to focus on protection for this major Scottish industry during the current banking crisis and recession; notes the Scottish Government's commitment that FiSAB should be adapted to deal with the challenges in the sector and should meet more frequently than the present position of twice a year; believes that there should be continued workforce representation at the meetings in the shape of the recognised trade unions, and calls for the urgent formation of a finance sector jobs taskforce within FiSAB to work proactively to help the staff with essential skills who are losing their jobs and for ministers to report to the  Parliament on its work and for such reports to include the latest estimate of the number of jobs in the financial sector in Scotland, direct and indirect.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3385.3, in the name of Karen Whitefield, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3385, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the early years framework, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 45, Against 61, Abstentions 16.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3385.1, in the name of Elizabeth Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3385, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3385.2, in the name of Hugh O'Donnell, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3385, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The final question is, that motion S3M-3385, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the early years framework, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to,  That the Parliament recognises that getting the early years right is key to delivering improved outcomes for children and young people and a key opportunity to shape a more successful Scotland; notes the publication of The Early Years Framework and the vision it sets out for giving children the best start in life, including a focus on parenting, early intervention, meeting the needs of children and parents and play; further recognises the challenges in shifting to prevention and early intervention while also supporting children who need help now, and calls on national and local government to work together with external agencies and the voluntary sector to address these challenges in partnership during the implementation of the framework which should include greater emphasis on the development of parenting skills and harnessing the excellent work of voluntary sector groups that provide these services.

Order. I am sorry to interrupt you, minister, but there is too much noise from around the chamber.

Can we have a question, please, Mr Gibson? You are asking a supplementary question.

Very wise.

Question 4 was not lodged.

Order.

I have received a large number of requests for constituency questions, which all reflect the same type of issue. I cannot take them all.

Members near to Christine Grahame's microphone should check whether their communication equipment is switched off; someone's BlackBerry is on. Carry on, Ms Grahame.

You must close now, please.

Order.

Good morning. The first item of business is a Liberal Democrat debate on motion S3M-3383, in the name of Tavish Scott, on borrowing powers for the Scottish Parliament.

You must close, please, Mr Scott.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3372, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 11 February 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: The Local Government Finance Act 1992 (Scotland) Order 2009 followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 12 February 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing followed by Stage 1 Debate: Sexual Offences (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution: Sexual Offences (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 25 February 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 26 February 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Debate: Disabled Persons' Parking Places (Scotland) Bill 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Justice and Law Officers; Rural Affairs and the Environment followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-3379, on the suspension of standing orders.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that, for the purpose of allowing up to 2 hours and 25 minutes to debate motion S3M-3386 (The Local Government Finance Act 1992 (Scotland) Order 2009) on Wednesday 11 February 2009, the final sentence of Rule 10.7.1 of Standing Orders be suspended.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time. The next item of business is consideration of four Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motions S3M-3374 to S3M-3377, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Town and Country Planning (Grounds for Declining to Follow Recommendations) (Scotland) Regulations 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Town and Country Planning (Hierarchy of Developments) (Scotland) Regulations 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Town and Country Planning (Amount of Fixed Penalty) (Scotland) Regulations 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Prohibited Procedures on Protected Animals (Exemptions) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2009 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The question on those motions will be put at decision time.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-3380, in the name of John Swinney, that the Budget (Scotland) (No 3) Bill be passed, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 123, Against 2, Abstentions 0.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the Budget (Scotland) (No.3) Bill be passed.

The next question is, that motion S3M-3379, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the suspension of standing orders, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that, for the purpose of allowing up to 2 hours and 25 minutes to debate motion S3M-3386 (The Local Government Finance Act 1992 (Scotland) Order 2009) on Wednesday 11 February 2009, the final sentence of Rule 10.7.1 of Standing Orders be suspended.

If no member objects, I propose to ask a single question on motions S3M-3374 to S3M-3377, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments. The final question is, that motions S3M-3374 to S3M-3377, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of SSIs, be agreed to.  Motions agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Town and Country Planning (Grounds for Declining to Follow Recommendations) (Scotland) Regulations 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Town and Country Planning (Hierarchy of Developments) (Scotland) Regulations 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Town and Country Planning (Amount of Fixed Penalty) (Scotland) Regulations 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Prohibited Procedures on Protected Animals (Exemptions) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2009 be approved.

That concludes the debate. Before we move to the next item of business, I am sure that members will want to join me in welcoming to the gallery the German ambassador to the United Kingdom, His Excellency Herr Georg Boomgaarden. [ Applause. ]

We move to stage 2 proceedings on the Budget (Scotland) (No 3) Bill. The bill will be considered by the Committee of the Whole Parliament, for which the occupant of this chair is known as the convener.  Section 1 agreed to.  Schedules 1 and 2 agreed to.  Section 2 agreed to.  Schedules 3 and 4 agreed to.  Sections 3 to 5 agreed to.  Schedule 5 agreed to.  Sections 6 to 10 agreed to.  Long title agreed to.   Meeting closed at 14:37.

I reconvene today's meeting of Parliament—I am sorry, but it has to be done—for consideration of stage 3 of the bill. The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-3380, in the name of John Swinney, that the Budget (Scotland) (No 3) Bill be passed. The question on the motion will be put at decision time. I remind members that Presiding Officers will not give any one-minute warnings. We are tight for time, so I urge all members to stick to the time limits that they are given.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-3381, in the name of John Swinney, on treating the Budget (Scotland) (No 3) Bill as an emergency bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Budget (Scotland) (No.3) Bill be treated as an Emergency Bill.—[ John Swinney .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-3362, in the name of John Swinney, on the general principles of the Budget (Scotland) (No 3) Bill.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3378, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme for this afternoon's proceedings.  Motion moved,  Wednesday 11 February 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: The Local Government Finance Act 1992 (Scotland) Order 2009 followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 12 February 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing followed by Stage 1 Debate: Sexual Offences (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution: Sexual Offences (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 25 February 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 26 February 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Debate: Disabled Persons' Parking Places (Scotland) Bill 11.40 am General Question Time  12.00 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Justice and Law Officers; Rural Affairs and the Environment followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

I understand that Michael Russell, the Minister for Environment, wishes to say a few words. I am happy to accede to that request.

I am very grateful to the minister for correcting the record and for the speed with which he sought to do so. I can confirm that he contacted me on Friday.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader is Professor John Haldane, director of the centre for ethics, philosophy and public affairs from the University of St Andrews.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion on the suspension of standing orders.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that, in order to consider the Budget (Scotland) (No.3) Bill at Stages 1, 2 and 3 on 4, 10 and 11 February 2009 respectively, the first sentence of Rule 9.16.5 be suspended.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

There are 11 questions to be put as a result of today's business. I must make members aware that, if amendment S3M-3325.1, in the name of Michael Russell, on forestry, is agreed to, amendment S3M-3325.2, in the name of Jim Hume, will fall, and that if amendment S3M-3322.2, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, on transport priorities, is agreed to, amendment S3M-3322.1, in the name of Alison McInnes, will fall. The first question is, that amendment S3M-3325.1.1, in the name of John Scott, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-3325.1, in the name of Michael Russell, on forestry, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 80, Against 42, Abstentions 1.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3325.1, in the name of Michael Russell, as amended, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3325, in the name of Sarah Boyack, on forestry, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 62, Against 61, Abstentions 1.  Amendment, as amended, agreed to.

Mr Hume's amendment S3M-3325.2 has been pre-empted. The next question is, that motion S3M-3325, in the name of Sarah Boyack, on forestry, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 62, Against 61, Abstentions 1.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament notes the consultation on climate change and forestry that has just closed; welcomes the widespread agreement that there must be a significant planting increase to assist the process of combating climate change; is grateful to all those who brought a variety of ideas and views forward, and looks forward to a report to the Parliament on the outcome of the consultation and to subsequent detailed parliamentary scrutiny of any proposals brought forward as a result of the consultation.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3322.2, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3322, in the name of Des McNulty, on transport priorities, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 46, Against 75, Abstentions 3.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3322.3, in the name of Alex Johnstone, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3322, in the name of Des McNulty, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 121, Against 2, Abstentions 1.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3322.1, in the name of Alison McInnes, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3322, in the name of Des McNulty, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 75, Against 46, Abstentions 3.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-3322, in the name of Des McNulty, on transport priorities, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 75, Against 48, Abstentions 1.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament notes that the Strategic Transport Projects Review lacks detail on timescales and does not commit the Scottish Government to deliver a programme of expenditure for the vast majority of the projects identified; also notes the concern of communities along the length of the A82, A77, A9, A90 and A96 that no indication has been given as to when their needs for road improvements will be addressed; notes in particular the disappointment of people in Elgin, Inverness and Maybole who were led to believe by the SNP prior to the 2007 election that their bypass schemes would be given priority by an SNP government; reminds ministers of the principle of collective responsibility and the need to ensure that communities are not misled about the Scottish Government's intentions and, while recognising that the new Forth Replacement Crossing is an overriding priority for Scotland, and calls on the Scottish Government to state its priorities by reference to the  projects listed in the Strategic Transport Projects Review and others identified by regional transport partnerships and local authorities as having a major regional significance.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3324.1, in the name of Pauline McNeill, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3324, in the name of Linda Fabiani, on the Gaelic language plan, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-3324, in the name of Linda Fabiani, on the Gaelic language plan, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament recognises that Gaelic is an integral part of Scotland's heritage, national identity and current cultural life; welcomes and supports the launch of the consultation on the Scottish Government's draft Gaelic Language Plan; acknowledges the work being carried out on the implementation of other Gaelic language plans by Argyll and Bute Council, Comhairle nan Eilean Siar, Edinburgh City Council, Glasgow City Council, Highland Council, the Scottish Parliament and Highland and Islands Enterprise; further welcomes the boost to the language provided by the establishment of BBC Alba, and calls for continued investment in and expansion of Gaelic-medium education.

The final question is, that motion S3M-3337, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on a suspension of standing orders, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that, in order to consider the Budget (Scotland) (No.3) Bill at Stages 1, 2 and 3 on 4, 10 and 11 February 2009 respectively, the first sentence of Rule 9.16.5 be suspended.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3336, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to the programme of business. I call Bruce Crawford to move—not too quickly—motion S3M-3336.

I make members aware that a revised version of section A of today's Business Bulletin  is now available at the back of the chamber. It includes a business motion setting out a revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 4 February and Wednesday 11 February, along with a Parliamentary Bureau motion suspending standing orders to allow the budget (Scotland) (no 3) bill to be considered at stages 1, 2 and 3 on 4, 10 and 11 February respectively.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-3324, in the name of Linda Fabiani, on the Gaelic language plan. [ Interruption. ] Could I have order please? Members who are leaving the chamber—please be quiet. I have agreed to a request by a number of members, under rule 7.1.1, to speak in Scots Gaelic. Members should note that headphones for simultaneous interpretation are available at the back of the chamber. I remind members that the Presiding Officers are no longer giving a one-minute warning before the end of each speech.

That is enough applause, thank you.

Order.

Order.

Mr Gray, a brief final question, please.

Order.

Order. I will decide on the timings in the chamber.

Order. That's enough.

I will take a constituency question from Michael McMahon.

Order. That is enough sedentary intervention.

There seems to be a marked reluctance by members to take interventions. Of course, they do not have to give way to other members, but I hope that they will not allow time constraints to prevent them from doing so. Time is available, and the Presiding Officers will be flexible.

Through the chair, please.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-3325, in the name of Sarah Boyack, on forestry. We have a little flexibility on time, but not a lot, so I ask members to stick closely to the time that they have been allocated.

As all the business managers have been advised, we will get the votes on the Parliamentary Bureau motions out of the way before we move to the vote on the Budget (Scotland) (No 2) Bill. The first question is, that motion S3M-3317, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on the office of the clerk, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that, between 1 September 2009 and 31 August 2010, the Office of the Clerk will be open on all days except: Saturdays and Sundays, 27 November 2009, 24 December (pm), 25 and 28 December 2009, 1 and 4 January 2010, 2 and 5 April 2010 and 3, 28 and 31 May 2010.

The next question is, that motion S3M-3318, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on parliamentary recess dates, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees the following parliamentary recess dates under Rule 2.3.1: 12 - 25 October 2009 (inclusive), 21 December 2009 - 4 January 2010 (inclusive), 15 - 21 February 2010 (inclusive) and 29 March - 11 April 2010 (inclusive).

The next question is, that motions S3M-3319 to S3M-3321, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments, be agreed to.  Motions agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Act 1992 Modification Order 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft International Organisations (Immunities and Privileges) (Scotland) Order 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Private Landlord Registration (Modification) (Scotland) Order 2009 be approved.

Members should pay attention. The final question is, that motion S3M-3299, in the name of John Swinney, on the Budget (Scotland) (No 2) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 64, Against 64, Abstentions 0. It is a well-established convention here and elsewhere that Presiding Officers cast in favour of the status quo. As the passing of the bill would result in a change to the present position with regard to the budget, and as I advised all business managers, I cast my vote against the motion.  Motion disagreed to.

The Budget (Scotland) (No 2) Bill therefore falls.

Order. I will first take the point of order from the cabinet secretary.

I thank the cabinet secretary for that statement. I will now take the point of order from Iain Gray.

I will take the second point first. If there is to be a motion of no confidence, that is up to members; it is not up to me. On the procedure from now on, my intention is to seek to call a meeting of the Parliamentary Bureau tomorrow to take forward the potential timetable for the new legislation.

I will bring in the Minister for Parliamentary Business.

That is very useful. Thank you, Mr Crawford. I will now take the point of order from Margo MacDonald.

As I explained, my vote was cast in terms of the status quo convention. The position is clear; it is the same as the position that I took last year. All business managers were informed of that position. It might be difficult for members to leave the chamber quietly, but it would be greatly appreciated if they could do so.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-3317, on the office of the clerk. Time is no longer a problem, Mr Crawford.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that, between 1 September 2009 and 31 August 2010, the Office of the Clerk will be open on all days except: Saturdays and Sundays, 27 November 2009, 24 December (pm), 25 and 28 December 2009, 1 and 4 January 2010, 2 and 5 April 2010 and 3, 28 and 31 May 2010.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-3318, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on parliamentary recess dates.

The next item of business is consideration of motions S3M-3319 to S3M-3321, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on approval of Scottish statutory instruments.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Act 1992 Modification Order 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft International Organisations (Immunities and Privileges) (Scotland) Order 2009 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Private Landlord Registration (Modification) (Scotland) Order 2009 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The questions on the motions will be put at decision time.

We have a number of procedural decisions to make before we come to decision time. The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3314, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3315, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 2 of the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3316, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 2 of the Health Boards (Membership and Elections) (Scotland) Bill. I call Bruce Crawford to move the motion.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Given the importance of the debate, I will allow each Opposition party's opening speaker to overrun by a few seconds, but that time will be taken off the party's closing speaker.

Good afternoon. As always on a Wednesday afternoon, the first item of business is time for reflection. I am delighted that our time for reflection leader today is the Right Rev David Lunan, the moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-3299, in the name of John Swinney, on the Budget (Scotland) (No 2) Bill. I remind members that the Presiding Officers no longer give a one-minute warning before the end of a speech. The debate is oversubscribed, so members must be careful to ensure that they do not exceed the time allocated to them.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-2814, in the name of John Swinney, on the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any expenditure of a kind referred to in paragraph 3(b)(iii) of Rule 9.12 of the Parliament's Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act. —[Michael Russell.]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

There are seven questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-3029, in the name of Alasdair Morgan, on the Scottish Parliamentary Pensions Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the Scottish Parliamentary Pensions Bill be passed.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3257.2, in the name of John Park, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3257, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the Scottish Government's response to the annual report of the Scottish Council of Economic Advisers, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is that amendment S3M-3257.1, in the name of Derek Brownlee, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3257, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the Scottish Government's response to the annual report of the Scottish Council of Economic Advisers, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 98, Against 18, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3257.3, in the name of Alison McInnes, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3257, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the Scottish Government's response to the annual report of the Scottish Council of Economic Advisers, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 15, Against 48, Abstentions 52.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-3257, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the Scottish Government's response to the annual report of the Scottish Council of Economic Advisers, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 98, Against 2, Abstentions 16.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament notes the recommendations made in the First Annual Report of the Scottish Council of Economic Advisers: December 2008 and the Scottish Government's response to those recommendations in the context of its action to help businesses and households, support jobs and investment and ensure Scotland is well positioned to take advantage of any recovery; calls on the Scottish Government to establish a formal link between the Council of Economic Advisers and the National Economic Forum to ensure that the work of the two bodies is coordinated to be of maximum benefit to the Scottish people, and in particular notes the commitment to an independent assessment of the full economic costs and abatement potential of the various energy options, including nuclear power, which are open to Scotland.

The next question is, that motion S3M-3163, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill.

The final question is, that motion S3M-2814, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution to the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any expenditure of a kind referred to in paragraph 3(b)(iii) of Rule 9.12 of the Parliament's Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.

Let us find out.

Indeed, you will not.

James Kelly has a constituency question.

I am sure that members will wish to join me in welcoming a number of speakers and parliamentary presidents to the gallery today. They are Mr John O'Donoghue, Ceann Comhairle of the Dáil Éireann; Stephen Rodan, Speaker of the House of Keys, Isle of Man; Mr Inge Lønning, President of the Norwegian Lagting; Stephen Peters, Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of Ontario; and Michael Polley, Speaker of the House of Assembly of the Parliament of Tasmania. Gentlemen, you are all extremely welcome. [ Applause. ]

Order.

I am sorry, Mr Purvis—we have to move on. I warned all members that there was no extra time available.  Amendment S3M-3257.3 moved:  "insert at end 'notes the Council of Economic Advisers' recommendation that the Scottish Government "raises the overall level of infrastructure spending within Scotland", and believes that the Elgin bypass should be included in the Scottish Government's transport infrastructure investment plans.'"—[ Jeremy Purvis. ]

Thank you—and I thank all members for keeping their speeches brief, which has given us a few extra minutes for the next debate, which is heavily subscribed.

Our next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-3257, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the Scottish Government's response to the annual report of the Scottish Council of Economic Advisers. This debate is oversubscribed, so I ask all members to stick strictly to their time allocations. I call Fiona Hyslop. Cabinet secretary, you have 11 minutes.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-3029, in the name of Alasdair Morgan, on the Scottish Parliamentary Pensions Bill.

We come to decision time. There are five questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-3250.4, in the name of Sarah Boyack, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3250, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the common agricultural policy health check, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3250.1, in the name of John Scott, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3250, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the common agricultural policy health check, as amended, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3250.3, in the name of Liam McArthur, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3250, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the common agricultural policy health check, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 53, Against 2, Abstentions 62.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3250.2, in the name of Robin Harper, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3250, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the common agricultural policy health check, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 3, Against 76, Abstentions 37.  Amendment disagreed to.

The final question is, that motion S3M-3250, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the common agricultural policy health check, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament, noting the recent agreement in the Council of Ministers on the European Commission's legislative proposals for the Health Check of the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), acknowledges the Scottish Government's commitment to work with stakeholders on how key aspects of the proposals should be implemented in Scotland and on the longer-term implementation of CAP in Scotland and believes that future decisions must reflect the distinctiveness of agriculture in Scotland and support a dynamic and competitive industry with farmers playing their full part in achieving the Scottish Government's purpose of sustainable economic growth through food production and the environmental management of our agricultural land, combined with the delivery of other economic and social public goods; calls on the Scottish Government to work constructively with UK ministers to ensure that the United Kingdom's negotiating strategy delivers the right framework for rural Scotland, including support for farming and crofting in fragile rural areas, to ensure that new policy mechanisms are in place to maintain habitat programmes, following the loss of set-aside provisions, and to continue a bull hire scheme; considers that greater levels of food production and increased self-sufficiency are becoming increasingly important; therefore encourages policy makers to work towards future support being linked to the active farming of land; notes with concern evidence of serious difficulties experienced by farmers and crofters in accessing monies under the Scotland Rural Development Programme (SRDP); recognises the Scottish Government's commitment to review the Rural Priorities scheme, and calls on the Scottish Government to ensure that the review is sufficiently wide-ranging to cover all aspects of the structure of the SRDP as well as the application process for payments to resolve urgently the problems with the operation and implementation of the programme.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3254, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 28 January 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Budget (Scotland) (No.2) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 29 January 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Gaelic Language Plan followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 4 February 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 5 February 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning; Europe, External Affairs and Culture  2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The minister will now take questions on the issues raised in his statement. I intend to allow about 20 minutes for such questions, after which we must move on to the next item of business. I cannot take time out of the next debate, as it is already oversubscribed.

We come to open questions. Time is limited, so there should be one question per member and one answer per question.

There should not have been a second question anyway, minister.

Please be as brief as possible, minister.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-3250, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the common agricultural policy health check. While people are changing places, I remind members that the Presiding Officers are no longer giving one-minute warnings as members approach the end of their speeches. We have no free time at all in the debate, which is already oversubscribed, so I must ask members to conclude within the time that is allocated to them.

When I led the parliamentary delegation to the United States of America and Canada during Scotland week last year, we received an incredibly warm welcome in Ontario. The recent Commonwealth Parliamentary Association delegation was similarly treated. It is therefore an even greater pleasure than usual to introduce our time for reflection leader, who is the hon Steve Peters, the speaker of the Legislative Assembly of Ontario.

The next item of business is a statement by Stewart Maxwell on mortgage to shared equity, mortgage to rent. The minister will take questions at the end of his statement. As always, there should therefore be no interventions or interruptions.

There are seven questions to be put as a result of today's business. Members should be aware that if amendment S3M-3214.3, in the name of Des McNulty, on the Forth crossing, is agreed to, amendment S3M-3214.4, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, will fall. The first question is, that amendment S3M-3162.1, in the name of Ross Finnie, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3162, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Health Boards (Membership and Elections) (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-3162, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Health Boards (Membership and Elections) (Scotland) Bill, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Health Boards (Membership and Elections) (Scotland) Bill but, in so doing, noting the terms of the Health and Sport Committee's Stage 1 report, calls on the Scottish Government to bring forward, ahead of Stage 3, firm proposals for the piloting of a variety of alternative schemes to improve public participation and shares the committee's view that such agreement to the general principles should not be taken to pre-empt any decision that the Parliament may later be asked to take on the rolling out of direct elections to health boards nationwide.

The next question is, that motion S3M-2937, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution to the Health Boards (Membership and Elections) (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Health Boards (Membership and Elections) (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any expenditure of a kind referred to in paragraph 3(b)(iii) of Rule 9.12 of the Parliament's Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3214.3, in the name of Des McNulty, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3214, in the name of John Swinney, on the Forth crossing, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 43, Against 64, Abstentions 16.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3214.1, in the name of Derek Brownlee, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3214, in the name of John Swinney, on the Forth crossing, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3214.4, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3214, in the name of John Swinney, on the Forth crossing, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 57, Against 66, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The final question is, that motion S3M-3214, in the name of John Swinney, on the Forth crossing, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 121, Against 2, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament notes the Scottish Government's choice of conventional capital funding for construction of the Forth Replacement Crossing and welcomes the fact that Scotland's biggest infrastructure project for a generation will be delivered without the need for tolls, and calls on the Scottish and UK governments to work together to ensure that the new crossing is delivered at the earliest possible opportunity.

That concludes the debate. Jeremy Purvis has a point of order.

I will not deny that, but it will be for the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee—I reiterate, in its procedural role—to determine what it wants to consider. However, I do not rule that out. It will be up to the committee.

We are into speech territory, minister.

I ask you to bring your answer to a close as soon as possible, please.

Order, Mr Rumbles.

Question, please, Mr Whitton.

If the cabinet secretary could answer those three questions in 20 seconds, I would be very grateful.

That concludes themed question time.

It is for Mr Gray to ask the questions. If I recall rightly, he asked about tourism.

Order.

Order.

Before I suspend the meeting, I will make a brief statement to the chamber. I have said on numerous occasions that the Presiding Officer never has been, is not and  cannot be responsible for the veracity of what is said in the chamber. That said, I note that such points of order are on the increase, which indicates to me a growing sense of frustration among members. I strongly believe that Parliament is, ultimately, ill served by that type of exchange. I also believe that all members must play their part in ensuring that we have the highest standards of probity, scrutiny and accountability. I have, therefore, today written to the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee asking it to launch an inquiry into the wider issue of the veracity of members' responses and how that is best policed.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-2937, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution in respect of the Health Boards (Membership and Elections) (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Health Boards (Membership and Elections) (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any expenditure of a kind referred to in paragraph 3(b)(iii) of Rule 9.12 of the Parliament's Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.—[ Nicola Sturgeon. ]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

Order. Perhaps I may be so bold as to suggest that the minister is verging on a speech.

I ask Christine Grahame to speak on behalf of the Health and Sport Committee. You have around seven minutes.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-3162, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Health Boards (Membership and Elections) (Scotland) Bill. I remind members that the Presiding Officers will no longer give a warning when a member has one minute remaining to speak. However, we have a little flexibility this morning to allow members to take interventions. We will monitor the situation as the debate goes on.

There is one question to be put as a result of today's business. The question is, that motion S3M-3161, in the name of John Swinney, on the Budget (Scotland) (No 2) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 107, Against 16, Abstentions 1.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Budget (Scotland) (No.2) Bill.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3212, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 21 January 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Mortgage to Shared Equity - Mortgage to Rent followed by Scottish Government Debate: Common Agricultural Policy Health Check followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 22 January 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Scottish Parliamentary Pensions Bill followed by Scottish Government Debate: Scottish Government's Response to the Scottish Council of Economic Advisers' Annual Report 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and Law Officers 2.55 pm Stage 1 Debate: Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution: Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 28 January 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Budget (Scotland) (No.2) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions  5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 29 January 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3210, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for consideration of the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill at stage 1.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 8 May 2009.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

Order. One debate at a time, please.

Before we move to the next item of business, I understand that Fergus Ewing wishes to raise a point of order.

I am grateful to the minister. I understand that Tavish Scott would also like to make a point of order.

I have not responded to the last one yet, Mr Baker. Members are aware that the content of ministers' responses to questions are matters for the ministerial code. As such, it is for ministers to respond to any complaint that is made under the ministerial code; it is not a matter for me.

Thank you for your point of order, Mr Baker. I am not of the opinion that there has been a breach of the standing orders in this matter. As for taking the matter to the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee, that is for you to pursue, not me, and you are free to do so.

Is this essential, Mr Stephen? If so, I will take your point of order, but we are eating seriously into the time for the budget debate.

Thank you. "as has been ruled from the chair on many occasions in the past, matters that are covered in the Scottish ministerial code are not for me. That includes the principle that ministers should give accurate and truthful information to the Parliament."— [ Official Report , 11 February 2004; c 56903.]  Those are not my words; they are the words of my predecessor, George Reid. Perfectly legitimate points have been made this afternoon; it is up to ministers to determine how they respond to them. If members wish to take the matter further through the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee, they are welcome to do so. I suggest that we move on to this afternoon's debate—

It is the duty of all members to ensure probity in the proceedings of this Parliament. I will reflect on these points of order later this afternoon and, if there is anything further to say, I will say it at decision time. I now seriously suggest that we move to the business in hand.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-3161, in the name of John Swinney, on the Budget (Scotland) (No 2) Bill. I remind members that the Presiding Officers no longer give a one-minute warning. We are now seriously short of time for the debate, so I ask all members who are called to speak to stick strictly to the amount of time given to them. In the event of their running over time, they will be cut off.

Good afternoon. As always on a Wednesday afternoon, the first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader is Sister Patricia McKenna of St John's in Barrhead.

There are nine questions to be put as a result of today's business. Members should be aware—please pay attention—that if amendment S3M-3174.1, in the name of Richard Baker, on protecting Scotland's communities—the Scottish Government's offender management plan, is agreed to, the other two amendments to motion S3M-3174 will fall. Members should also note that if amendment S3M-3174.2, in the name of Bill Aitken, is agreed to, amendment S3M-3174.3, in the name of Robert Brown, will fall. The first question is, that amendment S3M-3173.1, in the name of John Park, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3173, in the name of Jim Mather, on homecoming and its potential to support sustainable economic growth, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 55, Against 62, Abstentions 3.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3173.2, in the name of Gavin Brown, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3173, in the name of Jim Mather, on homecoming and its potential to support sustainable economic growth, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3173.4, in the name of Iain Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3173, in the name of Jim Mather, on homecoming and its potential to support sustainable economic growth, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-3173, in the name of Jim Mather, on homecoming and its potential to support sustainable economic growth, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament supports Scotland's first ever homecoming celebration; recognises that the spectacular calendar of events and activities taking place this year from the weekend around Burns Night to St Andrew's Day will make for a unique year for all those joining the celebrations, including the people living in Scotland, the diaspora Scots and those with an affinity for Scotland who visit in 2009, and further recognises the potential for Homecoming Scotland 2009 to boost international and domestic tourism in support of the Scottish economy at this time; recognises that ensuring a lasting economic legacy will depend on capturing information on those who visit during the Year of Homecoming with a view to creating a substantial marketing database for engaging with the diaspora Scots going forward; further recognises that individual tourism providers will be the engines of economic growth generated as a result of the Homecoming, and urges the Scottish Government to ensure that the industry be fully engaged throughout and calls on the Scottish Government to bring forward details of its plans to promote Homecoming in Scotland, the United Kingdom and abroad in order to achieve maximum economic benefit from the celebrations.

The next question is, that motion S3M-3179, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the humanitarian disaster in Gaza be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament expresses its concern over the loss of all lives in the conflict in Gaza; joins the international community in calling for a ceasefire; acknowledges the unfolding humanitarian disaster in Gaza; recognises and welcomes the role being played by those in Scotland involved in the humanitarian response, and supports the work of all charities and NGOs in Scotland that are responding to this situation.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3174.1, in the name of Richard Baker, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3174, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on protecting Scotland's communities—the Scottish Government offender management plan, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 41, Against 79, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3174.2, in the name of Bill Aitken, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3174, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on protecting Scotland's communities—the Scottish Government offender management plan, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 56, Against 63, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-3174.3, in the name of Robert Brown, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3174, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on protecting Scotland's communities—the Scottish Government offender management plan, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 62, Against 56, Abstentions 1.  Amendment agreed to.

The final question is, that motion S3M-3174, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on protecting Scottish communities—the Scottish Government offender management plan, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 62, Against 57, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament welcomes the publication on 17 December 2008 of Protecting Scotland's Communities: Fair, Fast and Flexible Justice , which sets out the Scottish Government's strategy to deliver a coherent offender management strategy built on a robust regime of community penalties and payback and proportionate management of offenders sentenced to prison; recognises that community sentences that are completed speedily and enforced with rigour offer greater benefits to communities and individuals than short prison sentences and that their planned expansion must be adequately resourced; calls on the Scottish Government to incorporate in its offender management strategy effective action to tackle the underlying causes of crime and factors and circumstances known to have a link with offending behaviour; reaffirms the importance of judicial independence free from executive direction, and looks forward to constructive engagement with the Scottish Government on the detailed implementation of the programme.

I thank the member for notice of her point of order, which is always helpful. I have genuinely thought about the matter carefully. My view is that Jackson Carlaw was simply expressing his point of view in the debate, so no discourtesy occurred.

That is not a matter for me as Presiding Officer to pursue.

Order. If the matter is to be pursued, that should be done between you and the First Minister. The matter is not for me.

You might have misheard me, Ms MacDonald. I did not say that anyone had been discourteous in today's debate.

What is your point of order?

This is not an issue of telling the truth to the Parliament, Lord Foulkes.

I do not think so, and I would prefer not to be questioned from the floor of the chamber. If members wish to speak to me, they can do so in other ways. I refer the member to the good practice on announcements by the Scottish Executive, which sets out several methods by which the Government can make an announcement to Parliament, one of which is by answering a parliamentary question. I believe that that happened in the instance that we are discussing. If members wish to pursue the matter, they should do so with the First Minister. We have said enough on the issue.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is themed question time, and the first set of questions is on Europe, external affairs and culture. Question 1 was not lodged.

Before I call the minister, I must remind members that they are meant to stick exactly to the question that they lodge. Dr McKee, your original question refers to  "European Union counterparts and what business will be discussed". I suspect that, on this occasion, the difference is not that big.

Mr Macintosh, you know that that is not a point of order. Ministers alone are responsible for the content of their replies.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Order. When I ask for order, I expect to get it. Sorry, First Minister.

As the member well knows, that is not a point of order for me. However, it is now on the record.

We are very grateful for that.

I am sorry, Ms Curran. I said that I would have to move on after four minutes.

I am afraid that I must move on. I am sorry, Mr Gibson.

We come now to the open debate. I ask for speeches of a tight four minutes.

Thank you, Mr Macdonald. I am sorry that there was a technical fault with the clock, but you were dead on time.

The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-3173, in the name of Jim Mather, on homecoming and its potential to support sustainable economic growth. I remind all members that Presiding Officers will no longer give a one-minute warning before the end of members' speeches. We are tight for time, so I ask members to stick strictly to the allocated time, or I will move on to the next speaker.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-3164.3, in the name of Rhona Brankin, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3164, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on national qualifications, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 42, Against 63, Abstentions 16.  Amendment disagreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-3164.1, in the name of Elizabeth Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3164, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on national qualifications, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The third question is, that amendment S3M-3164.2, in the name of Margaret Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3164, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on national qualifications, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The final question is, that motion S3M-3164, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on national qualifications, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament recognises the importance of developing the next generation of national qualifications in Scotland in line with the aims, vision and values of the Curriculum for Excellence, with its emphasis on equipping all young people to respond to the demands of the 21st century through developing their capacities as successful learners, confident individuals, responsible citizens and effective contributors; further recognises the funding, resourcing and training implications of such a move; acknowledges the challenges and opportunities in taking forward the findings of the national consultation exercise and the key role to be played by local authorities, schools, colleges, universities and others in ensuring that we develop a system that meets the expectations of society, in which robust and credible assessment supports good learning and teaching and all young people have the opportunity to acquire the skills, knowledge and experience that they require to take their places in a modern society and economy, and, in particular, recognises the need to ensure that pupils in Scotland are properly schooled and tested in the basic skills of literacy and numeracy by the end of primary 7 and also to ensure that the qualifications structure better reflects the specific needs of all pupils, whether they wish to pursue courses that are more academically focused or more vocationally focused.

Could we have a little less background noise, please, so that we can hear the minister?

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3177, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme for tomorrow. The motion appears in the revised section A of today's Business Bulletin , copies of which are available at the back of the chamber.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 8 January 2009— after Thursday 8 January 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions delete followed by Scottish Government Debate: Protecting Scotland's Communities - the Scottish Government's Offender Management Plan 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Europe, External Affairs and Culture; Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Homecoming and its Potential to Support Sustainable Economic Growth followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business and insert followed by Scottish Government Debate: Homecoming and its Potential to Support Sustainable Economic Growth followed by Scottish Government Debate: The Humanitarian Disaster in Gaza 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Europe, External Affairs and Culture; Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Protecting Scotland's Communities - the Scottish Government's Offender Management Plan followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

Tomorrow's business will be altered accordingly. As previously stated, copies of the revised business programme are available at the back of the chamber. The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3169, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 14 January 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 1 Debate: Budget (Scotland) (No.2) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 15 January 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 1 Debate: Health Boards (Membership and Elections) (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution: Health Boards (Membership and Elections) (Scotland) Bill 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Forth Crossing followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 21 January 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 22 January 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Scottish Parliamentary Pensions Bill followed by Scottish Government Business  11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and Law Officers 2.55 pm Stage 1 Debate: Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution: Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3170, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 1 of the Sexual Offences (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Sexual Offences (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be extended to 13 February 2009.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

You must close now, please.

You must close now, please, Ms Brankin.

I am sorry; I am afraid that I must move on. I warned members that their speeches had to be on time.  Amendment S3M-3164.3 moved:  "insert at end '; is therefore concerned at the continued lack of clarity over the implementation of the Curriculum for Excellence (CfE) within the new examinable framework; highlights the need for parents, teachers and other stakeholders to be involved to a far greater extent in developing the CfE and for teaching staff in particular to be given the time and investment needed to develop materials for it; believes that literacy and numeracy are central to the development of the CfE; believes that it is unacceptable that fewer than half of primary 7 pupils are well established in reading; calls on the Scottish Government to establish an assessment regime for basic literacy in primary schools, linked to individual programmes for pupils who have failed to attain adequate literacy skills, with the expectation that all pupils should leave primary school functionally literate, and calls for a greater show of leadership and direction from the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning.'" —[Rhona Brankin.]

Briefly, please.

As I should have done before, I invite members who wish to speak in the debate to press their request-to-speak buttons, if they have not done so already.

I take this opportunity to welcome you back and to wish you all a happy new year. I would like to say that it is good to be back. It is, it is. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection, for which our leader is the Rev Sam Torrens, of the Barclay Church of Scotland in Edinburgh.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-3164, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on national qualifications. I remind members that as of today, the Presiding Officers will no longer give a one-minute warning before the end of each speech, so members are responsible for completing their speeches within the time available.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-3125.1.1, in the name of Bill Aitken, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-3125.1, in the name of Richard Baker, on drink driving, be agreed to? Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 99, Against 15, Abstentions 2.  Amendment agreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-3125.1, in the name of Richard Baker, as amended, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3125, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on drink driving, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 55, Against 61, Abstentions 0.  Amendment, as amended, disagreed to.

The third question is, that motion S3M-3125, in the name of Kenny  MacAskill, on drink driving, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 66, Against 1, Abstentions 49.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament expresses concern that one in nine road deaths in Scotland is related to drink driving; calls on the UK Government to reduce the 80 mg limit, which was set over 40 years ago, to a 50 mg limit in line with much of Europe; wishes Scotland's police forces success with their campaign over the festive season, and sincerely hopes that no one has their Christmas and New Year destroyed by those who choose to ignore the anti-drink-driving message.

The fourth question is, that amendment S3M-3124.1, in the name of Dr Richard Simpson, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3124, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on organ donation, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 48, Against 64, Abstentions 4.  Amendment disagreed to.

The final question is, that motion S3M-3124, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on organ donation, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament accepts the recommendations in the second report from the UK Organ Donation Taskforce and notes in particular that the move to a system of opt out should be reviewed again in five years' time in light of the progress with implementation of the recommendations in the taskforce's first report, which are designed to remove existing barriers to donation, and that, in light of the growing shortage of organs for transplantation, Scotland should, within the existing legislative framework, take all possible steps to almost double its number of organ donors, as our contribution to the challenge of increasing organ donation rates across the United Kingdom from the present level of 13 donors per million population to 24 donors per million population by 2013.

Before I conclude, I wish each and every one of you a very happy Christmas and a good new year. I now close this meeting of Parliament.  Meeting closed at 17:04.

Despite that valiant effort, I am afraid that I must suspend the meeting for 28 seconds.

A question, please.

Quickly, please—a question.

Order.

Order. The First Minister will get plenty of time to answer—Mr Gray is allowed to ask a question.

Order.

That concludes questions to the First Minister. I suspend this meeting until 2.15. [ Interruption. ] Of course, I completely overlooked the fact that we are going on to members' business, so I ask members leaving the chamber to do so quietly.

Question 6 was not lodged.

Order. There is an awful lot of background noise—too much, if I may say so.

I call Robert Brown to open on behalf of the Scottish Liberal Democrats. [ Interruption. ] I have been misinformed. I call Mr Finnie to open on behalf of the Liberal Democrats.

I remind members that they must address all remarks through the Presiding Officer and should not refer to other members directly.

Good morning. The first item of business this morning is a debate on motion S3M-3125, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on drink driving. I invite all members who wish to speak in the debate to press their request-to-speak buttons. Any members who do not wish to speak in the debate would also be welcome to press their request-to-speak buttons, as we have a lot of time available for the debate. I am happy to give every member at least a minute extra if they want to take it. I call Mr MacAskill to speak to and move the motion in his name. Mr MacAskill, you have quite a bit of time.

We have two questions as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-3100, in the name of Andrew Welsh, on behalf of the Finance Committee, on the Scottish Government's draft budget 2009-10, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament notes the 7th Report 2008 (Session 3) of the Finance Committee on the Scottish Government's Draft Budget 2009-10 (SP Paper 179), and refers the report and its recommendations to the Scottish Government for consideration.

The second question is, that motion S3M-3120, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the designation of a lead committee, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the Local Government and Communities Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Scottish Government National Planning Framework for Scotland 2 (Proposed Framework).

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motion S3M-3120, on the designation of a lead committee.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Local Government and Communities Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Scottish Government National Planning Framework for Scotland 2 (Proposed Framework).—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3117, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on the suspension of standing orders.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that Rule 5.6.1(c) of Standing Orders be suspended for the purposes of Members' Business on Thursday 18 December 2008.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3118, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to the business programme for Thursday 18 December.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 18 December 2008— after 5.00 pm Decision Time delete followed by Members' Business and after 12 noon First Minister's Question Time insert followed by Members' Business.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3119, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 7 January 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: National Qualifications followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 8 January 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Protecting Scotland's Communities - the Scottish Government's Offender Management Plan 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Europe, External Affairs and the Environment; Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Homecoming and its Potential to Support Sustainable Economic Growth followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 14 January 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 1 Debate: Budget (Scotland) (No. 2) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 15 January 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is the Very Rev Patrick Keegans, formerly the parish priest of Holy Trinity church in Lockerbie.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-3100, in the name of Andrew Welsh, on behalf of the Finance Committee, on the Scottish Government's draft budget 2009-10. I call Andrew Welsh, the convener of the committee, to speak to and move the motion.

There are six questions to be put as a result of today's business. In relation to the debate on the ScotRail franchise, if the amendment in the name of Stewart Stevenson is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Alex Johnstone will fall. The first question is, that amendment S3M-3075.3, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3075, in the name of Des McNulty, on the ScotRail franchise, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 47, Against 76, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-3075.1, in the name of Alex Johnstone, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3075, in the name of Des McNulty, on the ScotRail franchise, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 63, Against 61, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The third question is, that amendment S3M-3075.2, in the name of Alison McInnes, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3075, in the name of Des McNulty, on the ScotRail franchise, be agreed to. Are we agreed?  Amendment agreed to.

The fourth question is, that motion S3M-3075, in the name of Des McNulty, on the ScotRail franchise, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 63, Against 58, Abstentions 3.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament notes the Audit Scotland report on the extension of First ScotRail's contract to 2014; notes from the report that the original contract, negotiated by the previous Labour-led Scottish administration, "did not specify the conditions under which an extension should be considered or the criteria to be used to decide whether an extension might be appropriate"; believes that practice and procedures for future contract management can be improved and notes the report's recommendations for Transport Scotland; considers that, in light of the finding that "First ScotRail was performing above its punctuality and capacity improvements targets within its first year of operating" and "key aspects of the original franchise contract were no longer fit for purpose", the decision to extend the contract, inserted into the original contract under the previous Labour-led Scottish administration, was on balance justifiable; requires the Scottish Government to conduct the next steps of the franchise extension process with the greatest possible transparency, and therefore calls on the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change to bring before Parliament the draft proposals on how the £73.1 million accrued through the franchise extension will be reinvested to allow close scrutiny of the plans before any further funds are committed.

The fifth question is, that amendment S3M-3078.1, in the name of Adam Ingram, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3078, in the name of Rhona Brankin, on kinship care, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 49, Against 59, Abstentions 16.  Amendment disagreed to.

The final question is, that motion S3M-3078, in the name of Rhona Brankin, on kinship care, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 58, Against 49, Abstentions 17.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament notes the commitment given by the First Minister on 27 September 2007 to provide allowances for kinship carers and ensure that funding would be brought forward to ensure that all kinship carers of looked-after children in Scotland were paid the recommended allowance for foster carers; further notes the commitment contained in the Scottish Government's strategy, Getting it right for every child in kinship and foster care, to introduce a minimum national allowance of between £119 and £198 per week for kinship carers and the comments of the Minister for Children and Early Years in the subsequent debate on 5 December 2007 that he anticipated that payment of this allowance would begin in April 2008; is concerned that this  has not materialised and that the vast majority of kinship carers are not in receipt of an allowance consistent with the promises made by both the Minister for Children and Early Years and the First Minister, and therefore calls on the Scottish Government to honour in full its pledge to Scotland's kinship carers and to properly recognise the vital role that kinship carers play in looking after some of Scotland's most vulnerable children.

Before we come to question 2, I repeat what I said at First Minister's question time this morning, which is that the supplementary questions on the matter that is about to be discussed should relate purely to the efficiency of the organisation that is involved.

Mr Rumbles.

Question, please.

Question 3 has been withdrawn.

Question 8 has been withdrawn.

I have to come in at this point, Lord Foulkes. I am afraid that that is not a point of order. Ministers alone are responsible for the content of their answers.

I am not aware that any member went against my ruling on sub judice—if that answers your point of order.

That was better.

Order. That is enough, thank you.

Order.

That is enough advertising, Mr Scott.

I remind all members that I do not encourage the use of nicknames in the chamber. I will take one constituency question from Malcolm Chisholm.

As there is considerable interest in the question, I remind members that it is about the effectiveness of the organisations. I ask them not to impinge on disciplinary matters in the board of the SPSA, which are sub judice.

The member will be aware that that is not a point of order. However, the member whom he mentions might want to consider what he said. By raising a point of order, his view is now on the record.

Order.

Very briefly, Mr Brown.

That is not a point of order. However, I point out that, in the brief time that I have been in the chair, I have noticed sedentary comments coming from all parts of the chamber, not just one.

We now come to open debate. We have a little flexibility, so if members are minded to accept interventions, I will be able to add on time for that luxury.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-3075, in the name of Des McNulty, on the ScotRail franchise.

We now come to decision time. There are five questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-2987, in the name of Gil Paterson, on behalf of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee, on elections to the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament notes the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee's 1st Report, 2008 (Session 3), Elections to the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body (SP Paper 47), and agrees that the changes to Standing Orders set out in Annexe A to the report be made with effect from 11 December 2008.

The next question is, that motion S3M-2988, in the name of Gil Paterson, also on behalf of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee, on the Audit Committee's title and remit, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament notes the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee's 8th Report, 2008 (Session 3), Audit Committee - Title and Remit (SP Paper 151), and agrees that the changes to Standing Orders set out in Annexe A to the report be made with effect from 11 December 2008.

The next question is, that motion S3M-3071, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the designation of a lead committee, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee be designated as the lead committee, and that the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee be designated as secondary committee, in consideration of the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1.

The next question is, that motion S3M-3070, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Protection of Charities Assets (Exemption) and the Charity Test (Specified Bodies) (Scotland) Amendment Order 2008 be approved.

The next question is, that motion S3M-3072, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of an SSI, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Fundable Bodies (Scotland) Order 2008 be approved.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-3071, on the designation of a lead committee.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee be designated as the lead committee, and that the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee be designated as secondary committee, in consideration of the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time. The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motions S3M-3070 and S3M-3072, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Protection of Charities Assets (Exemption) and the Charity Test (Specified Bodies) (Scotland) Amendment Order 2008 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Fundable Bodies (Scotland) Order 2008 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The questions on those motions will also be put at decision time. Before we come to decision time, I am sure that the chamber will wish to welcome the Speaker, or President, of the Assembly of Macedonia and the Macedonian ambassador to the United Kingdom, who have joined us in the Presiding Officer's gallery. [ Applause. ]

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-3077, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 17 December 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Finance Committee Debate: Budget Process 2009-10 followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 18 December 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Drink Driving 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Organ Donation Taskforce followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 7 January 2009 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 8 January 2009 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Europe, External Affairs and the Environment; Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed b y Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

Order.

Some members were clearly not present when I said that there should be no interruptions during the minister's statement. That includes applause and sedentary interventions.

As agreed by the Parliamentary Bureau, we now move straight to the debate on the strategic transport projects review. I call Des McNulty, who will be followed by Alex Johnstone. Mr McNulty, you have nine minutes.

That is not a point of order for me, Mr Neil.

Please take your seat, Mr Neil. Mr McNulty you have nine minutes.

Indeed, decisions on both motions will be taken at decision time.

We come slightly earlier than expected to the next item of business, which is a statement by Stewart Stevenson on the strategic transport projects review. The statement will be followed by a subject debate on the matter, so there should be no interventions or interruptions during the 25-minute statement.

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

We move on to a debate on motion S3M-2988, in the name of Gil Paterson, on behalf of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee, on its eighth report in 2008, "Audit Committee—Title and Remit". I invite Gil Paterson to speak to and move the motion. This time, you have up to six minutes, Mr Paterson.

Good afternoon. As always, the first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Iain Gordon, from the Bethany Christian Trust.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-2987, in the name of Gil Paterson, on the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee's first report in 2008, "Elections to the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body". I call Gil Paterson to speak to and move the motion. Mr Paterson, you have three minutes.

There are six questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-3013.1, in the name of Iain Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3013, in the name of Ted Brocklebank, on broadcasting, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 74, Against 1, Abstentions 49.  Amendment agreed to.

The second question is, that motion S3M-3013, in the name of Ted Brocklebank, on broadcasting, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 75, Against 0, Abstentions 49.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament notes that 4 December 2008 is the final date for submissions to Ofcom's Public Service Broadcasting (PSB) Review, Preparing for the Digital Future; recognises that, while broadcasting is reserved, there is a need for a healthy, competitive Scottish-based television programme-making sector outwith the BBC, notwithstanding that organisation's historic, respected and pivotal role in Scottish broadcasting; recognises the role of STV as the only remaining Scottish-based commercial PSB provider; prefers Ofcom's enhanced evolution option with a commercial TV channel continuing to provide PSB for Scotland as part of a wider UK network; recognises that STV's survival as a PSB provider is at risk in the current economic climate, particularly since ITV is now advocating a single UK-wide brand, and calls on Ofcom to explore all options to ensure that there is PSB competition for BBC Scotland in the nation's rapidly changing broadcasting landscape; further believes that all Scottish residents should have access to the full range of broadcasting following digital switchover, and calls on Ofcom to ensure that all relay transmitters are capable of transmitting the full spectrum of free-to-view broadcasting and that the 7th Mux is enabled in Scotland.

The third question is, that amendment S3M-3014.2.1, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-3014.2, in the name of John Swinney, on local government finance, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 61, Against 64, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The fourth question is, that amendment S3M-3014.2, in the name of John Swinney, which seeks to amend motion S3M-3014, in the name of Derek Brownlee, on local government finance, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 60, Against 65, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The fifth question is, that motion S3M-3014, in the name of Derek Brownlee, on local government finance, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 65, Against 60, Abstentions 0.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament notes the intention of the Scottish Government to introduce legislation to reform the system of local government taxation and calls on it to ensure that the scope of the Bill when introduced is sufficiently wide as to enable members to debate and vote on all options, including reform of the council tax, a land value tax, a local income tax with variable rates determined locally and the Scottish Government's own proposals.

The sixth question is, that motion S3M-3011, in the name of Stewart Maxwell, on forced marriages, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament recognises the right of every person to choose whom to marry without fear of physical, emotional or psychological abuse; recognises that forced marriage is a violation of internationally recognised human rights and a form of violence against women and has no place in Scotland; makes a clear distinction between arranged marriages to which both parties have freely consented, and which are an established and accepted practice, and forced marriage; welcomes the Scottish Government's consultation that asks whether forced marriage civil legislation is required and provides an opportunity to consider what more can be done to help those affected in Scotland and to ensure our communities are safer, stronger and fairer places for all; acknowledges the work of the Forced Marriage Network in tackling this issue, and supports continued efforts to assist those affected, raise awareness of the impact of forced marriage and to end this terrible practice.

Question 6 has been withdrawn.

That was almost a speech.

You just made it, Dr Simpson.

Question 12 has been withdrawn.

The next item of business is a statement by Adam Ingram on a report into child protection services in Aberdeen. The minister will take questions at the end of his 10-minute statement; therefore, there should be no interruptions or interventions during it.

Thank you for the point of order. As you are aware, Mr Rumbles, you raised the issue at the bureau meeting on Tuesday. The matter is under consideration and the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body and the bureau will be informed of the outcome of those deliberations in due course.

That is not a point of order, but it will be in the Official Report .

I can save you the trouble of writing, Ms MacDonald. As I have said, the matter is under consideration.

I hear what the former First Minister says and will reflect on his point at the appropriate time.

Order.

I will take a constituency question from Pauline McNeill.

If I may say, I do not think that that question is relevant to question 1.

Question 5 has been withdrawn.

Before we move to First Minister's question time, I am delighted to welcome Tanzania's high commissioner to the United Kingdom and Quebec's agent-general in  London, who have joined us in the Presiding Officer's gallery. They are most welcome. [ Applause. ]

You may, but I cannot give you extra time, Mr Macintosh.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-3013, in the name of Ted Brocklebank, on broadcasting.

There are nine questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-2966.3, in the name of Sarah Boyack, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2966, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on sea fisheries, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 68, Against 0, Abstentions 47.  Amendment agreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-2966.1, in the name of John Scott, which also seeks to amend motion S3M-2966, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on sea fisheries, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The third question is, that amendment S3M-2966.2, in the name of Liam McArthur, which also seeks to amend motion S3M-2966, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on sea fisheries, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 53, Against 61, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-2966, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on sea fisheries, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament supports Team UK and in particular the positive approach taken by the new UK Fisheries Minister and the work of the Scottish Government in seeking to negotiate a deal that is fair and just for Scotland's fishing communities, and which will secure sustainable fisheries for Scotland; commends the Scottish Fishermen's Federation's recent environmental statement and for the leadership and innovation being shown by Scotland's fishermen, demonstrating the way forward for the rest of Europe; notes with concern the European Commission's proposals for west coast stocks that, if implemented, could especially damage the viability of the west coast langoustine sector, and therefore calls on the Scottish Government to work towards a settlement that successfully balances the need to conserve depleted west coast whitefish stocks with a thriving langoustine fishery.

The fifth question is, that amendment S3M-2965.1, in the name of Ted Brocklebank, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2965, in the name of Linda Fabiani, on St Andrew's day, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-2965, in the name of Linda Fabiani, on St Andrew's day, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament believes in the importance of St Andrew's Day, Scotland's national day; recognises the opportunity that it presents for everyone in Scotland, and friends of Scotland around the world, to celebrate our history, culture and traditions as well as the vibrant, creative and dynamic nation that Scotland is today; notes the Scottish Government's support for a programme of events throughout Scotland as part of the Winter Festival; supports the opportunity that St Andrew's Day provides to prepare the way for the 2009 Year of Homecoming, which will give a much-needed boost to the Scottish tourism sector and to the economy generally, and welcomes the example set by the ancient burgh of St Andrews in organising its own programme of events for St Andrew's Day, which provides an appropriate focus for the nation's celebrations at this time of year.

The seventh question is, that amendment S3M-2958.2, in the name of Rhona Brankin, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2958, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the divisions is: For 38, Against 77, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-2958.1, in the name of Elizabeth Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2958, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of a SSI, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the divisions is: For 53, Against 62, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The final question is, that motion S3M-2958, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of an SSI, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 87, Against 28, Abstentions 0.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Provision of School Lunches (Disapplication of the Requirement to Charge) (Scotland) Order 2008 be approved.

Order.

I thank all members for the assiduous way in which they have ensured that we are not in danger of breaching the time that is available to us under the suspension of standing orders. So assiduous have they been that I must now suspend the meeting until 5 o'clock.

The minister must close.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-2958, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the draft Provision of School Lunches (Disapplication of the Requirement to Charge) (Scotland) Order 2008. Following Parliament's agreement yesterday to motion S3M-2961, standing orders will be suspended to allow members up to 30 minutes to debate motion S3M-2958. Members must ensure that their speeches are kept to the time that is allocated to them, as the debate must finish within 30 minutes. If they fail to do so, I will have no option but to cut off their microphones. I will give a one-minute warning, but members must finish on time. The suspension of standing orders will start at the moment the minister rises to move the motion.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Provision of School Lunches (Disapplication of the Requirement to Charge) (Scotland) Order 2008 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

Question 2 has been withdrawn.

Order.

Ms Brankin, I would like to hear the answer.

Question 9 was not lodged.

The member should ask a question, please.

Order.

Order.

Questions should be to the First Minister, not from him.

As Tavish Scott has been asked a question, I will give him a final supplementary.

Order.

Lord Foulkes, please be quiet.

I do not accept that the issue is a matter of courtesy; I think that it is a matter of procedure. As I intimated last week, I am considering the procedure, and I will continue to do so.

I think that there was a link, minister.

Good morning. The first item of business is a statement by Fiona Hyslop on a framework for science in Scotland. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of her statement and there should therefore be no interventions or interruptions.

The cabinet secretary will take questions on the issues raised in her statement. We have exactly 20 minutes available for those questions, after which we must move to the next item of business.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-2966, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on sea fisheries.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-2961, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on suspension of standing orders.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that, for the purpose of allowing up to 30 minutes to debate motion S3M-2958 on Thursday 27 November 2008, the second and third sentences of Rule 10.6.5 of Standing Orders be suspended.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-2691, in the name of Jackie Baillie, on the Disabled Persons' Parking Places (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Disabled Persons' Parking Places (Scotland) Bill.

The second question is, that motion S3M-2950, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution to the Disabled Persons' Parking Places (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Disabled Persons' Parking Places (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any increase in expenditure of a kind referred to in paragraph 3(b)(iii) of Rule 9.12 of the Parliament's Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.

The final question is, that motion S3M-2961, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on suspension of standing orders, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that, for the purpose of allowing up to 30 minutes to debate motion S3M-2958 on Thursday 27 November 2008, the second and third sentences of Rule 10.6.5 of Standing Orders be suspended.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-2950, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution to the Disabled Persons' Parking Places (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Disabled Persons' Parking Places (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any increase in expenditure of a kind referred to in paragraph 3(b)(iii) of Rule 9.12 of the Parliament's Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.—[ Stewart Stevenson. ]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-2960, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 3 December 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Scottish Government's Response to the Pre-Budget Report followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 4 December 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Ministerial Statement: Report into Child Protection Services in Aberdeen followed by Scottish Government Debate: Forced Marriages followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 10 December 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee Debate: 1st Report 2008: Elections to the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body followed by Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee Debate: 8th Report 2008: Audit Committee - Title and Remit followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion  followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 11 December 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Justice and Law Officers; Rural Affairs and the Environment 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-2959, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 2 of the Scottish Parliamentary Pensions Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Scottish Parliamentary Pensions Bill at Stage 2 be completed by 19 December 2008.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

You do not have much.

The cabinet secretary will now take questions on issues that were raised in his statement. I will allow around 30 minutes for such questions, after which we must move to the next item of business.

We come to open questions. You all know the guidance by now.

Good afternoon. As always, the first item of business is time for reflection, for which our leader is the Rev David Whiteman from Coylton parish church linked with Drongan the Schaw kirk.

The next item of business is a statement by John Swinney on the Scottish Government's response to the pre-budget report. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement and there should therefore be no interventions or interruptions.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-2912, in the name of Tom McCabe, on behalf of the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body, on the expenses scheme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament recognises that Members' staff salaries were last uprated in the financial year 2007-08 and in relation to the Resolution of the Parliament dated 12 June 2008 on the Expenses Scheme ("the Resolution")— (i) amends the Schedule of Rates annexed as Annex 2 to the Resolution with immediate effect by deleting "£54,620" where it appears in line 2 and by inserting "£56,650" and (ii) determines that all references to the Schedule of Rates and to the limit on entitlement to reimbursement of staff salary costs in paragraph (a) of the Resolution shall be read as references to the Schedule of Rates and limit on entitlement to reimbursement of staff salary costs as so amended.—[ Tom McCabe .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

There are eight questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-2922.1.1, in the name of Margaret Smith, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-2922.1, in the name of Rhona Brankin, on supporting Scotland's looked-after children, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-2922.1, in the name of Rhona Brankin, as amended, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2922, in the name of Adam Ingram, on supporting Scotland's looked-after children, be agreed to.  Amendment, as amended, agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-2922, in the name of Adam Ingram, on supporting Scotland's looked-after children, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament agrees that it is unacceptable that outcomes for looked-after children and young people and care leavers across a range of indicators fall so far behind those of their peers and agrees to do everything possible to end discrimination and stigmatisation of those who have experienced the care system and to challenge all services to offer the best possible childhoods to the children and young people in their care to ensure that looked-after children and young people and care leavers are able to grow up into successful, responsible and happy adults; in that spirit recognises that looked-after children are among those considered as most vulnerable and therefore believes that integral to their success is for the Scottish Government to ensure that local authority funding for the care and safety of children more generally is properly protected, particularly in light of the recent worrying HM Inspectorate of Education report into child protection services in Aberdeen, and therefore calls on the Scottish Government to make a statement on that report and to revisit the Children's Services Bill consulted on in the previous parliamentary session and to work with local authorities and other partner agencies to ensure that appropriate early intervention and support is available across Scotland and that child protection practices are kept under immediate and continuous review.

The next question, is that amendment S3M-2921.2, in the name of Elaine Murray, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2921, in the name of Michael Russell, on a fresh start for Scottish aquaculture, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-2921.1, in the name of John Scott, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2921, in  the name of Michael Russell, on a fresh start for Scottish aquaculture, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-2921.3, in the name of Jim Hume, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2921, in the name of Michael Russell, on a fresh start for Scottish aquaculture, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-2921, in the name of Michael Russell, on a fresh start for Scottish aquaculture, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament notes the recent consultation, Scottish Aquaculture: A Fresh Start; supports the continued development of an ambitious, sustainable, thriving and growing Scottish aquaculture industry; recognises the economic importance of the industry to Scotland as a whole and many coastal communities in particular; supports efforts to advance the enviable international reputation of quality Scottish aquaculture products, built on high environmental standards and excellent health status when compared to competitor nations; further supports efforts to advance the enviable international reputation of Scotland's wild salmon stocks and, in light of the potential damage to the health and integrity of wild stocks caused by escaped farmed fish, believes that a robust commitment to reducing escapes and improved traceability must be a central element of the new Strategic Framework; recognises the continued threat posed by Gyrodactylus salaris to farmed and wild salmon stocks alike and, in light of the economic and ecological damage that an outbreak could cause, considers that further serious consideration must be given to measures aimed at reducing the likelihood of the parasite entering Scotland; welcomes the engagement of the shellfish and finfish industries and other stakeholders in the development of the new Strategic Framework for Scottish Aquaculture, to be published in spring 2009; believes that the renewed strategy for Scottish aquaculture must be consistent with the provisions of the forthcoming Marine Bill and the EU Water Framework Directive; believes that Scotland can learn valuable lessons from its competitor nations with thriving aquaculture industries; further believes that Scottish aquaculture can maximise the opportunities presented by the current rapid expansion of the international industry to achieve genuinely sustainable growth, and therefore calls on the Scottish Government to take decisive action to streamline the regulatory burden, introduce a fair inspection regime, improve community and industry liaison, and encourage the development and retention of a skilled and qualified workforce in the aquaculture industry.

The final question is, that motion S3M-2912, in the name of Tom McCabe, on behalf of the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body, on the expenses scheme, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament recognises that Members' staff salaries were last uprated in the financial year 2007-08 and  in relation to the Resolution of the Parliament dated 12 June 2008 on the Expenses Scheme ("the Resolution")— (i) amends the Schedule of Rates annexed as Annex 2 to the Resolution with immediate effect by deleting "£54,620" where it appears in line 2 and by inserting "£56,650" and (ii) determines that all references to the Schedule of Rates and to the limit on entitlement to reimbursement of staff salary costs in paragraph (a) of the Resolution shall be read as references to the Schedule of Rates and limit on entitlement to reimbursement of staff salary costs as so amended.

Order. There is too much noise in the chamber during the winding up of a very interesting debate.

You should wind up now, Dr Murray.

Quite a period of time is available in the debate. If any member feels particularly loquacious, they may find that we are relaxed about their taking up some time. I do not propose to set a time limit for speeches, unless any member threatens to take up all the available time. I call Dr Elaine Murray. In theory, she has nine minutes, but we will be flexible with the time.

I remind members of our new-found, very amicable  agreement. I would be grateful if members could keep questions as short as possible—they should not ask multiple questions. Of course, we expect ministers to follow suit in their answers.

We have a little time in hand, so I will take a final question, which is from Richard Baker.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-2921, in the name of Michael Russell, on a fresh start for Scottish aquaculture.

Today, questions to the First Minister will be taken by the Deputy First Minister.

Order.

I am sorry, but I simply do not have time to take any constituency questions. I will wish to discuss—

Lord Foulkes, if you would be quiet, please, I might say something. I will wish to discuss with business managers over the next week how we can speed up these opening exchanges.

Come to a question, please.

Could you come to your question please?

Please come to your question, Ms Livingstone.

Before we move to First Minister's question time, I am delighted to say that Senõr Alberto Perdomo MP, Speaker of the chamber of representatives of the General Assembly of Uruguay, and His Excellency Ricardo Varela, the Uruguayan ambassador to the United Kingdom, have joined us in the Presiding Officer's gallery for First Minister's question time. Mr Speaker, Your Excellency, on behalf of the Scottish Parliament, I give you a warm welcome. [ Applause. ]

Minister, you should come to a close, please.

Quite soon, please, minister.

You have one minute left.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-2922, in the name of Adam Ingram, on supporting Scotland's looked-after children.

There are six questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-2906.2.1, in the name of Bill Aitken, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-2906.2, in the name of Robert Brown, on identity cards, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 68, Against 1, Abstentions 38.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-2906.2, in the name of Robert Brown, as amended, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2906, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on ID cards, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 68, Against 0, Abstentions 38.  Amendment, as amended, agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-2906, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on ID cards, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 69, Against 0, Abstentions 38.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament notes that the UK Government's proposals for an ID card scheme are presently estimated by it to cost the public purse around £5 billion and considers that the scheme as proposed will not increase security, nor deter crime, and will have serious implications for the civil liberties of ordinary citizens; recognises that the UK Government has repeatedly shown itself to be incapable of keeping personal data securely and therefore cannot be trusted with what would be the most powerful, most expensive and most intrusive database in the world; further recognises the large-scale public and political opposition to the imposition of the ID card scheme; believes that the money for ID cards could more usefully be spent elsewhere, such as on improving border security or policing, and therefore calls on the UK Government to heed public opinion and cancel this wasteful government folly.

The next question is, that motion S3M-2917, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the office of the clerk, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the Office of the Clerk be closed on 29, 30 and 31 December 2008.

The next question is, that motion S3M-2918, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Housing (Scotland) Act 2006 (Scheme of Assistance) Regulations 2008 be approved.

The final question is, that motion S3M-2919, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of an SSI, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Pre-release Access to Official Statistics (Scotland) Order 2008 be approved.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-2917, on the office of the clerk.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Office of the Clerk be closed on 29, 30 and 31 December 2008.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-2918 and S3M-2919, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Housing (Scotland) Act 2006 (Scheme of Assistance) Regulations 2008 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Pre-release Access to Official Statistics (Scotland) Order 2008 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The questions on the motions will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-2914, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 20 November 2008— after 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: A Fresh Start for Scottish Aquaculture insert  followed by Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body Motion: Expenses Scheme—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-2928, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. I draw members' attention to the fact that they should make sure that have the correct motion in front of them. Business motion S3M-2928, which was issued this afternoon, replaces business motion S3M-2915, which appeared in this morning's Business Bulletin , but which has been withdrawn. Copies of the motion are available at the back of the chamber, but it was e-mailed to members earlier.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees— (a) the following programme of business— Wednesday 26 November 2008 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Scottish Government's Response to the Pre-budget Report followed by Stage 1 Debate: Disabled Persons' Parking Places (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution: Disabled Persons' Parking Places (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 27 November 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions  followed by Ministerial Statement: A Framework for Science in Scotland followed by Scottish Government Debate: Sea Fisheries 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning; Europe, External Affairs and Culture 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: St Andrew's Day followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 3 December 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 4 December 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business (b) that the period for members to submit their names for selection for Question Times on 8 January 2009 ends at 12 noon on Tuesday 16 December 2008; (c) that the deadline for lodging questions for Question Times on 8 January 2009 shall be 12 noon on Tuesday 23 December 2008; (d) that the period for members to submit their names for selection for Question Times on 15 January 2009 ends at 12 noon on Thursday 18 December 2008.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-2916, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 2 of the Damages (Asbestos-related Conditions) (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Damages (Asbestos-related Conditions) (Scotland) Bill at Stage 2 be completed by 5 December 2008.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

Could you wind up now, please, minister?

Could you come to a conclusion now, minister?

The cabinet secretary will now take questions on the issues that were raised in her statement, for which we have about 30 minutes. I call Mary Mulligan. [ Interruption. ] I beg your pardon—I was not correctly informed. I call Cathy Jamieson, to be followed by Mary Scanlon.

We come to open questions. We are fairly tight for time and I have no time available to take out of the next debate, so if members are short and sharp, we will manage to get everybody in.

Short and sharp, Mr Neil, please.

Short and sharp, please, Mr Neil.

A question, please, Mr Hume.

That concludes questions on the cabinet secretary's statement on fuel poverty.

As Mr Neil well knows, it is entirely for the Presiding Officer to determine how a debate will be conducted. The front-bench questioners stuck within the time limits that were given to them. I remind the member that time is taken up by answers as well as by questions, but I will consider the point that he has raised before the next occasion on which a ministerial statement is made.

I will take your point away and reflect on it, Mr Purvis.

It is every bit as appropriate for that to happen as for somebody to come in half way through the statement and ask a question on it.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-2906, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on identity cards.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Pete Chirnside of Tearfund Scotland.

The next item of business is a statement by Nicola Sturgeon on fuel poverty. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of her statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions.

There are 15 questions to be put as a result of today's business. I should inform members, in relation to the debate on the Scottish Futures Trust, that if the amendment in the name of Andy Kerr is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Derek Brownlee will fall. The first question is, that amendment S3M-2864.1, in the name of Patrick Harvie, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2864, in the name of Sarah Boyack, on energy efficiency, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 91, Against 15, Abstentions 14.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-2864, in the name of Sarah Boyack, on energy efficiency, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 90, Against 15, Abstentions 14.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament recognises the significant role that energy efficiency and microgeneration measures could have in reducing energy costs for householders and businesses, in achieving urgent reductions in greenhouse gas emissions of at least 80% by 2050 and contributing to the eradication of fuel poverty by 2016; notes that research carried out by the Energy Savings Trust suggests that widespread installation of microgeneration could provide 30 to 40% of our electricity needs by 2050 but that current investment in energy efficiency and microgeneration measures is insufficient to achieve these goals; calls on the Scottish Government to take steps, as set out in the Energy Efficiency and Microgeneration Bill proposals, such as fiscal incentives for householders and businesses, to ensure that microgeneration technologies become widely available and used and to consider other energy efficiency measures for new and existing housing stock to tackle fuel poverty, climate change and security of energy supply; notes the evidence given by Friends of the Earth Scotland to the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee suggesting that an additional £100 million per annum would be a welcome change to the draft budget for 2009-10, and calls on the Scottish Government to consider a comprehensive and fully funded Scotland-wide scheme on this scale to provide energy audits, insulation provision and financial support for micro-renewables where appropriate.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-2863.1, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2863, in the name of Cathy Jamieson, on health funding, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 64, Against 42, Abstentions 14.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-2863, in the name of Cathy Jamieson, on health funding, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 65, Against 41, Abstentions 14.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament notes that the Scottish Government's spending plans are set against the background of the 2007 spending review settlement from the UK Treasury that represents the lowest increase for Scotland since devolution; recognises that the NHS has received a fair share of the financial settlement and that the Scottish Government is increasing spending on health in Scotland; further recognises that in this context it is right that the NHS should strive to make sure that resources are spent as efficiently as possible; commends the NHS's record in achieving efficiency savings linked to good quality care; welcomes the Scottish Government's decision to continue the practice whereby all efficiency savings generated by the NHS will be retained by the NHS for local reinvestment in frontline services, and condemns the Labour Party, which instituted efficiency savings while in government but has irresponsibly attacked them in opposition.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-2862.3, in the name of Andy Kerr, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2862, in the name of John Swinney, on the Scottish Futures Trust, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 56, Against 64, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-2862.1, in the name of Derek Brownlee, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2862, in the name of John Swinney, on the Scottish Futures Trust, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 64, Against 56, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-2862.2, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2862, in the name of John Swinney, on the Scottish Futures Trust, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division. I think that members will have got the hang of this by now.

The result of the division is: For 56, Against 64, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-2862, in the name of John Swinney, on the Scottish Futures Trust, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 64, Against 56, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament agrees that modern infrastructure is essential to economic well-being and excellent public services in Scotland; notes actions to invest in public infrastructure set out in the Scottish Government's £35 billion Infrastructure Investment Plan; notes efforts to promote collaboration among public authorities and agencies in planning and developing capital projects to maximise value for money; believes that identifying and managing risk effectively through the capital project life cycle and providing a range of approaches to structuring and financing infrastructure investment are important objectives to be pursued; notes the steps being taken by the Scottish Government to develop the non-profit distributing model for capital schemes to achieve an appropriate balance of risk and reward; believes that the establishment of the Scottish Futures Trust, with its role of maximising value for money by facilitating and encouraging effective and efficient investment in public infrastructure schemes, is in the public interest, and calls on the Scottish  Government to ensure that the Scottish Futures Trust makes a full contribution to these objectives.

The next question is, that motion S3M-2843, in the name of John Swinney, on the Energy Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the UK Energy Bill in Part 2 (Electricity from Renewable Sources - the Renewables Obligation), introduced in the House of Commons on 10 January 2008 and that the relevant amendments to Part 5 (Miscellaneous Provisions - Renewable Heat Incentives), tabled by Her Majesty's Government on 29 October 2008, should, insofar as they relate to matters within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament or alter the executive competence of the Scottish Ministers, be considered by the UK Parliament.

The next question is, that motion S3M-2870, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on the establishment of a committee, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees to establish a committee of the Parliament as follows— Name of Committee: Review of SPCB-supported Bodies; Remit: To consider and report on whether alterations should be made to the terms and conditions of the office-holders and the structure of the bodies supported by the SPCB; to consider how any proposals for future arrangements should be taken forward, including by way of a Committee Bill, and to make recommendations accordingly; Duration: Until the Parliament has concluded consideration of the committee's report; Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish Labour Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party; Membership: Jackson Carlaw, Ross Finnie, Joe FitzPatrick, Trish Godman, Jamie Hepburn, Johann Lamont.

The next question is, that motion S3M-2871, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on the establishment of a committee, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees— (a) to establish a committee of the Parliament as follows— Name of Committee: Scottish Parliamentary Pensions Bill Committee; Remit: To consider the Scottish Parliamentary Pensions Bill at Stage 2; Duration: Until the Bill is passed, or falls or is otherwise no longer in progress; Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the  Scottish National Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish Labour Party; Membership: Bill Aitken, Keith Brown, Nicol Stephen, David Stewart; and (b) that "4" be substituted for "5" in Rule 6.3.2 of Standing Orders for the purpose of the membership of the committee.

The next question is, that motion S3M-2879, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on committee membership, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that— Keith Brown be appointed to replace Gil Paterson as a member of the European and External Relations Committee; Gil Paterson be appointed to replace Keith Brown and Aileen Campbell be appointed to replace Christina McKelvie as members of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee; Bob Doris be appointed to replace Gil Paterson as a member of the Subordinate Legislation Committee.

The next question is, that motion S3M-2880, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on committee membership, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that— Nanette Milne be appointed to replace Jamie McGrigor as a member of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee.

The next question is, that motion S3M-2881, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on substitution on committees, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that— Gil Paterson be appointed to replace Keith Brown as the Scottish National Party substitute on the European and External Relations Committee; Christina McKelvie be appointed to replace Bob Doris as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Public Petitions Committee.

The final question is, that motion S3M-2882, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on substitution on committees, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that— Jamie McGrigor be appointed to replace John Scott as the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party substitute on the Public Petitions Committee.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-2843, in the name of John Swinney, on the Energy Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the UK Energy Bill in Part 2 (Electricity from Renewable Sources - the Renewables Obligation), introduced in the House of Commons on 10 January 2008 and that the relevant amendments to Part 5 (Miscellaneous Provisions - Renewable Heat Incentives), tabled by Her Majesty's Government on 29 October 2008, should, insofar as they relate to matters within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament or alter the executive competence of the Scottish Ministers, be considered by the UK Parliament.—[ Jim Mather .]

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-2870, on the establishment of the Review of SPCB-supported Bodies Committee; motion S3M-2871, on the establishment of the Scottish Parliamentary Pensions Bill Committee; and motions S3M-2879 to S3M-2882 inclusive, on committee membership and substitution on committees Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees to establish a committee of the Parliament as follows— Name of Committee: Review of SPCB-supported Bodies; Remit: To consider and report on whether alterations should be made to the terms and conditions of the office-holders and the structure of the bodies supported by the SPCB; to consider how any proposals for future arrangements should be taken forward, including by way of a Committee Bill, and to make recommendations accordingly; Duration: Until the Parliament has concluded consideration of the committee's report; Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish Labour Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party; Membership: Jackson Carlaw, Ross Finnie, Joe FitzPatrick, Trish Godman, Jamie Hepburn, Johann Lamont. That the Parliament agrees— (a) to establish a committee of the Parliament as follows— Name of Committee: Scottish Parliamentary Pensions Bill Committee; Remit: To consider the Scottish Parliamentary Pensions Bill at Stage 2; Duration: Until the Bill is passed, or falls or is otherwise no longer in progress; Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish Labour Party; Membership: Bill Aitken, Keith Brown, Nicol Stephen, David Stewart; and (b) that "4" be substituted for "5" in Rule 6.3.2 of Standing Orders for the purpose of the membership of the committee. That the Parliament agrees that— Keith Brown be appointed to replace Gil Paterson as a member of the European and External Relations Committee; Gil Paterson be appointed to replace Keith Brown and Aileen Campbell be appointed to replace Christina McKelvie as members of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee; Bob Doris be appointed to replace Gil Paterson as a member of the Subordinate Legislation Committee. That the Parliament agrees that— Nanette Milne be appointed to replace Jamie McGrigor as a member of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee. That the Parliament agrees that— Gil Paterson be appointed to replace Keith Brown as the Scottish National Party substitute on the European and External Relations Committee; Christina McKelvie be appointed to replace Bob Doris as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Public Petitions Committee. That the Parliament agrees that— Jamie McGrigor be appointed to replace John Scott as the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party substitute on the Public Petitions Committee.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

Order. There is far too much noise in the chamber.

Order. I am sorry, Mr Whitton. Members should know by now that I do not encourage sedentary conversations between members while another member is speaking. I hope they will stick to that.

There is no spare time available in the debate, so the Presiding Officers  will be rigorous in ensuring that members stick within the times that are available to them.

I thank Mr Purvis for warning me of that point of order which—I am glad to say—really was a point of order. I have had no communication from Government ministers on this issue. However, under standing orders, any member may put a question to the Scottish Government that relates to any matter for which ministers have general responsibility. Rules of admissibility are applied to each question on a case-by-case basis.

It is not for me to secure information from the Government, but questions will be analysed and assessed case by case. That should allow all members to scrutinise these matters. We now move to the debate, for which time will be tight. The debate is on motion S3M-2862, in the name of John Swinney, on the Scottish Futures Trust.

I remind members that all contributions should be made through the chair, rather than directly to other members.

Briefly, please.

Briefly, please, Mr Brown.

While ministers are changing seats, I remind any members who have not been in the chamber during the past couple of weeks that, as their business managers will have told them, questions are expected to be short,  succinct and to the point, and answers should follow suit.

Order.

Order.

Order.

We started late, so I will take a brief supplementary from Ian McKee.

Question 4 has not been lodged.

Order. There is too much noise in the chamber.

Not from a sedentary position, please, ministers.

I am sorry to interrupt, but could members please check that their electronic equipment is turned off, because we are getting interference? The problem has been solved—thank you.

After Marilyn Livingstone, we will come to closing speeches.

I remind members that the accepted chamber protocol is that they do not call each other by their Christian names, even if they co-convene a very worth while cross-party group.

Good morning. This morning is given over to Labour Party business. The first debate is on motion S3M-2864, in the name of Sarah Boyack, on energy efficiency.

There are six questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-2594, in the name of Alasdair Morgan, on the Scottish Parliamentary Pensions Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Scottish Parliamentary Pensions Bill.

The second question is, that motion S3M-2837, in the name of John Swinney, on the Scottish Parliamentary Pensions Bill financial resolution, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Scottish Parliamentary Pensions Bill, agrees to any expenditure charged on the Scottish Consolidated Fund in consequence of the Act.

The third question is, that amendment S3M-2853.4, in the name of John Park, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2853, in the name of John Swinney, on the Scottish economy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 40, Against 75, Abstentions 3.  Amendment disagreed to.

The fourth question is, that amendment S3M-2853.1, in the name of Derek Brownlee, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2853, in the name of John Swinney, on the Scottish economy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 63, Against 53, Abstentions 2.  Amendment agreed to.

The fifth question is, that amendment S3M-2853.3, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2853, in the name of John Swinney, on the Scottish economy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 13, Against 105, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The final question is, that motion S3M-2853, in the name of John Swinney, on the Scottish economy, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 62, Against 53, Abstentions 3.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament notes the impact of the global economic slowdown on families, individuals and businesses across Scotland; notes the actions already taken by the Scottish Government but believes that the current recession is in part attributable to the mismanagement of the UK economy by the present UK Government and the era of irresponsibility over which it has presided, evidenced by the record levels of government borrowing, regulatory failure and the taxation of pension schemes, which has discouraged saving and investment, and welcomes the measures approved by this Parliament, such as business rates relief and the council tax freeze, which will help businesses and households to maximise jobs and investment and provide a basis for Scotland to take early and speedy advantage of any recovery.

The next item of business is consideration of one Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-2860, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 19 November 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Fuel Poverty followed by Scottish Government Debate: ID Cards followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 20 November 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Supporting Scotland's Looked-after Children 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: A Fresh Start for Scottish Aquaculture followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 26 November 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 1 Debate: Disabled Persons' Parking Places (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution: Disabled Persons' Parking Places (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 27 November 2008  9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning, Europe, External Affairs and Culture 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

I think that the minister has made it clear that he will not be taking an intervention.

Order. There is too much background noise.

You must close, please, minister.

Close please, minister.

Mr Park, you have one minute left.

The member is not taking an intervention, Mrs MacDonald.

The member is in his last minute.

Order.

The question has almost been answered, but the First Minister may make a brief comment.

I remind members who were not in the chamber for questions last week of the instructions that they should have received from their business managers. Questions should be sharply focused and should take the form of a question, rather than a statement or speech. I expect ministers to respond accordingly.

I am indeed left wondering what that had to do with the question.

That remark is off the subject, minister.

I remind the minister of what I said at the beginning of question time: I expect answers to stick strictly to the subject matter of the question.

I am not sure how that relates to the question. [ Laughter. ] I would prefer your answer to relate to the question, minister.

I hope that it is a point of order, Lord Foulkes.

That is not a point of order.

Thank you for that sedentary intervention, in which I declare an interest.

Good morning. The first item of business is a statement by John Swinney on scrutiny improvement—changes to structures.

The cabinet secretary will take questions on issues that were raised in his statement. Around 30 minutes are available for such questions. Not a huge number of members want to ask questions, so there is a little—I repeat: a little—flexibility in times. I call Andy Kerr to ask the first question.

I am grateful to members for endeavouring to take up the full 30 minutes that was available. We have not quite made it, but we move to the next item of business. I will allow a wee while for members to change seats.

The next item of business is a debate on patients' rights.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-2797, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution in respect of the Damages (Asbestos-related Conditions) (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Damages (Asbestos-related Conditions) (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any expenditure of a kind referred to in Rule 9.12.3(b)(ii) of the Parliament's Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.—[ Fergus Ewing. ]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-2820, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 12 November 2008 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 1 Debate: Scottish Parliamentary Pensions Bill followed by Financial Resolution: Scottish Parliamentary Pensions Bill followed by Scottish Government Debate: Scottish Economy followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 13 November 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and Law Officers 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Scottish Futures Trust followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Energy Bill - UK Legislation followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 19 November 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 20 November 2008  9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of one Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-2821, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft International Criminal Court (Remand Time) Order 2008 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is that amendment S3M-2796.1, in the name of Jackson Carlaw, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2796, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the Damages (Asbestos-related Conditions) (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-2796, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the Damages (Asbestos-related Conditions) (Scotland) Bill, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved.  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Damages (Asbestos-related Conditions) (Scotland) Bill but, in so doing, notes the terms of the Justice Committee's Stage 1 report, in particular the concerns expressed with regard to the Financial Memorandum, and calls on the Scottish Government to provide the Parliament with a more detailed analysis of the likely cost implications, from such information as is available to or can be obtained by the Scottish Government, prior to the Bill being considered at Stage 3.

The next question is, that motion S3M-2797, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution in respect of the Damages (Asbestos-related Conditions) (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-2821, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.

As members will realise, 10 minutes is a fairly elastic description of the time that is available to speakers in the debate. I call Richard Baker, who also has an elastic 10 minutes.

I said at the beginning of the debate that we have a little time in hand, so I am happy to offer at least the next three speakers up to 10 minutes each. I invite Bill Aitken to speak on behalf of the Justice Committee and remind him that he has up to 10 minutes.

I call Jackson Carlaw to speak to and move amendment S3M-2796.1. Mr Carlaw, you have up to 11 minutes.

Amazingly, no member has asked to speak against the motion. [ Laughter. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-2796, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the Damages (Asbestos-related Conditions) (Scotland) Bill. I invite all members who wish to speak to press their request-to-speak buttons. We had quite a lot of time available for the debate; now we just have a bit of time available. [ Laughter. ]

Good afternoon. As always on a Wednesday, the first item of business is time for reflection. Our leader for time for reflection today is the Reverend Donald Scott, who is chaplain of Her Majesty's Young Offenders Institution Polmont.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-2819, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme. I call Bruce Crawford to move the motion.

There are eight questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-2780.1, in the name of John Swinney, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2780, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, on a helping hand with the rising cost of living, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 64, Against 40, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The second question is, that motion S3M-2780, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, on a helping hand with the rising cost of living, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 65, Against 38, Abstentions 1.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament notes with grave concern the rise in the cost of living and the impact of the credit crunch on families, individuals and small businesses in Scotland; agrees that the Scottish Government should use all of the levers at its disposal to give practical help; calls on the Liberal Democrats to set out in detail the £800 million of cuts to public services that they would make to fund their proposal on income tax and believes that until these cuts are identified and are open to scrutiny the Liberal Democrats and their proposal have no credibility, and further believes that, as part of the forthcoming budget process, the Liberal Democrats should bring forward detailed proposals of where they believe cuts should be made.

The third question is, that amendment S3M-2779.1, in the name of Derek Brownlee, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2779, in the name of Tavish Scott, on the importance of HBOS to the Scottish economy and jobs, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 16, Against 87, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The fourth question is, that amendment S3M-2779.2, in the name of Patrick Harvie, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2779, in the name of Tavish Scott, on the importance of HBOS to the Scottish economy and jobs, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 3, Against 100, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The fifth question is, that motion S3M-2779, in the name of Tavish Scott, on the importance of HBOS to the Scottish economy and jobs, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 61, Against 40, Abstentions 2.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament gives a general welcome to the measures taken by the UK and other governments to tackle the current banking crisis; considers, however, that the recapitalisation plans announced by HM Treasury in October 2008 have fundamentally changed the landscape under which competition rules were waived to enable a merger between Lloyds TSB and Halifax Bank of Scotland (HBOS); further considers that inconsistent statements have come from the UK Treasury about whether or not the banks would independently have access to the recapitalisation funds; believes that this ambiguity is not serving anyone's interests in the present environment; further believes that losing HBOS corporate headquarters and jobs in Edinburgh would seriously jeopardise the city's position as a financial centre; sees no reason why HBOS should not be able to access UK Treasury recapitalisation and, therefore, liquidity funding on the same independent basis as other major banks, and, with this in mind, considers it a very real possibility that an independent HBOS solution could be found that may well be in the best interests of shareholders, employees, customers and the Scottish economy at large.

The sixth question is, that amendment S3M-2777.2, in the name of Elaine Murray, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2777, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on non-native invasive species, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The seventh question is, that amendment S3M-2777.1, in the name of Jim Hume, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2777, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on non-native invasive species, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The final question is, that motion S3M-2777, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on non-native invasive species, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament welcomes the Invasive Non-Native Species Framework Strategy for Great Britain; notes that this is one of the first comprehensive strategies on invasive non-native species to be developed in Europe; further welcomes the Scottish Government's commitment to work in partnership with governments and organisations across these islands to implement the strategy; acknowledges that continued efforts are required by all partners to progress the key actions of the strategy; asks the Scottish Government to review existing legislation and report back to the Parliament on whether it considers that current legislation requires to be strengthened to ensure that the issue of non-native species is addressed more effectively; recognises that prevention and early intervention are vital in protecting native species, habitats and ecosystems, and therefore calls on the Scottish Government to work with local organisations with a remit for the protection of Scotland's natural environment to find ways to expedite the timeous implementation of measures at a local level and to report back to the Parliament with the findings.

We move to members' business. If members who are leaving the chamber do so quietly, that will be a miracle.

Order. One moment, minister. Far too many conversations that have nothing at all to do with the debate are taking place in the chamber.

I agree. I have already asked for quiet in the chamber. I should not have to ask for it twice.

The cabinet secretary will take questions on the issues that have been raised in her statement. We have around 20 minutes for such questions.

We come now to open questions, which should follow the guidance that I gave earlier, as should the answers.

I have raised the manner in which I expect questions to be asked with all business managers, who I hope will have discussed the issue with members. In the interests of fairness to all members, and to allow for as many questions as possible to be asked, members should keep their questions brief and in the form of a question, rather than a statement. In addition, I do not expect multiple questions to be asked. Although I have no desire to do so, if necessary and should members fail to adhere to that advice, I may be forced to stop questioners. I also expect ministers to respond accordingly.

A splendid example, Dr McKee.

Equally perfect.

Question 5 was not lodged.

For the benefit of members who have entered the chamber since question time resumed, I repeat that, as they will know from their business managers, I expect questions to be kept brief and to be in the form of a question rather than a statement. I also expect ministers to respond accordingly. As that has given ministers the time necessary to take their seats, we can move to question 1.

Hugh O'Donnell.

Question 6 has been withdrawn.

Order.

The next item of business is a statement by Fiona Hyslop on the teacher employment working group report. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of her statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions during it.

In the understandable absence of Iain Gray today, question 1 will be asked by Johann Lamont.

I do not believe that the First Minister has responsibility for what Cardinal O'Brien has said. I give the First Minister the opportunity not to respond to that if he so chooses.

I should caution you, Mr Scott, that your further questions should be on a subject for which the First Minister has direct responsibility.

I will take a constituency question from Dr Elaine Murray.

We have another constituency question, from Angela Constance.

Come to a question, please.

I raised with all business managers before and following the recess the issue of the manner in which I expect questions to be asked, and the business managers should have informed their members of that. In the interests of fairness to all members, and in order to allow for as many questions as possible to be asked, I repeat that I expect members to keep their questions brief and in the form of a question, rather than a statement. In addition, I do not expect multiple questions to be asked. Although I have no desire to do this, should members fail to adhere to that guidance, I may be forced to stop the questioner. I also expect ministers to respond accordingly.

I am not sure whether there was a question, but the cabinet secretary might wish to comment.

Order. I have previously asked front benchers not to make sedentary interventions.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-2779, in the name of Tavish Scott, on the importance of HBOS to the Scottish economy and jobs.

I call David Whitton, who has up to five minutes.

We come to closing speeches. Due to a reduction in the number of speakers in the next debate, we have a little time in hand, so I can offer closing speakers an extra minute, should they choose to take it.

There is a bit of time in hand should you wish to take an intervention, Mr Brown.

It would be helpful if, when you continue, Ms Alexander, you could address the motion more directly.

That is for me to decide, Mr Brown. I have asked Ms Alexander to address the motion and, in the one minute of her speech that remains, I hope that she will do so.

Order. Mr Purvis, you have had your intervention.

Order. I am sorry to interrupt the cabinet secretary, but we cannot have conversations taking place among front benchers at the same time as we are having a debate. I ask members to desist.

Good morning. The first item of business this morning is a Liberal Democrat debate on motion S3M-2780, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, on a helping hand with the rising cost of living.

Order.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I invite Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-2783, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Mental Health (England and Wales Cross-border transfer: patients subject to requirements other than detention) (Scotland) Regulations 2008 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-2767.1, in the name of Michael McMahon, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2767, in the name of John Swinney, on the British-Irish Council, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 46, Against 65, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-2767, in the name of John Swinney, on the British-Irish Council, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 65, Against 30, Abstentions 16.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament acknowledges the successful summit meeting of the British-Irish Council at Hopetoun House; notes the outcomes of the summit in relation to demography, energy and the ongoing business of the Council; notes also that the Council gave consideration to the global economic situation; believes that the Council is an invaluable forum for strengthening intergovernmental relationships; supports the Scottish ministers' proposal to lead a workstream on renewable energy, and encourages them to continue to support the Council in addressing issues of real and common concern.

The final question is, that motion S3M-2783, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Mental Health (England and Wales Cross-border transfer: patients subject to requirements other than detention) (Scotland) Regulations 2008 be approved.

Yes, they are.

The question is, that motion S3M-2781, in the name of Bruce Crawford, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 65, Against 45, Abstentions 1.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 30 October 2008— after 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Europe, External Affairs and Culture; Education and Lifelong Learning delete 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Non-Native Invasive Species and insert 2.55 pm Ministerial Statement: Teacher Employment Working Group Report followed by Scottish Government Debate: Non-Native Invasive Species

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-2784, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 5 November 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 1 Debate: Damages (Asbestos-related Conditions) (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 6 November 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Scrutiny Improvement Changes to Structures followed by Scottish Government Debate: Patients' Rights 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 12 November 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 1 Debate: Scottish Parliamentary Pensions Bill followed by Financial Resolution: Scottish Parliamentary Pensions Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions  5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 13 November 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and Law Officers 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-2782, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a stage 1 timetable for the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 6 March 2009.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

I call on Bruce Crawford to respond on behalf of the Government.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-2781, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme for Thursday 30 October, which is tomorrow.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 30 October 2008— after 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Europe, External Affairs and Culture; Education and Lifelong Learning delete 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Non-Native Invasive Species and insert 2.55 pm Ministerial Statement: Teacher Employment Working Group Report followed by Scottish Government Debate: Non-Native Invasive Species—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

Mike Rumbles has indicated that he wishes to speak against the motion. Mr Rumbles, you have up to five minutes.

I call the cabinet secretary to wind up what has clearly been a wide-ranging debate.

Order. I am sorry to interrupt, Mr Macdonald, but I expect front-bench members, including ministers, to set an example by not making sedentary interventions.

Good afternoon and welcome back. As always, the first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is the Rev Iain MacDonald from Westray and Papa Westray in Orkney.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-2767, in the name of John Swinney, on the British-Irish Council.

There are two questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-2667, in the name of Duncan McNeil, on behalf of the Local Government and Communities Committee, on its report on the elections in 2007, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Local Government and Communities Committee's 8th Report, 2008 (Session 3): Elections 2007 (SP Paper 120).

The next question is, that motion S3M-2656, in the name of Jamie McGrigor, on the Scottish Register of Tartans Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the Scottish Register of Tartans Bill be passed.

I am delighted to say that the Scottish Register of Tartans Bill has been passed. [ Applause. ]

I am not sure that that really relates to Edinburgh's capital city status, but if the cabinet secretary would like to make a brief comment, I will allow it.

Question 9 has been withdrawn.

Please speak through the chair.

Ask a question, please.

Question 5 has been withdrawn.

We come to speeches in the open debate. Members have a tight 6 minutes.

Good morning. The first item of business this morning is a debate on motion S3M-2667, in the name of Duncan McNeil, on behalf of the Local Government and Communities Committee, on the committee's report on the elections in 2007. I warn members that time is very tight in this debate, so Presiding Officers will be enforcing time limits on members' contributions.

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motions. I invite Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-2682, on the designation of a lead committee, and motions S3M-2679 to S3M-2681 inclusive, on approval of Scottish statutory instruments.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Freedom of Information (Relaxation of Statutory Prohibitions on Disclosure of Information) (Scotland) Order 2008 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Scottish Commission for Human Rights (Specification) Order 2008 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Adults with Incapacity (Electronic Communications) (Scotland) Order 2008 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The questions on those motions will be put at decision time, to which we now come.

There are six questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-2671.3, in the name of Pauline McNeill, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2671, in the name of Linda Fabiani, on the Scottish Broadcasting Commission, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 68, Against 1, Abstentions 44.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-2671.1, in the name of Ted Brocklebank, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2671, in the name of Linda Fabiani, on the Scottish Broadcasting Commission, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 16, Against 60, Abstentions 37.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-2671.2, in the name of Iain Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2671,  in the name of Linda Fabiani, on the Scottish Broadcasting Commission, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-2671, in the name of Linda Fabiani, on the Scottish Broadcasting Commission, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament welcomes the Scottish Broadcasting Commission's final report and recognises the cross-party engagement that enabled the commission to carry out its work in a constructive and consensual fashion; notes that the report reflects the importance of broadcasting to the cultural and economic life of Scotland and accepts that the Parliament should take an active role in considering the broadcasting industry and services as they relate to Scotland; welcomes the key recommendation for the creation of a new public service Scottish digital network, which represents a major opportunity to develop Scotland's broadcasting industry; notes that the commission's recommendations require action by a range of parties; calls on the Scottish Government to respond positively to the report within its responsibilities; agrees with the commission that Scotland should not lose out on the obvious advantages of being part of the UK broadcasting framework, particularly in research and development of digital media platforms; believes that the Calman Commission should consider the role of the Parliament in playing an active role in scrutinising and promoting the broadcasting industry as it relates to Scotland, and notes with concern the proposals contained within Phase 2 of Ofcom's Second Public Service Broadcasting Review, which present a serious threat to the long-term viability of Scottish public service broadcasters, of Borders news programmes and of Scottish content programming and Gaelic language programmes on Channel 3.

The next question is, that motion S3M-2682, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on the designation of a lead committee, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1.

The final question is, that motions S3M-2679 to S3M-2681 inclusive, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments, be agreed to.  Motions agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Freedom of Information (Relaxation of Statutory Prohibitions on Disclosure of Information) (Scotland) Order 2008 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Scottish Commission for Human Rights (Specification) Order 2008 be approved.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Adults with Incapacity (Electronic Communications) (Scotland) Order 2008 be approved.

That concludes decision time. Members leaving the chamber should do so quietly.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-2678, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 29 October 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: British-Irish Council followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 30 October 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Liberal Democrats Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Europe, External Affairs and Culture; Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Non-Native Invasive Species followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 5 November 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 6 November 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing  2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-2677, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 1 of the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 23 January 2009.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

I am sorry to interrupt, minister, but I must ask that you refer to other members by their full names, not just their Christian names.

Order. Will members who are entering the chamber please recognise that a debate is going on? Thank you.

Too much detail, Mr Whitton.

We come to decision time. There are 11 questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-2631.2, in the name of John Swinney, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2631, in the name of Derek Brownlee, on local government finance, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 65, Against 38, Abstentions 16.  Amendment agreed to.

The second question is, that amendment 2631.1, in the name of Andy Kerr, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2631, in the name of Derek Brownlee, on local government finance, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The third question is, that motion S3M-2631, in the name of Derek Brownlee, on local government finance, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 68, Against 34, Abstentions 16.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament calls on the Scottish Government to publish in detail, prior to the introduction of a council tax abolition Bill, how it proposes to allocate to each local authority local income tax revenues and all other sources of funding, including revenue support grant and non-domestic rates income, together with indicative figures for each local authority for the first year of operation of local income tax, and how stability of funding is delivered to ensure that no local authority loses revenues directly because of the introduction of the new tax system in the event of the Bill being enacted, and believes the UK Government should agree that Council Tax Benefit money forms an integral part of local government finance and should be available to local government as part of decisions by the Scottish Parliament to reform local taxation in Scotland.

The fourth question is, that amendment S3M-2629.1, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2629, in the name of Murdo Fraser, on age limits on purchases of alcohol be agreed to. Are we agreed?

The result of the division is: For 48, Against 71, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The fifth question is, that motion S3M-2629, in the name of Murdo Fraser, on age limits on purchases of alcohol be agreed to. Are we agreed?

The result of the division is: For 72, Against 47, Abstentions 0.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament rejects the Scottish Government's proposals to raise the age limit for purchasing alcohol from off-licences and supermarkets from 18 to 21.

The sixth question is, that amendment S3M-2635.3, in the name of Sarah Boyack, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2635, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the Scudamore report into foot-and-mouth disease, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The seventh question is, that amendment S3M-2635.1, in the name of John Scott, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2635, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the Scudamore report into foot-and-mouth disease be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The eighth question is, that amendment S3M-2635.2, in the name of Liam McArthur, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2635, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the Scudamore report into foot-and-mouth disease be agreed to.

The result of the division is: For 64, Against 54, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The ninth question is, that motion S3M-2635, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the Scudamore report into foot-and-mouth disease, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

The result of the division is: For 64, Against 38, Abstentions 16.  Resolved,  That the Parliament supports the Scudamore report's conclusions on Scotland's handling of the 2007 foot and mouth disease outbreak, contained in Foot and Mouth Disease Review (Scotland) 2007, and welcomes the Scottish Government's commitment to take the recommendations forward, including consideration of any potential opportunities for regionalisation and other steps such as the role that local abattoirs might play and the unique circumstances of Scotland's islands; notes however the continuing difficulties experienced by the pig industry; calls on the Scottish Government to take urgent action to support the Scottish pig industry and to consider further action to minimise the potential future disruption to the Scottish livestock industry; notes the continued economic impact of the outbreak on Scotland's beef, sheep and pig farmers; calls on the Scottish Government to address proactively the continuing decline in livestock numbers across Scotland; believes that, although the devolution settlement has largely been a success for Scottish agriculture, the current position whereby Scotland decides on animal health policy but has no control over its funding is an anomaly of the Scotland Act 1998, which is detrimental to relationships between the two administrations, and calls on the Scottish Government to press the case for devolving a proportionate share of the  animal health budget currently held at Westminster to Scotland, while preserving the right to access the UK Treasury reserve fund.

The 10 th question is, that motion S3M-2648, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on committee membership, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that— Cathie Craigie be appointed to replace Charlie Gordon as a member of the Audit Committee; Wendy Alexander be appointed to replace David Whitton as a member of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee; Claire Baker be appointed to replace Mary Mulligan as a member of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee; Malcolm Chisholm be appointed to replace Richard Baker as a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee; Charlie Gordon be appointed to replace Malcolm Chisholm as a member of the European and External Relations Committee; David Whitton and Jackie Baillie be appointed to replace Elaine Murray and Tom McCabe as members of the Finance Committee; Jackie Baillie be appointed to replace Rhoda Grant as a member of the Health and Sport Committee; Mary Mulligan be appointed to replace Johann Lamont as a member of the Local Government and Communities Committee; Marlyn Glen and Bill Butler be appointed to replace Rhoda Grant and Claire Baker as members of the Public Petitions Committee; Elaine Murray be appointed to replace Des McNulty as a member of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee; Peter Peacock and Marilyn Livingstone be appointed to replace Cathie Craigie and Marlyn Glen as members of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee; Malcolm Chisholm and Tom McCabe be appointed to replace John Park and Jackie Baillie as members of the Subordinate Legislation Committee; Des McNulty be appointed to replace David Stewart as a member of the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee.

The 11 th question is, that motion S3M-2649, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on substitution on committees, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that— David Whitton be appointed to replace George Foulkes as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee; Cathy Peattie be appointed to replace Claire Baker as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee; Johann Lamont be appointed to replace John Park as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Equal Opportunities Committee; Ken Macintosh be appointed to replace Jackie Baillie as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the European and External Relations Committee; Lewis Macdonald be appointed to replace Peter Peacock as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Finance Committee; Frank McAveety be appointed to replace Irene Oldfather as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Health and Sport Committee; Richard Simpson be appointed to replace Marlyn Glen as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Justice Committee; Paul Martin be appointed to replace Rhoda Grant as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Local Government and Communities Committee; Claire Baker be appointed to replace Marilyn Livingstone as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Public Petitions Committee; Rhoda Grant be appointed to replace David Stewart as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee; Mary Mulligan be appointed to replace Trish Godman as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee; David Stewart be appointed to replace Richard Baker as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee.

As Ms MacDonald is fully aware, that is not a point of order. The matter is now on the public record. I hope that she is satisfied. I now close this meeting of Parliament. No—I do not; we move to the members' business debate.

As the member has been made aware, the matter does not fall under the standing orders. It is, therefore, not a matter for me. However, I am sure that the Government would wish to discuss the question of courtesy among ministers, so I advise the member that he might wish to pursue the matter under the ministerial code of conduct.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I invite Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-2648, on committee membership, and motion S3M-2649, on substitution on committees.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that— Cathie Craigie be appointed to replace Charlie Gordon as a member of the Audit Committee; Wendy Alexander be appointed to replace David Whitton as a member of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee; Claire Baker be appointed to replace Mary Mulligan as a member of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee; Malcolm Chisholm be appointed to replace Richard Baker as a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee; Charlie Gordon be appointed to replace Malcolm Chisholm as a member of the European and External Relations Committee; David Whitton and Jackie Baillie be appointed to replace Elaine Murray and Tom McCabe as members of the Finance Committee; Jackie Baillie be appointed to replace Rhoda Grant as a member of the Health and Sport Committee; Mary Mulligan be appointed to replace Johann Lamont as a member of the Local Government and Communities Committee; Marlyn Glen and Bill Butler be appointed to replace Rhoda Grant and Claire Baker as members of the Public Petitions Committee; Elaine Murray be appointed to replace Des McNulty as a member of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee; Peter Peacock and Marilyn Livingstone be appointed to replace Cathie Craigie and Marlyn Glen as members of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee; Malcolm Chisholm and Tom McCabe be appointed to replace John Park and Jackie Baillie as members of the Subordinate Legislation Committee; Des McNulty be appointed to replace David Stewart as a member of the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee. That the Parliament agrees that— David Whitton be appointed to replace George Foulkes as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee; Cathy Peattie be appointed to replace Claire Baker as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee; Johann Lamont be appointed to replace John Park as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Equal Opportunities Committee; Ken Macintosh be appointed to replace Jackie Baillie as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the European and External Relations Committee; Lewis Macdonald be appointed to replace Peter Peacock as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Finance Committee; Frank McAveety be appointed to replace Irene Oldfather as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Health and Sport Committee; Richard Simpson be appointed to replace Marlyn Glen as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Justice Committee; Paul Martin be appointed to replace Rhoda Grant as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Local Government and Communities Committee; Claire Baker be appointed to replace Marilyn Livingstone as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Public Petitions Committee; Rhoda Grant be appointed to replace David Stewart as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee; Mary Mulligan be appointed to replace Trish Godman as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee; David Stewart be appointed to replace Richard Baker as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The questions on the motions will be put at decision time.

Order. There is too much noise in the chamber. I am sorry about that, minister.

We have a little time in hand for the next debate, so I will take one more question.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-2635, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the Scudamore report into foot-and-mouth disease.

Order.

Order.

Question 1 has been withdrawn.

I ask the member to be brief.

Order.

I press the member for a question.

That has a slightly tenuous link with the original question, but carry on, cabinet secretary.

Briefly, please.

Order.

Just before I call Bob Doris, I ask that all members who wish to speak in the debate make sure that they have pressed their request-to-speak buttons.

Speeches should be of a tight four minutes in the open debate.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-2631, in the name of Derek Brownlee, on local government finance.

Order.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-2598, in the name of Frank McAveety, on the Public Petitions Committee's report on the availability on the national health service of cancer treatment drugs, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament notes the conclusions contained in the Public Petitions Committee's 3rd Report, 2008 (Session 3): Availability on the NHS of cancer treatment drugs (SP Paper 133).

The next question is, that motion S3M-2627, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Public Appointments and Public Bodies etc. (Scotland) Act 2003 (Amendment of Specified Authorities) Order 2008 be approved.

The next question is, that motion S3M-2628, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of an SSI, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Housing Grants (Assessment of Contributions) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2008 be approved.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-2626, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business motion.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees— (a) the following programme of business— Wednesday 8 October 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by First Minister's Statement: Scottish Broadcasting Commission followed by Scottish Government Debate: Scottish Broadcasting Commission followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 9 October 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Local Government and Communities Committee Debate: 8th Report 2008: Elections 2007 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Ministerial Statement: Strengthening Scotland's Secure Accommodation followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Scottish Register of Tartans Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 29 October 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 30 October 2008  9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Europe, External Affairs and Culture; Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business and (b) that the period for members to submit their names for selection for General and Themed Question Times on 30 October 2008 should end at 12.00 noon on Wednesday 8 October.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I invite Bruce Crawford to move motions S3M-2627 and S3M-2628, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Public Appointments and Public Bodies etc. (Scotland) Act 2003 (Amendment of Specified Authorities) Order 2008 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Housing Grants (Assessment of Contributions) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2008 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The questions on the motions will be put at decision time, to which we now come.

Order. I ask members who are coming into the chamber to be quiet, please. We are in the closing stages of a debate.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-2589.1, in the name of Frank McAveety, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2589, in the name of Margo MacDonald, on the legacy from lottery funding for community sport, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The second question is, that motion S3M-2589, in the name of Margo MacDonald, on the legacy from lottery funding for community sport, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  [Resolved,]  That the Parliament, in view of the reduction in lottery funding for the development of community sport in Scotland, supports calls for a substantial sum of National Lottery funding to be released as soon as possible, without prejudice to the outcome of ongoing consultations on aspects of the wider remits of lottery funding, thus ensuring both support for ongoing coaching programmes and a legacy from the 2014 Commonwealth Games in Glasgow that benefit the population of Glasgow and all of Scotland; believes that such funding is capable of enhancing the Glasgow games so that, in addition to supporting a spectacular event, the investment would lay the foundations for health and sporting improvements across the entire population of Scotland and also tackle poverty and deprivation, improve economic performance, protect the environment and historic heritage and support artistic endeavour, and notes the particular role of community and voluntary organisations in delivering this legacy.

The third question is, that motion S3M-2342, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Bill be passed.

Group 6 is on the Judicial Appointments Board, removal of members. Amendment 23, in the name of Bill Aitken, is the only amendment in the group.

The question is, that amendment 23 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 71, Against 46, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 23 agreed to.

Group 7 is on Scottish Court Service membership. Amendment 1, in the name of Pauline McNeill, is the only amendment in the group.

We move to the division on amendment 20.

The result of the division is: For 56, Against 62, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 20 disagreed to.  [Amendment 21 moved—[Bill Aitken].]

The question is, that amendment 21 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 56, Against 62, Abstentions 0.  Amendment 21 disagreed to.  [Amendment 22 not moved.]

Group 3 is on removal from shrieval office—procedure. Amendment 2, in the name of the minister, is the only amendment in the group.

Order. I am sorry, minister, but there are far too many conversations going on. Can we have a level of silence, please?

Group 4 is on the meaning of "judicial office holder". Amendment 3, in the name of the minister, is the only amendment in the group.

Group 5 is on boundaries, locations and justice of the peace court establishment and constitution. Amendment 4, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendments 5 to 17.

The question is, that amendment 20 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division. As it is the first division of the afternoon, I will suspend the meeting for five minutes. The division will take us beyond the time limit for groups 1 to 4. I therefore exercise my power under rule 9.8.4A of the standing orders to extend the time limit to allow members with a right to speak on groups 3 and 4 to do so.

I ask Paul Martin to wind up and to either press or withdraw amendment 18.

Group 2 is on the Judicial Appointments Board for Scotland—recommendations and ranking. Amendment 20, in the name of Bill Aitken, is grouped with amendments 21 and 22.

We are short of time, so I ask Richard Baker to be brief.

I ask Robert Brown to be equally brief.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-2591, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for the stage 3 consideration of the Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that, during Stage 3 of the Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Bill, debate on groups of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limit indicated, that time limit being calculated from when the Stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the Stage being called) or otherwise not in progress: Groups 1 to 4: 35 minutes Groups 5 to 7: 1 hour 5 minutes.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is the stage 3 proceedings on the Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Bill. In dealing with amendments, members should have the bill as amended at stage 2, SP bill 6A; the marshalled list of amendments, SP bill 6A-ML; and the groupings that I have agreed. The division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for five minutes for the first division this afternoon. The period for voting for the first division will be 30 seconds. Thereafter, I will allow a voting time of one minute for the first division after a debate, and 30 seconds for all other divisions.

The first group is on the Lord President's accountability to ministers and the Parliament. Amendment 18, in the name of Paul Martin, is grouped with amendment 19.

Order.

Order.

You can make a brief point, Mr Gray.

Order.

I call Christina McKelvie.

Apologies, First Minister; I thought that you had concluded your answer. I call Christina McKelvie.

Order.

Briefly, please.

Order.

Order.

I hope that this is an intervention, Ms MacDonald, and not an advertisement.

I do not want to be unnecessarily heavy handed in what has been a good-natured debate, but I ask members not to  use just other members' first names when referring to them, even when they refer to Miss MacDonald.

Good morning. The first item of business today is a debate on motion S3M-2589, in the name of Margo MacDonald, on the legacy from lottery funding for community sport. Miss MacDonald, you have 13 minutes.

I congratulate Miss MacDonald on perfect timing in the verbal equivalent of the 5,000m. I notice that Mr McAveety has completed his vocal warm-ups, so I ask him to speak to and move his amendment S3M-2589.1.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I invite Bruce Crawford to move motions S3M-2587 and S3M-2588, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Legal Profession and Legal Aid (Scotland) Act 2007 (Transitional, Savings and Consequential Provisions) Order 2008 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Mental Health (Absconding patients from other jurisdictions) (Scotland) Regulations 2008 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

There are two questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-2587, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Legal Profession and Legal Aid (Scotland) Act 2007 (Transitional, Savings and Consequential Provisions) Order 2008 be approved.

The second question is, that motion S3M-2588, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of an SSI, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Mental Health (Absconding patients from other jurisdictions) (Scotland) Regulations 2008 be approved.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-2585, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 1 October 2008 2.15 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body Question Time followed by Ministerial Statement: Scottish Government Response to the Report of the Committee of Inquiry on Crofting followed by Public Petitions Committee Debate: 3rd Report 2008: Availability on the NHS of cancer treatment drugs followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 2 October 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Justice and Law Officers; Rural Affairs and the Environment 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Scudamore Report into Foot and Mouth Disease followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 8 October 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 9 October 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Stage 3 Proceedings: Scottish Register of Tartans Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-2586, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a stage 1 timetable for the Health Boards (Membership and Elections) (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Health Boards (Membership and Elections) (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 30 January 2009.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

As I said earlier, the First Minister will now take questions on issues raised in his statement. We have around 15 minutes for questions of, I repeat, technical clarification, after which we will move on to the full debate.

I am not sure how technical that question was, but I will give it to the First Minister.

I said that questions should be of a technical nature only. I do not believe that the last one was.

I am not sure that that is a particularly technical question, either.

Briefly, please, First Minister.

Tom McCabe will ask the final question. Please be as brief as possible.

Yes, I will. It is a matter for the Presiding Officer's judgment, but I accept that today's questions and the manner in which some of them were put call for reflection. I will reflect on that.

The next item of business is further debate on the implications for Scotland of the Lloyds TSB takeover of HBOS. We are now extremely tight for time, but I call on Iain Gray to open the debate. Mr Gray, you have nine minutes.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-2584, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised programme for today's business.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 24 September 2008— after 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions delete followed by Scottish Government Debate: Scudamore Report into Foot and Mouth and insert followed by First Minister's Statement: The Implications for Scotland of the Lloyds TSB Takeover of HBOS  followed by Scottish Government Debate: The Implications for Scotland of the Lloyds TSB Takeover of HBOS.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a statement by the First Minister on the implications for Scotland of the Lloyds TSB takeover of HBOS. The First Minister will take questions at the end of his statement, therefore I ask that there be no interventions or interruptions.

Good afternoon. As always on a Wednesday, the first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader is Father John Bollan from the religious education department of the University of Glasgow.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-2553.2, in the name of Sarah Boyack, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2553, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on hill farms and less favoured areas, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 54, Against 62, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-2553.1, in the name of John Scott, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2553, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on hill farms and less favoured areas, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 79, Against 37, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The third question is, that amendment S3M-2553.3, in the name of Liam McArthur, which seeks to amend motion S3M-  2553, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on hill farms and less favoured areas, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 52, Against 64, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The fourth question is, that motion S3M-2553, in the name of Richard Lochhead, as amended, on hill farms and less favoured areas, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 78, Against 37, Abstentions 1.  Motion agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament recognises the valuable contribution made by farmers on Scotland's hills and other remote areas to food production, environmental management and our rural economy; notes the publication of the Scottish Agricultural College's report, Farming's Retreat from the Hills , funded by the Scottish Government, and the Royal Society of Edinburgh's report on its Inquiry into Scotland's Hills and Islands as well as other recent publications highlighting the challenges and opportunities facing the sector, and welcomes the publication on 18 September 2008 of the Scottish Government's consultation on the Less Favoured Area Support Scheme and its commitment to work in partnership with stakeholders to consider the range  of relevant economic, social and environmental issues with the aim of securing a sustainable future for agriculture on our hills and in our more remote communities; notes the burden of increased costs for hill farmers and crofters, notably fertilisers, fuel and transport, coupled with the ongoing challenges of farming on some of the most disadvantaged land in Europe, and therefore agrees with the Royal Society of Edinburgh's report in condemning the UK Government's policy of ending direct support for Scottish producers after 2013.

The final question is, that motion S3M-2543, in the name of Iain Smith, on the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee's sixth report in 2008, "Growing Pains - can we achieve a 50% growth in tourist revenue by 2015?", be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee's 6th Report, 2008 (Session 3): Growing Pains - can we achieve a 50% growth in tourist revenue by 2015? (SP Paper 141).

Can we have a question please, Mr Fitzpatrick.

In light of the takeover by Lloyds TSB of HBOS, and having discussed the matter with all business managers, I intend to allow some leeway in the timing of First Minister's questions today. In addition, it is the intention of the Parliamentary Bureau to schedule a ministerial statement and debate on the matter next Wednesday. We now move to First Minister's questions, starting with question 1, from Iain Gray. [ Applause. ]

Much of the leeway to which I referred earlier appears to have been used up, but I am keen to bring in other members. Bearing in mind that there is to be a debate next week on the issue, I ask that members keep questions and answers as brief as possible.

I will take a final question on this issue, from Sarah Boyack.

I will take a further supplementary question, on a different issue, from Bill Butler.

Members who would have liked to ask a supplementary will be most welcome in the chamber this afternoon when we have further questions on education. That concludes First Minister's question time; thank you for your forbearance.

A question, please.

Order. There is too much noise in the chamber. Please keep it down.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-2553, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on hill farms and less favoured areas.

Talking of electronics, I ask all members to ensure that their electronic equipment is turned off, because there is some interference.

There is time to take an intervention if you wish to.

I ask members again to check their electronic appliances, please. We are still getting sound interference. Having them set to silent is not enough; they need to be turned off.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-2551, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 24 September 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Scuddamore Report into Foot and Mouth followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 25 September 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Independent Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Stage 3 Proceedings: Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 1 October 2008 2.15 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body Question Time followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 2 October 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 pm First Minister's Question Time  2.15 pm Themed Question Time Justice and Law Officers; Rural Affairs and the Environment 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

There is just one question to be put as a result of today's business. The question is, that motion S3M-2466, in the name of Malcolm Chisholm, on the European and External Relations Committee's report on international development, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the European and External Relations Committee's 3rd Report, 2008 (Session 3): Inquiry into International Development (SP Paper 134).

The cabinet secretary will take questions on the issues that were raised in her statement. We have about 30 minutes for questions, after which we will move to the next item of business—the next item is heavily subscribed, so I have no leeway.

We come to open questions. I have 12 members requesting and 18 minutes to fit them into. You do the math, as they say.

I must insist that members ask just one question now or we will not get everyone in.

If the remaining two members are brief and the answers are brief, we will manage to fit them both in.

Straight to the question, please, Mr Doris.

Good afternoon. As always on a Wednesday, the first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader is Alex McLellan, executive director of Reason Why.

The next item of business is a statement by Nicola Sturgeon on the Scottish Ambulance Service. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of her statement and there should therefore be no interventions or interruptions.

There are potentially six questions to be put as a result of today's business. I remind members that, in relation to the debate on the Scottish National Party Government failure on jobs for newly qualified teachers, if the amendment in the name of Fiona Hyslop is agreed to, the amendments in the names of Elizabeth Smith and Margaret Smith will fall. The first question is, that amendment S3M-2524.1, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2524, in the name of Margaret Curran, on clostridium difficile-associated disease in hospitals, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 63, Against 64, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-2524, in the name of Margaret Curran, on clostridium difficile-associated disease in hospitals, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 62, Against 2, Abstentions 63.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament notes with deep concern the outbreak of Clostridium difficile at the Vale of Leven Hospital; considers the report from the independent review team to be a helpful starting point but believes that there are still serious questions to be addressed; notes the referral of the report by the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing to the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service to consider what action should be taken; recognises and supports the substantial case made by the families of Clostridium difficile victims for a public inquiry; notes that the Scottish Ministers can instruct such an inquiry under the Inquiries Act 2005 and acknowledges the need for wider lessons to be learned throughout the NHS in Scotland in preventing and tackling Clostridium difficile, and therefore calls on the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing to return to the Parliament to make a statement when the views of the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal are known.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-2525.3, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2525, in the name of Rhona Brankin, on the SNP Government failure on jobs for newly qualified teachers, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 49, Against 77, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-2525.1, in the name of Elizabeth Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2525, in the name of Rhona Brankin, on the SNP Government failure on jobs for newly qualified teachers, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-2525.2, in the name of Margaret Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2525, in the name of Rhona Brankin, on the SNP Government failure on jobs for newly qualified teachers, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 77, Against 47, Abstentions 3.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is,  that motion S3M-2525, in the name of Rhona Brankin, on the SNP Government failure on jobs for newly qualified teachers, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 77, Against 49, Abstentions 1.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament notes with concern the recent Times Educational Supplement Scotland and General Teaching Council for Scotland surveys showing an increasing number of post-probationary teachers who are unable to secure a permanent teaching post; believes that this development represents an appalling waste of talent and is grossly unfair to those newly-qualified teachers encouraged to train to join the profession; further notes that this comes at a time when many class sizes are rising highlighting that the SNP's manifesto commitment to reduce class sizes to 18 in P1 to P3 is in utter chaos, with insufficient funding, a lack of a legal framework and the omission of the policy from 21 out of 32 local authorities' single outcome agreements, and calls on the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning to make a ministerial statement on this subject as soon as practicable following receipt of the report of the Teacher Employment Working Group.

The next item of business is a debate on the report of the Scottish Prisons Commission. I call the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, Kenny MacAskill, to open the debate.

Ms Jamieson, I find that this is a matter of party rather than political interest.

Ms Jamieson, can I be assured that the question that you are going to put falls under first ministerial responsibility?

I will allow Miss Goldie a very brief final question.

Come to a question, please.

Would you come to the question quickly please?

No, you must stop now Mr Smith.

I say to the whole chamber that I am always keen to take supplementary questions, but they really must be brief.

Order.

Briefly, please.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Good morning. The first item of business is a Labour Party debate on motion S3M-2524, in the name of Margaret Curran, on clostridium difficile-associated disease in hospitals.

There is but one question to be put as a result of today's business. The question is, that motion S3M-2496, in the name of Patrick Harvie, on the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee's report on ferry services in Scotland, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee's 4th Report, 2008 (Session 3): Ferry Services in Scotland (SP Paper 138).

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-2520, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 17 September 2008 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Scottish Ambulance Service followed by European and External Relations Committee Debate: 3rd Report 2008: Inquiry into International Development followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 18 September 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Hill Farms and Less Favoured Areas 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning; Europe, External Affairs and Culture 2.55 pm Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee Debate: 6th Report 2008: Growing Pains - can we achieve a 50% growth in tourist revenue by 2015?  followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 24 September 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 25 September 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business  11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Stage 3 Proceedings: Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business.—[ David McLetchie .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motions S3M-2522 and S3M-2521, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on the completion date for stage 1 of the Damages (Asbestos-related Conditions) (Scotland) Bill and the completion date for stage 1 of the Sexual Offences (Scotland) Bill.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Damages (Asbestos-related Conditions) (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 6 November 2008. That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Sexual Offences (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 23 January 2009.—[ David McLetchie .]  Motions agreed to.

I asked for no interruptions during the statement and I would like that to be the case. There will be plenty of opportunity to question the cabinet secretary at the end.

The cabinet secretary will now take questions on the issues that were raised in the statement.

We come to open questions. A large number of members want to ask questions, so if questions and answers can be kept short we will get there in the end.

Good afternoon. As always on a Wednesday, the first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader is the Reverend Dave Richards of St Paul's and St George's church here in Edinburgh.

The next item of business is a statement by John Swinney on the Scottish Futures Trust. As the cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his 15-minute statement, there should be no interventions or interruptions.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-2493, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to the business programme for next week.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 10 September 2008— after Wednesday 10 September 2008 delete 2.30 pm Time for Reflection and insert 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Ministerial Statement: Scottish Futures Trust.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

There are six questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-2442, in the name of Keith Brown, on the breach of the Interests of Members of the Scottish Parliament Act 2006, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 49, Against 70, Abstentions 2.  Motion disagreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-2480.1, in the name of Rhona Brankin, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2480, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on getting it right for every child, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 76, Against 44, Abstentions 1.  Amendment agreed to.

The third question is, that motion S3M-2480, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on getting it right for every child, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 75, Against 44, Abstentions 1.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament welcomes the continuing support for the Getting It Right For Every Child programme, initiated by the previous administration; acknowledges the significant progress in pathfinder activity, both in Highland and for children and young people experiencing domestic abuse, exploring how best agencies can work together to record and share information as necessary to inform effective decision making around children's needs and to redesign services to reduce overlap and bureaucracy; welcomes progress in developing the eCare Framework to support positive practice change across all services and the plans to develop a safe and secure environment for exchanging information where necessary and for a particular purpose, respecting both data protection legislation and the privacy of individuals; supports continuing activity to develop understanding and awareness of implementation of Getting It Right For Every Child and how services can best work to improve outcomes for children and delivery of the national outcomes and therefore voices its concern at the impact on vulnerable children of rising class sizes, cuts in the number of health visitors and cuts in the number of teachers of children with additional support needs, and calls on the Scottish Government to honour its pledge to pay kinship carers allowance to grandparents.

The fourth question is, that amendment S3M-2481.2, in the name of Margaret Curran, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2481, in the name of Shona Robison, on the obesity action plan, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The fifth question is, that amendment S3M-2481.1, in the name of Ross Finnie, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2481, in the name of Shona Robison, on the obesity action plan, as amended, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The final question is, that motion S3M-2481, in the name of Shona Robison, on the obesity action plan, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament welcomes the commitment of the Scottish Government to tackle obesity as highlighted in the recent publication, Healthy Eating, Active Living: An action plan to improve diet, increase physical activity and tackle obesity, and further welcomes the £56 million over the next three years, which the Scottish Government has made available to build on the existing good work in support of the Scottish Diet Action Plan and the National Physical Activity Strategy as outlined in the action plan; calls on the Scottish Government to bring forward to the Parliament details on how it intends to meet its commitment to two hours per week PE tuition in schools by specialist teachers and guarantee five days' outdoor education for every  school pupil, and believes that progress in tackling obesity should be assessed and reported on a regular basis according to the 10 measurements set out in chapter two of the action plan.

Briefly please.

I call Nanette Milne, but ask her to bear in mind that the question relates to Dumfries.

Question 6 is Helen Eadie's, but she does not appear to be present in the chamber.

We have some time available so I will allow question 6.

First Minister's questions will be taken today by the Deputy First Minister, Nicola Sturgeon.

Order.

That will do, thank you. Order.

Order. I would like to hear the question, even if no one else would.

Order.

I remind you—

Order.

All members should have received a memo from me this morning asking them not to refer to one another other than by their proper names or titles.

Order.

Mr O'Donnell is winding up on behalf of the committee but, in doing so, he is quite entitled to refer to points that have been made during the debate. Mr O'Donnell, you now have less than two minutes left.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-2480, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on getting it right for every child. [ Interruption. ] I ask members who are leaving the chamber to be quiet, please.

Order, order.

I do take that seriously, Mr Foulkes. Thank you for it. I am not happy with the terminology, but I am also clear that Mr Thompson has not broken any of the parliamentary rules in using that particular terminology. However, I think that he wants to think very carefully before he continues along that line.

Thirty seconds, Mr Thompson.

Good morning. The first item of business this morning is a debate on motion S3M-2442, in the name of Keith Brown, on behalf of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee, on a breach of the Interests of Members of the Scottish Parliament Act 2006. I call on the convener of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee, Keith Brown, to speak to and move the motion.

You should speak through the chair, please, Ms McNeill.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-2477 on committee membership and motion S3M-2478 on substitution on committees.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that— Nicol Stephen be appointed to replace Jim Hume as a member of the Audit Committee; Iain Smith be appointed to replace Tavish Scott as a member of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee; Margaret Smith be appointed to replace Jeremy Purvis as a member of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee; Jim Hume be appointed to replace Iain Smith as a member of the European and External Relations Committee; Jeremy Purvis be appointed to replace Liam McArthur as a member of the Finance Committee; Robert Brown be appointed to replace Margaret Smith as a member of the Justice Committee; Liam McArthur be appointed to replace Mike Rumbles as a member of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee; Robert Brown be appointed to replace Hugh O'Donnell as a member of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee. That the Parliament agrees that— John Farquhar Munro be appointed to replace Iain Smith as the Scottish Liberal Democrats substitute on the Audit Committee; Jeremy Purvis be appointed to replace Liam McArthur as the Scottish Liberal Democrats substitute on the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee; Margaret Smith be appointed to replace Jim Tolson as the Scottish Liberal Democrats substitute on the Equal Opportunities Committee; Iain Smith be appointed to replace Jeremy Purvis as the Scottish Liberal Democrats substitute on the European and External Relations Committee; Liam McArthur be appointed to replace Ross Finnie as the Scottish Liberal Democrats substitute on the Finance Committee; Alison McInnes be appointed to replace Robert Brown as the Scottish Liberal Democrats substitute on the Local Government and Communities Committee; Nicol Stephen be appointed to replace Jim Hume as the Scottish Liberal Democrats substitute on the Public Petitions Committee; Jim Hume be appointed to replace John Farquhar Munro as the Scottish Liberal Democrats substitute on the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee; Mike Rumbles be appointed to replace Alison McInnes as the Scottish Liberal Democrats substitute on the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee; Ross Finnie be appointed to replace Margaret Smith as the Scottish Liberal Democrats substitute on the Subordinate Legislation Committee; Jim Tolson be appointed to replace Tavish Scott as the Scottish Liberal Democrats substitute on the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The questions on the motions will be put at decision time.

The first question is, that motion S3M-2477, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on committee membership, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that— Nicol Stephen be appointed to replace Jim Hume as a member of the Audit Committee; Iain Smith be appointed to replace Tavish Scott as a member of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee; Margaret Smith be appointed to replace Jeremy Purvis as a member of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee; Jim Hume be appointed to replace Iain Smith as a member of the European and External Relations Committee; Jeremy Purvis be appointed to replace Liam McArthur as a member of the Finance Committee; Robert Brown be appointed to replace Margaret Smith as a member of the Justice Committee; Liam McArthur be appointed to replace Mike Rumbles as a member of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee; Robert Brown be appointed to replace Hugh O'Donnell as a member of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee.

The second question is, that motion S3M-2478, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on substitution on committees, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that— John Farquhar Munro be appointed to replace Iain Smith as the Scottish Liberal Democrats substitute on the Audit Committee; Jeremy Purvis be appointed to replace Liam McArthur as the Scottish Liberal Democrats substitute on the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee; Margaret Smith be appointed to replace Jim Tolson as the Scottish Liberal Democrats substitute on the Equal Opportunities Committee; Iain Smith be appointed to replace Jeremy Purvis as the Scottish Liberal Democrats substitute on the European and External Relations Committee; Liam McArthur be appointed to replace Ross Finnie as the Scottish Liberal Democrats substitute on the Finance Committee; Alison McInnes be appointed to replace Robert Brown as the Scottish Liberal Democrats substitute on the Local Government and Communities Committee; Nicol Stephen be appointed to replace Jim Hume as the Scottish Liberal Democrats substitute on the Public Petitions Committee; Jim Hume be appointed to replace John Farquhar Munro as the Scottish Liberal Democrats substitute on the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee; Mike Rumbles be appointed to replace Alison McInnes as the Scottish Liberal Democrats substitute on the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee; Ross Finnie be appointed to replace Margaret Smith as the Scottish Liberal Democrats substitute on the Subordinate Legislation Committee; Jim Tolson be appointed to replace Tavish Scott as the Scottish Liberal Democrats substitute on the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee.

I ask front-bench spokespersons not to make sedentary interventions.

We now continue with the debate on the Scottish Government's programme. We are tight for time, so I ask members to stick strictly to the six minutes that they are allocated.

It was remiss of me not to ask members who wish to speak to press their request-to-speak buttons.

At the beginning of the statement, I said that there should be no interruptions. I now ask that there be no further interruptions.

As I said earlier, the First Minister will now take questions on the issues that have been raised in his statement. We have about 45 minutes for this, but a very large number of members wish to ask questions so it would be very helpful if those who wish to do so press their request-to-speak buttons now. I think that not all the names might fit on the screen. I ask everyone to keep questions and answers short, so that we get through as many as we can.

We come to open questions. I remind members that a four-hour debate follows, so questions should be on points of clarification only. [ Interruption. ] If members would like to listen, they might get it right when they come to ask a question.

Question please, Ms Brankin.

Very briefly, please.

I am afraid that I have to stop you, Ms Brankin. I call the First Minister.

That brings us to the end of the First Minister's statement and questions on the Scottish Government's programme. I thank all members for enabling us to get through the item timeously.

The next item of business is a debate on the Scottish Government's programme.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-2441, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, under rule 2.2.3 of standing orders, to allow business to begin at 9 o'clock on Thursday 4 September.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that "09:00" be substituted for "09:15" in Rule 2.2.3 to allow the meeting of the Parliament on Thursday 4 September to begin at 9.00 am. —[Bruce Crawford].  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-2476, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 3 September 2008 9.30 am Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by First Minister's Statement: Scottish Government's Programme followed by Scottish Government Debate: Scottish Government's Programme 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Scottish Government's Programme followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 4 September 2008 9.00 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee Motion on Breach of the Interests of Members of the Scottish Parliament Act 2006 followed by Scottish Government Debate: Getting it Right for Every Child 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and Law Officers 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Obesity Action Plan  followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 10 September 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee Debate: 4th Report 2008 Ferry Services in Scotland followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 11 September 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Report of the Scottish Prisons Commission followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 17 September 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 18 September 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning; Europe, External Affairs and Culture 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business —[Bruce Crawford].  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a statement by the First Minister on the Scottish Government's programme. The First Minister will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should therefore be no interventions or interruptions.

Good morning. It is good to see everyone back after the summer recess. Our first item of business this morning is time for reflection, and our time for reflection leader today is Father Kevin Dow of St Mary's church in West Calder.

I said that I was closing the meeting, but I am prepared to take a point of order, seeing as it is you, Ms MacDonald.

I point out to the member as gently as I can that the Parliament has not yet seen the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee's report. I equally respectfully suggest that we wait until the report is published before we deliberate on any of its findings.

The issue of the code of conduct, and a possible review of it, is not a matter for me, but any member may take it up with the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee. If Jackie Baillie wishes to do so, she is more than welcome—it is her right. I agree that the other issues are substantive. I hope that, on this occasion, members will forgive me if I do not say something about them right now. However, I will deliberate on them and I will come back to members at a later date, either in writing or in the chamber. I take this opportunity to wish everybody a very happy recess.  Meeting closed at 15:00.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-2068, in the name of Alasdair Morgan, on a proposal for a committee bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees to the proposal for a Committee Bill under Rule 9.15 contained in the Scottish Parliamentary Pension Scheme Committee's 1st Report, 2008 Scottish Parliamentary Pension Scheme (SP Paper 103).

The second question is, that motion S3M-2208, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee's report on flooding and flood management, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee's 2nd Report, 2008 (Session 3): Flooding and Flood Management (SP Paper 96).

The third question is, that motion S3M-2265, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on committee membership, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that— Kenneth Gibson be appointed to replace Rob Gibson as a member of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee; Rob Gibson be appointed to replace Brian Adam as a member of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee; Jamie Hepburn be appointed to replace Alasdair Morgan as a member of the European and External Relations Committee; Angela Constance be appointed to replace John Wilson as a member of the Justice Committee; John Wilson be appointed to replace Kenneth Gibson as a member of the Local Government and Communities Committee; John Wilson be appointed to replace Angela Constance as a member of the Public Petitions Committee; Alasdair Morgan be appointed to replace Jamie Hepburn as a member of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee.

The fourth question is, that motion S3M-2266, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on substitution on committees, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that— Bill Kidd be appointed to replace Shirley-Anne Somerville  as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee; Willie Coffey be appointed to replace Jamie Hepburn as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Equal Opportunities Committee; Brian Adam be appointed to replace Tricia Marwick as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Local Government and Communities Committee; Bob Doris be appointed to replace John Wilson as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Public Petitions Committee; Jamie Hepburn be appointed to replace Bill Kidd as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee.

That concludes decision time. I now close this meeting.

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-2265, on committee membership, and motion S3M-2266, on substitution on committees.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that— Kenneth Gibson be appointed to replace Rob Gibson as a member of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee; Rob Gibson be appointed to replace Brian Adam as a member of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee; Jamie Hepburn be appointed to replace Alasdair Morgan as a member of the European and External Relations Committee; Angela Constance be appointed to replace John Wilson as a member of the Justice Committee; John Wilson be appointed to replace Kenneth Gibson as a member of the Local Government and Communities Committee; John Wilson be appointed to replace Angela Constance as a member of the Public Petitions Committee; Alasdair Morgan be appointed to replace Jamie Hepburn as a member of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee. That the Parliament agrees that— Bill Kidd be appointed to replace Shirley-Anne Somerville as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee; Willie Coffey be appointed to replace Jamie Hepburn as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Equal Opportunities Committee; Brian Adam be appointed to replace Tricia Marwick as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Local Government and Communities Committee; Bob Doris be appointed to replace John Wilson as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Public Petitions Committee; Jamie Hepburn be appointed to replace Bill Kidd as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

Question 3 was not lodged.

Marlyn Glen is unable to be here, for entirely understandable reasons. Question 7 is therefore withdrawn.

I think that "Yes" would do, cabinet secretary.

Order. Could members who are coming into the chamber please respect the fact that a question-and-answer session is going on?

I inform members that, as Wendy Alexander has lost her voice, although she will ask her question as printed in the Business Bulletin , I will then call Cathy Jamieson to ask supplementary questions to question 1, as permitted by standing order 13.7.5, which states: "If the member who asked the question does not ask the first supplementary question, any member may, at the discretion of the Presiding Officer, ask a supplementary question or questions."

Order. That is enough applause, thank you.

I think that that deserves a further question from Miss Goldie.

I will allow Nicol Stephen a very brief supplementary.

Can we have an equally brief answer, please, First Minister?

Briefly, please.

Briefly, please.

Order.

I will take points of order at the end, Mrs MacDonald.

I hear your suggestion, Ms MacDonald but, as you well know, that matter does not come under the standing orders.

We need a question, please.

Very briefly, please.

Sorry, minister—can I have less conversation in the chamber, please?

Order.

Briefly, please, Mr Doris.

Thank you, Mr Doris. We have got the hang of the question.

As briefly as possible, please.

As briefly as you can, minister.

Before we move to First Minister's question time, I am delighted to say that  His Excellency Mr George Liswaniso, the High Commissioner of Namibia, has joined us in the Presiding Officer's gallery. On behalf of the Scottish Parliament, I extend a warm welcome to the High Commissioner. [ Applause. ]

I ask members who are speaking and those who are sitting close to them to ensure that their telephones and BlackBerrys are turned off. Quite a lot of interference came through during the cabinet secretary's speech.

Before I close the debate, I have a further request from Hugh O'Donnell. I can allow you to make a brief comment, Mr O'Donnell.

Thank you for that courtesy, Mr O'Donnell.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-2208, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham, on the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee's report on flooding and flood management. We have already eaten a little into the time that is available, so I ask members to stick closely to their allocated times. I call on Roseanna Cunningham to speak to and move the motion in her name.

Good morning. The first item of business this morning is consideration of business motion S3M-2272, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on the suspension of standing orders.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that Rule 12.3.3A of Standing Orders be suspended for the purpose of allowing the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee to meet in the afternoon of Thursday 26 June 2008.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-2068, in the name of Alasdair Morgan, on behalf of the Scottish Parliamentary Pension Scheme Committee, on a proposal for a committee bill. I remind members that all contributions should be made through the chair.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motions S3M-2260 and S3M-2261, on approval of Scottish statutory instruments.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Charity Test (Specified Bodies) (Scotland) Order 2008 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Nutritional Requirements for Food and Drink in Schools (Scotland) Regulations 2008 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on the motions will be put at decision time.

There is one question to be put as a result of today's business. I propose to put a single question on motions S3M-2260 and S3M-2261, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of Scottish statutory instruments. If any member objects to a single question being put, they should say so now. The question is, that motions S3M-2260 and S3M-2261, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of Scottish statutory instruments, be agreed to.  Motions agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Charity Test (Specified Bodies) (Scotland) Order 2008 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Nutritional Requirements for Food and Drink in Schools (Scotland) Regulations 2008 be approved.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-2256, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 3 September 2008 9.30 am Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 2.30 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 4 September 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and Law Officers 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-2258, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 1 of the Disabled Persons' Parking Places (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Disabled Persons' Parking Places (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 28 November 2008.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-  2259, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 2 of the Scottish Register of Tartans Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Scottish Register of Tartans Bill at Stage 2 be completed by 12 September 2008.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The cabinet secretary will now take questions on the issues that have been raised in her statement. We have almost exactly 20 minutes for such questions.

With respect, I do not think that that is a point of order, Ms Marwick.

This is all eating into the time that is available for questions.

That is not a point of order, but I am grateful to the member for putting it on the record; it should answer any possible queries about the issue, which is not a point of order. We now have less than 20 minutes for questions, after which we will move to the next item of business.

I remind all members to address other members through the chair.

We come to questions from back-bench members. As always, I ask members to keep questions and answers as brief as possible. If they do so, we will manage to fit everyone in.

I call Ian McKee. Please be as brief as possible.

Perfect.

I should just say that my use of the word "perfect" was in relation to the length of Dr Ian McKee's question and the answer.

The next item of business is a 10-minute statement by Nicola Sturgeon on Scottish Ambulance Service contact information. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of her statement, therefore there should be no interventions or interruptions during it.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-2257, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme for today.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 25 June 2008— after followed by Scottish Government Debate: Alcohol Misuse delete followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business and insert followed by Ministerial Statement: Scottish Ambulance Service Contact Information followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.30 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a statement by Nicola Sturgeon on housing. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of her statement, therefore there should be no interventions or interruptions during it.

Order. I asked for no interruptions. That includes clapping.

As I intimated earlier, the cabinet secretary will take questions on the issues raised in her statement. We have around 40 minutes for such questions, after which we will move on to the next item of business. The times for this item of business and the next debate are tight.

You really must close now, Ms Lamont.

The cabinet secretary thanked Mr McGrigor for a number of things; let me add that I thank him for his brevity, which I recommend to other members as an example.

We come to questions from back-bench members. I repeat my plea for  brevity. A large number of members would like to ask questions, and I would like to fit all of them in.

Order.

Question, please.

Very briefly, please.

Could you come to a question, please, Ms MacDonald?

Good afternoon. As always, our first item is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Rabbi Nancy Morris from the Glasgow Reform synagogue.

Absolutely. It is entirely up to members whether they take interventions. The member has made it clear that she does not want to do that, Mr Doris. You are down to speak in the debate, so you will get your chance.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-2204.2, in the name of Pauline McNeill, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2204, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on youth justice, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 58, Against 63, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-2204.1, in the name of Bill Aitken, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2204, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on youth justice, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 16, Against 104, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The third question is, that amendment S3M-2204.3, in the name of Mike Pringle, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2204, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on youth justice, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 17, Against 103, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The fourth question is, that motion S3M-2204, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on youth justice, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament acknowledges the positive contribution that children and young people across Scotland make to society; believes that every young person deserves the best start in life; is committed to giving young people more positive choices and chances and removing the barriers that prevent some from realising their potential and leading successful lives; notes that there are a number of young people who do not realise their potential and get into trouble and recognises the need to intervene quickly and effectively to turn their lives around; further recognises the need to support victims of offending, and considers that communities, the third sector, the private sector, public services, local authorities and the Scottish Government need to work together to build a more successful Scotland by preventing offending and intervening early with children and families at risk.

The fifth question is, that motion S3M-2072, in the name of Jamie McGrigor, on the Scottish Register of Tartans Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Scottish Register of Tartans Bill.

The final item of business is a members' business debate on motion S3M-1811, in the name of Sandra White, on Glasgow passport office. The debate will be concluded without any question being put.  Motion debated,  That the Parliament expresses deep concern at the plans to stop passport-processing services in Glasgow, resulting in the loss of over 100 jobs and leaving Scotland without a fully operational passport service; notes with further concern what appears to have been a deliberate run-down of the service in the lead-up to this announcement; believes that this streamlining process will see a further three or four passport offices throughout the United Kingdom affected, and further believes that concise information as to the effect of these changes should be issued immediately in order to remove the doubt and uncertainty surrounding the plans.

Thank you for the point of order. I make it clear that I did not undertake earlier to come back to the chamber this afternoon. I said that I took the point of order in the constructive way in which it was made and that I would deliberate on it. I will do that, but I gave no undertaking to come back to the chamber.

I have not finished answering the first point yet, Ms MacDonald. I will reflect again on what Mr McConnell has said. If necessary, I will take steps to clarify the situation before the deadline for lodging questions next Monday. Members should be aware that, in general, they should ask only the question that was lodged and which appears in the Business Bulletin .

I cannot add to what I have said. I will take away the matter to ponder and deliberate on. If it is necessary to take further steps before midday next Monday, I will do so.

As Ms MacDonald is well aware, that is not a point of order. If she wishes to raise the matter through the Procedures Committee, she is welcome to do so.

You should be closing now, Mr McGrigor.

The minister will take questions on the issues that were raised in her statement. We have around 30 minutes for questions, after which we will move to the next item of business. I remind members that all contributions should be made through the chair.

You must come to a question, please.

We come to back-bench questions. As always, if members keep their questions short, sharp and to the point, we will get in everybody who wants to be brought in.

It was better than 100 questions, Dr Simpson.

Briefly, please.

I call the minister.

That was not a question. We will therefore go to question 5.

I am afraid that Mr Henry knows exactly what I am going to say. The content of ministerial responses is a matter for ministers. That matter is not covered by standing orders, I regret to say.

The next item of business is a statement by Shona Robison on the report of the ministerial task force on health inequalities. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of her statement and there should therefore be no interventions or interruptions during it. I give her a moment or two to get settled into her place. I inadvertently just gave the minister a title that I understand is not yet hers to take. I meant, of course, that the minister will take questions at the end of her statement.

Order.

Order. The First Minister, and nobody else, will answer the question.

Order.

Your question is not exactly as written, Mr Neil, but I will hand it over to the First Minister.

Ask a question, please.

I take the point of order in a constructive manner and thank Jack McConnell for it. Today the member concerned was given the option of withdrawing question 4, but was within his rights to choose not to do so. I will reflect on what Jack McConnell has said for future occasions.

Order.

I am sorry to interrupt, Ms McNeill. I ask you to address your remarks through the chair.

The first item of business is a statement by John Swinney, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth, on the financial outturn for 2007-08. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his 10-minute statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions during it.

The cabinet secretary will now take questions on issues that were raised in his statement. We have around 20 minutes for such questions, after which we must move to the next item of business. I remind all members that contributions should be made through the chair, which means that members should refer to other members by name or title.

We come to questions from back-bench members. As always, time is limited, so I beg members to keep questions brief and to ask one question per member.

I am certainly not, Mr McNulty. I asked members to address other members through the chair. Somebody of your experience should know how to do that.

We must conclude questions on the cabinet secretary's statement—we are already into the time for the next debate. I apologise to members whom I am unable to call.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-2204, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on youth justice.

The next item of business is consideration of four Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motions S3M-2195 to 2198, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Protection of Children (Scotland) Act 2003 (Amendment of the Definition of Child Care Position) Order 2008 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Crime (International Co-operation) Act 2003 (Designation of Participating Countries) (Scotland) Order 2008 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Act 1992 Modification Order 2008 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Human Tissue (Scotland) Act 2006 (Consequential Amendment) Order 2008 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The question on the motions will be put at decision time.

The first question is, that motion S3M-2028, in the name of Linda Fabiani, on the Creative Scotland Bill—

Standing orders are quite clear: questions must be put in the order in which motions are moved. I have no flexibility in that matter.

As a matter of fact, I must not do that, Dr Simpson. When I put the question on the financial resolution, if one member objects, then a vote has to be taken. I can call the divisions only in the order in which the motions were moved. Therefore, the first question is, that motion S3M-2028, in the name of Linda Fabiani, on the Creative Scotland Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Creative Scotland Bill.

The next question is, that motion S3M-1776, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution to the Creative Scotland Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

No, I am clear that Parliament has not given permission for the motion to be withdrawn. Therefore, I put the  question to members. [ Interruption. ] Order.  Mr McMahon, order, please.

For the benefit of all members, let me quote rule 8.3.6: "After a motion is moved, it may be withdrawn by the member who moved it at any time before the question is put unless any member objects to it being withdrawn." I have had objections to the motion being withdrawn, therefore I must put the question to members. The question is, that motion S3M-1776, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution to the Creative Scotland Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 49, Against 68, Abstentions 0.  Motion disagreed to.

Standing orders are quite clear; the Creative Scotland Bill therefore falls.—[ Interruption. ] Order. The next question is, that motion S3M-2101, in the name of Jim Mather, on the Energy Bill, United Kingdom legislation, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the UK Energy Bill in Part 1, Chapter 3 (Storage of Carbon Dioxide), introduced to the House of Commons on 10 January 2008, should, insofar as they relate to matters within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament or alter the executive competence of the Scottish Ministers, be considered by the UK Parliament.

The next question is, that motions S3M-2195 to S3M-2198 inclusive, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments, be agreed to.  Motions agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Protection of Children (Scotland) Act 2003 (Amendment of the Definition of Child Care Position) Order 2008 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Crime (International Co-operation) Act 2003 (Designation of Participating Countries) (Scotland) Order 2008 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Act 1992 Modification Order 2008 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Human Tissue (Scotland) Act 2006 (Consequential Amendment) Order 2008 be approved.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-2101, in the name of Jim Mather, on the Energy Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the UK Energy Bill in Part 1, Chapter 3 (Storage of Carbon Dioxide), introduced to the House of Commons on 10 January 2008, should, insofar as they relate to matters within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament or alter the executive competence of the Scottish Ministers, be considered by the UK Parliament.—[ Jim Mather .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-2193, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on a meeting of the Parliament.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that— (a) "09:00" be substituted for "09:15" in Rule 2.2.3 to allow the meeting of the Parliament on Thursday 26 June to begin at 9.00 am; and (b) Rule 5.6.1(c) be suspended for the purposes of Members' Business on Thursday 26 June.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-2192, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 25 June 2008 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Housing followed by Scottish Government Debate: Alcohol Misuse followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 26 June 2008 9.00 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Parliamentary Pension Scheme Committee Debate: 1st Report 2008, Scottish Parliamentary Pension Scheme followed by Rural Affairs and Environment Committee Debate: 2nd Report 2008, Flooding and Flood Management 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time followed by Members' Business 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 2.55 pm Decision Time Wednesday 3 September 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 4 September 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and Law Officers 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The minister has requested permission to withdraw the motion. I have to put it to Parliament—

I can clarify the position. The motion on the financial resolution has already been moved. Were it to be voted down, standing orders are clear that the bill would fall.

If members stop making points of order, I will get round to my next question, which is to ask for Parliament's approval for the minister's request to withdraw the motion on the financial resolution. Is that agreed?

I will take a point of order from Bruce Crawford before I return to Mr McMahon.

The Government has not at this point sought leave to withdraw the motion on stage 1 of the bill and I am clear that it does not seek to do so.

As I am sure the member is aware, that is not a point of order for me; it is a debating point. The minister has requested, and given his reason for requesting, to withdraw the motion, and he is quite entitled to do so. The decision is for Parliament to take, and members can choose to oppose.

You are absolutely correct. It is for the Parliamentary Bureau to timetable any such motion. I will now put the question to Parliament—

Have you a point of order?

Both motions have been moved, and the Government has requested to withdraw one of them. Therefore, the question I put to the chamber is whether it approves the withdrawal of the motion. Jackie Baillie has a further point of order.

Members will have to excuse me for deliberating carefully. These are serious issues. My problem is that both motions have been moved. The Government has sought permission to withdraw one of them. The position is that I must put that question to the chamber. I do not accept the request for a motion without notice, because the matter has been fully deliberated on in the parliamentary chamber.

That has to be a judgment for members when they cast their vote.

I seek order from other members, please. These are serious issues.

Again, that was not a point of order. I am looking at the Minister for Parliamentary Business but he is not choosing to accede to that request. He is quite entitled to do that. The question is, that Parliament agrees to the withdrawal of the motion on the financial resolution. Are we agreed?

That is not agreed. The question will therefore be put at decision time.

The cabinet secretary will now take questions on the issues that were raised in her statement. We have about 20 minutes for questions, after which we move to the next item of business.

I must ask you to be brief, minister.

Thank you. I am grateful to you. We are very tight for time.

Our time is so tight that I do not even have enough time to chide members properly for using the word "you".

I really must insist that questions are extremely short and to the point.

That brings us to the end of the statement and questions on Clostridium difficile cases at the Vale of Leven hospital. I apologise to members whom I was unable to call.

As I said, the question on the motion will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is a statement by Nicola Sturgeon on Clostridium difficile cases at the Vale of Leven hospital. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of her statement and there should therefore be no interventions or interruptions during it.

I can only ask the minister to respond to that.

That is not strictly a point of order for me, but I will check the Official Report . I hope that you understand that I will have to do so, minister.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-1776, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution to the Creative Scotland Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Creative Scotland Bill, agrees to any increase in expenditure of a kind referred to in paragraph 3(b)(iii) of Rule 9.12 of the Parliament's Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.—[ Linda Fabiani .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

I will take a moment to deliberate on that. If you wish to speak against the resolution, it is in order to give you a brief period—perhaps up to two minutes—to state your reasons.

Order.

You have one minute left.

We are tight for time in the debate. I ask members to stick to their time if at all possible.

You have a full minute left.

The First Minister will now take questions on the issues raised in his statement. We have a little over 30 minutes for questions.

We come to questions from back-bench members. An enormous number of members would like to ask questions and I would like to call as many as possible. I therefore ask that both questions and answers be kept brief and to the point.

Question, please.

That was not a point of order, but the point has been made.

We are starting to get very tight for time, so I ask for brief questions and answers.

I am afraid that we must move on to the next item of business. I am sorry to the two members whom I was unable to call, but the next debate is already oversubscribed.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-2028, in the name of Linda Fabby—I mean Linda Fabiani—on the Creative Scotland Bill.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-2194, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme for today.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 18 June 2008— after followed by Financial Resolution: Creative Scotland Bill delete followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Energy Bill - UK Legislation followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business and insert followed by Ministerial Statement: Clostridium Difficile Cases at the Vale of Leven Hospital followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Energy Bill - UK Legislation followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.30 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a statement by Alex Salmond on the ministerial code. The First Minister will take questions at the end of his 15-minute statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions during it.

Good afternoon. Our first item of business, as always on a Wednesday afternoon, is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Elizabeth Duffy, who is the young adult development officer for the Roman Catholic diocese of Motherwell.

There are 15 questions to be put as a result of today’s business. I remind members, in relation to the debate on the expenses scheme, that if the amendment in the name of Jackie Baillie is agreed to, amendment S3M-2092.2.1 in the name of Margo MacDonald will fall, and if the amendment in the name of Tricia Marwick is agreed to, amendment S3M-2092.1, in the name of Margo MacDonald, will fall. The first question is, that amendment S3M-2120.3, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2120, in the name of Rhona Brankin, on education cuts, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 46, Against 68, Abstentions 3.  Amendment disagreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-2120.1, in the name of Murdo Fraser, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2120, in the name of Rhona Brankin, on education cuts, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 15, Against 102, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-2120.2, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2120, in the name of Rhona Brankin, on education cuts, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 71, Against 46, Abstentions 1.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-2120, in the name of Rhona Brankin, on education cuts, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 54, Against 48, Abstentions 16.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament recognises the lack of confidence expressed by parents, teachers, primary and secondary heads, and directors of education in the SNP government’s handling of Scottish education; notes with concern the cuts in education provision across Scotland; calls on the First Minister to clarify the cost and timescale for delivery of his class-sizes pledge, made on 5 September 2007, when he promised the Parliament that his class-sizes pledge on primaries 1 to 3 would be met in the lifetime of this parliament; recognises the growing number of teachers coming to the end of their probationary year who are either unable to find a teaching post or who are forced into taking part-time or temporary employment; worries that if this trend is allowed to continue unchecked, it will undermine the internationally recognised success of the teacher induction scheme; calls for immediate action from Scottish Ministers to address the impending jobs crisis; welcomes the assessment from the Association of Directors of Education in Scotland that implementation of the SNP policy to cut class sizes to 18 in P1-P3 requires £360 million of capital for additional classrooms and £62 million of recurring revenue funding, and therefore calls on the First Minister to confirm to the Parliament whether his government believes that this is an accurate estimate and why.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-2121.1.1, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-2121.1, in the name of Alex Johnstone, on bus transport, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 61, Against 41, Abstentions 16.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-2121.1, in the name of Alex Johnstone, as amended, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2121, in the name of Des McNulty, on bus transport, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 61, Against 56, Abstentions 0.  Amendment, as amended, agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-2121.3, in the name of Alison McInnes, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2121, in the name of Des McNulty, on bus transport, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 56, Against 61, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-2121.2, in the name of Patrick Harvie, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2121, in the name of Des McNulty, on bus transport, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 86, Against 15, Abstentions 16.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-2121, in the name of Des McNulty, on bus transport, as amended, be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 48, Against 68, Abstentions 1.  Motion disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-2092.2.2, in the name of Jackie Baillie, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-2092.2, in the name of Tricia Marwick, on the expenses scheme, be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 39, Against 74, Abstentions 2.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-2092.2.1, in the name of Margo MacDonald, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-2092.2, in the name of Tricia Marwick, on the expenses scheme, be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 7, Against 105, Abstentions 3.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-2092.2, in the name of Tricia Marwick, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2092, in the name of Tom McCabe, on the expenses scheme, be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 69, Against 44, Abstentions 2.  Amendment agreed to.

Amendment S3M-2092.1, in the name of Margo MacDonald, therefore falls. The next question is, that motion S3M-2092, in the name of Tom McCabe, on the expenses scheme, as amended, be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 69, Against 42, Abstentions 2.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament recognises that the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body ("the SPCB") commissioned and received a report from an independent review panel on the reimbursement of expenses for Members of the Scottish Parliament, notes the SPCB’s responsibility to present a scheme to Parliament, and therefore; (a)	by virtue of sections 81(2) and (5)(b) and 83(5) of the Scotland Act 1998 (i)	confers functions on the SPCB to pay allowances to members in respect of expenses or costs incurred in each financial year in accordance with the Reimbursement of Members’ Expenses Scheme ("the Scheme") annexed as Annex 1 to this resolution and confers other functions on the SPCB as specified in the Scheme; (ii)	determines that the various limits on expenses or costs under the Scheme are as set out in the Schedule of Rates annexed as Annex 2 to this resolution and that such limits are applicable until the SPCB exercises its power under the Scheme to uprate or vary them; (iii)	determines that the Scheme shall come into effect on 1 October 2008, subject to any arrangements made under sub-paragraph (vi); (iv)	directs the SPCB to make such arrangements as it may consider necessary or expedient to allow transition from the Members’ Allowances Scheme agreed to by resolution of the Parliament on 21 June 2001 ("the Previous Scheme") to the Scheme, including, but not limited to, continuing in force any provisions of the Previous Scheme beyond 1 October 2008, making apportionments between the Previous Scheme and the Scheme or making arrangements for particular cases or particular classes of case as appropriate;  (v)	directs the SPCB that any transitional arrangements which it determines under sub-paragraph (iv) shall end not later than 31 March 2011; and (vi)	directs the SPCB to make such arrangements as it may consider necessary or expedient to apply the limit on entitlement to reimbursement of staff salary costs with effect from a date before 1 October 2008, whether by adjusting the amount of the Members’ Support Allowance under the Previous Scheme or by backdating reimbursement of staff salary costs under the Scheme; (b)	rescinds, with effect from 1 October 2008, the Resolution of the Parliament of 21 June 2001 in relation to the Equipment and Furniture Scheme; (c)	subject to any arrangements made under paragraph (a) above, rescinds, with effect from 1 October 2008, the Resolution of the Parliament of 21 June 2001 in relation to the Previous Scheme.

I do not know, but I am willing to give the Minister for Parliamentary Business the opportunity to respond.

Thank you. That will indeed be a matter for the Parliamentary Bureau to decide.

I am often disappointed when you say "In conclusion", Ms Curran, but never as much as I am today. I now call Mary Scanlon, who has quite a long time for her speech.

I call Margaret Curran, who has at least six minutes.

Group 9 is on enforcement of sunbed offences: power to enter dwelling-houses. Amendment 46, in the name of Ross Finnie, is the only amendment in the group.

Mr Finnie, would you like to wind up?

Group 10 is on regulations: procedure. Amendment 39, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendments 40 and 41.

That ends consideration of amendments.

We move, somewhat ahead of schedule, to the next item of business, which is a debate on motion S3M-2018, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Public Health etc (Scotland) Bill.

We move to the division on amendment 1.

The result of the division is: For 29, Against 47, Abstentions 35.  Amendment 1 disagreed to.

We now move to the second group of amendments. Amendment 2, in the name of Shona Robison, is grouped with amendments 3 to 7, 32 and 33.

Order. Too many conversations are taking place in the chamber.

We now move to the third group of amendments. Amendment 45, in the name of Shona Robison, is grouped with amendments 22, 23, 24, 38 and 44.

Group 4 is on compensation for carers. Amendment 8, in the name of the minister, is the only amendment in the group.

Group 5 is on the effect of application for recall and appeals. Amendment 9, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendment 21.

Group 6 is on appeals. Amendment 10, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendments 11 to 20 and 34 to 37.

Group 7 is on use of powers by a local authority in an emergency: application. Amendment 25, in the name of the minister, is grouped with amendments 26 to 28 and 31.

Group 8 is on recovery of expenses. Amendment 29, in the name of Mary Scanlon, is grouped with amendment 30.

The question is, that amendment 1 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division. As it will be the first division in the proceedings, I suspend the meeting for five minutes.

The next item of business is the stage 3 proceedings on the Public Health etc (Scotland) Bill. In dealing with amendments, members should have the bill as amended at stage 2, which is Scottish Parliament bill 3A (revised); the marshalled list, which is SP bill 3A-ML; and the groupings that I have agreed. If members picked up documents from the back of the chamber earlier, they might not be the right ones—the documents must be those that are relevant to stage 3. The right documents are available in the coffee lounge. The division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for five minutes for the first division this afternoon. The period of voting for the first division will be 30 seconds. Thereafter, I will allow a voting period of one minute for the first division after a debate. All other divisions will be 30 seconds. I remind members that, as always, all contributions should be made through the chair, which means that members should refer to other members by name or by their preferred title.

Group 1 is on fees for notification of diseases. Amendment 1, in the name of Mary Scanlon, is the only amendment in the group.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-2119, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for the stage 3 consideration of the Public Health etc (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that, during Stage 3 of the Public Health etc. (Scotland) Bill, debate on groups of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limit indicated, that time limit being calculated from when the Stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the Stage being called) or otherwise not in progress: Groups 1 to 4	25 minutes Groups 5 to 8	45 minutes Groups 9 to 11	1 hour 5 minutes.— [Bruce Crawford.]  Motion agreed to.

I will take a supplementary question from Liam McArthur.

That concludes First Minister's questions.

The member may certainly raise a point of order, but I hope that it is not about the fact that I was unable to call her to ask a supplementary question. That would not be a point of order.

As you, of all people, know, Ms Baillie, that is a matter for you to pursue through your business manager and the bureau. Unusually, we have further business today, so I ask members who are leaving the chamber to do so quickly and quietly, please.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-2092, in the name of Tom McCabe, on the expenses scheme.

I should have pointed out earlier that question 5 has been withdrawn.

Before we come to First Minister's question time, I am delighted to say that the diplomatic corps of Caribbean high commissioners has joined us in the Presiding Officer's gallery for First Minister's question time. High commissioners, on behalf of the Scottish Parliament, I warmly welcome you.

We come to the closing speeches.

Excuse me, Ms McKelvie. You cannot accuse other members of lying in the chamber. I ask you to revisit that sentence.

I find that terminology unacceptable, Ms McKelvie. I ask you to apologise and move on.

I am sorry to keep interrupting, Ms McKelvie, but I have asked you to apologise for that terminology. I would be grateful if you would do so.

Could you speak through the chair, Mr Henry?

We come to the open debate. Speeches should be of around four minutes.

It does not come under standing orders, Mr Henry. I am afraid that it is entirely up to the member who is speaking whether they take an intervention.

Good morning. The first item of business is a Labour Party debate on motion S3M-2120, in the name of Rhona Brankin, on education cuts. I remind members that all speeches should be made through the chair, by which I mean that members should refer to other members by their preferred name or title.

The first question is, that amendment S3M-2102.1, in the name of Elaine Murray, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2102, in the name of Jim Mather, on the small business bonus scheme, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 39, Against 78, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-2102.2, in the name of Derek Brownlee, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2102, in the name of Jim Mather, on the small business bonus scheme, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 78, Against 0, Abstentions 39.  Amendment agreed to.

The third question is, that amendment S3M-2102.3, in the name of Liam  McArthur, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2102, in the name of Jim Mather, on the small business bonus scheme, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 55, Against 16, Abstentions 46.  Amendment agreed to.

The fourth question is, that motion S3M-2102, in the name of Jim Mather, on the small business bonus scheme, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 79, Against 0, Abstentions 38.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament welcomes the introduction, on 1 April 2008, of the Small Business Bonus Scheme; notes that businesses have reacted positively to the scheme; believes that businesses themselves are best placed to decide how to use the reductions in business rates resulting from the scheme to invest in their own success and to deliver new opportunities, new employment and new ventures throughout Scotland; welcomes the acceleration of the business rate reductions announced during the Parliamentary budget process; calls on the Scottish  Government, local authorities and business organisations to work together to ensure that eligible businesses are aware of and benefit from the reductions, and calls on the Scottish Government to commission an independent assessment in 2010 of the impact and effectiveness of the current and previous administrations' business rate reduction measures.

The fifth question is, that motion S3M-2112, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the designation of the lead committee for the Offences (Aggravated by Prejudice) (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the Justice Committee be designated as the lead committee, and that the Equal Opportunities Committee be designated as secondary committee, in consideration of the Offences (Aggravated by Prejudice) (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1.

The sixth question is, that motion S3M-2113, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the designation of the lead committee for the Disabled Persons' Parking Places (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the Local Government and Communities Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Disabled Persons' Parking Places (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1.

The seventh question is, that motion S3M-2114, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Scotland Act 1998 (Transfer of Functions to the Scottish Ministers etc.) Order 2008 be approved.

The member has made his point, but I think that he is fully aware that it is not a point of order for me to consider.

The next item of business is consideration of three Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-2112, on the designation of the lead committee for consideration of the Offences (Aggravation By Prejudice) (Scotland) Bill at stage 1.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Justice Committee be designated as the lead committee, and that the Equal Opportunities Committee be designated as secondary committee, in consideration of the Offences (Aggravated by Prejudice) (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-2113, on the designation of the lead committee for consideration of the Disabled Persons' Parking Places (Scotland) Bill at stage 1.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Local Government and Communities Committee be designated as the lead committee in consideration of the Disabled Persons' Parking Places (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-2114, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Scotland Act 1998 (Transfer of Functions to the Scottish Ministers etc.) Order 2008 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The questions on the motions will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-2110, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 18 June 2008 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by First Minister's Statement: Ministerial Code followed by Stage 1 Debate: Creative Scotland Bill followed by Financial Resolution: Creative Scotland Bill followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Energy Bill - UK Legislation followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 19 June 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Financial Outturn 2007-08 followed by Scottish Government Debate: Youth Justice 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Europe, External Affairs and Culture; Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Ministerial Statement: Ministerial Task Force on Health Inequalities Report followed by Stage 1 Debate: Scottish Register of Tartans Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 25 June 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion  followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 26 June 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Rural Affairs and Environment Committee Debate: 2nd Report 2008, Flooding and Flood Management 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Scottish Parliamentary Pension Scheme Committee Debate: 1st Report 2008, Scottish Parliamentary Pension Scheme followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-2111, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 1 of the Offences (Aggravation By Prejudice) (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Offences (Aggravated by Prejudice) (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 3 April 2009.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

Order. Excuse me, minister. If members wish to talk to one another, would they do so outside the chamber?

Before I call Elaine Murray, I remind all members that contributions should always be made through the chair, which means referring to members by their chosen name or their title.

The cabinet secretary will now take questions on the issues that were raised in his statement. We have about 20 minutes for questions, after which we move to the next item of business. I remind members that contributions should, as always, be made through the chair. That means that members should refer to other members by their preferred name or title.

We come to questions from back-bench members. If I am to fit everybody in, questions will have to be short, sharp and to the point. I ask for brief questions, and I hope that the answers will reflect that brevity.

Minister, please be as brief as possible.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-2102, in the name of Jim Mather, on the small business bonus scheme.

Good afternoon. As always on a Wednesday, the first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Juliet Wilson from the Humanist Society of Scotland.

The next item of business is a statement by Kenny MacAskill, on an alternative business structure for the legal profession.

There are eight questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-2056.2, in the name of Margaret Curran, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2056, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on remote and rural health care, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 40, Against 79, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-2056.1, in the name of Mary Scanlon, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2056, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on remote and rural health care, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The third question is, that amendment S3M-2056.3, in the name of Ross Finnie, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2056, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on remote and rural health care, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The fourth question is, that motion S3M-2056, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on remote and rural health care, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament commends the work of the Remote and Rural Steering Group and recognises that its report, Delivering for Remote and Rural Healthcare , forms the basis of a safe and sustainable service for remote and rural areas that will increase community resilience and guarantee the future of Scotland's rural general hospitals; notes the extension of the Emergency Medical Retrieval Service pilot, providing consultant-led resuscitation and transfer of patients with life-threatening injuries or illness in remote and rural hospitals in the west of Scotland, which commenced on 2 June 2008; further notes the work of the Remote and Rural Healthcare Education Alliance in providing a co-ordinated approach to the development of remote and rural health education programmes across Scotland to ensure that Scotland's healthcare professionals can provide, and their patients can benefit from, the best possible healthcare, as locally as possible; further notes the concerns raised regarding the provision of ambulance services and asks the Scottish Government to ensure that those living in rural communities are not disadvantaged; in line with recommendation 10.12 of the NHS Scotland Resource Allocation Committee's (NRAC) report, calls on the Scottish Government to establish without delay a standing committee to lead work on the future development of the NHS board funding formula and to come forward with details on the precise membership, format and remit of the committee, and further calls on the Scottish Government to review the impact of the NRAC report on NHS boards' ability to maintain and develop remote and rural services.

The fifth question is, that amendment S3M-2057.3, in the name of Andy Kerr, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2057, in the name of John Swinney, on investment in Scottish infrastructure, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 54, Against 66, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The sixth question is, that amendment S3M-2057.1, in the name of Derek Brownlee, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2057, in the name of John Swinney, on investment in Scottish infrastructure, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 65, Against 54, Abstentions 1.  Amendment agreed to.

The seventh question is, that amendment S3M-2057.2, in the name of Liam McArthur, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2057, in the name of John Swinney, on investment in Scottish infrastructure, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 54, Against 64, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The final question is, that motion S3M-2057, in the name of John Swinney, on investment in Scottish infrastructure, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 66, Against 54, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament notes the publication of Taking Forward the Scottish Futures Trust and the £14 billion of infrastructure investment set out in the Scottish Government's Infrastructure Investment Plan; believes that it is important to ensure maximum value for the public purse from infrastructure investment and welcomes efforts to deliver better value, and further notes that 14 possible options for work to be carried out under the umbrella of the Scottish Futures Trust (SFT) were identified and will be the subject of further development before being brought back to the Parliament; believes that a broad range of public and private options should be available for capital investment by public bodies and that the public sector should seek appropriate provisions in the best interests of taxpayers;  calls on ministers to report to the Parliament on progress after the summer recess and regularly thereafter until the final range of options and shape of the SFT has been confirmed; calls on the Scottish Government to finalise the details of the SFT as soon as possible and, as part of its work on the SFT, to review how refinancing provisions in non-profit distributing models might be amended to ensure that they achieve intended aims without discouraging investment, and calls on the Scottish Government to develop and publish a robust investment option-appraisal framework capable of producing comparable information on whole-life costs for future projects regardless of which method of procurement or operation is used.

I undertook to give further consideration to the final point that Jeremy Purvis raised earlier this afternoon, on the role of officials in relation to the notification of announcements. With regard to the particular case to which Mr Purvis referred, I understand that, in addition to writing to the convener of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning also answered an inspired parliamentary question on the issue at 9.10 this morning, thereby complying with the guidance. I have asked parliamentary officials to liaise with Government officials on the issue of communication. I hope that the matter can be considered speedily and the outcome delivered as soon as possible. It is always a matter of good practice for the Government to give as much notice as possible to Parliament on the occasion of such announcements.

The minister is correct, and so is Mr Purvis. There are issues here, and I repeat that I have therefore asked parliamentary officials to liaise with Government officials on the issue of communication. I think that there is an issue of communication here. I ask members to be patient until the matter has been looked into to see whether we can improve that communication.

I will decide what is in order, Mr Purvis—please continue. I ask for silence from front-bench members.

I thank the member for giving me rather brief notice—although that was not his fault—of the point of order. I have not—[ Interruption. ] May I have some order while I say what I wish to say? I have not had the opportunity to consider the matter in great detail, but I refer the member to the "Good Practice Guidance by the Presiding Officer on Announcements by the Scottish Government", which sets out a number of methods by which the Government can make announcements to the Parliament. It is for the Government to decide which of those methods is the most appropriate in the circumstances, but I always hope that the Government will do so only after careful consideration of the position of the Parliament. I would like to give Mr Purvis's final point further consideration this afternoon, and I will come back to the chamber at decision time to say something further on that point.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-2057, in the name of John Swinney, on investment in Scottish infrastructure. I remind members that all contributions should be made through the chair, which means that members should refer to other members by their name or preferred title.

Question 1 was not lodged.

I call Nigel Don, and I remind him that the question relates to Dundee.

That was good enough, Mr Don.

Question 8 has been withdrawn.

Question 2 has been withdrawn.

With respect, First Minister, it is for Wendy Alexander to ask the questions. Does Ms Alexander wish to ask a final question?

I have a number of requests from members to ask supplementary questions. I will do my best to get in as many such questions as possible.

I cannot ask the First Minister to speak for the SPCB, but I am sure that he will want to.

Order.

Mr Rumbles, I ask you not to come into the chamber and straight away start making sedentary comments. Thank you.

We move to the open debate. Speeches should be around six minutes, please.

Order.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-2056, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on remote and rural health care. I remind members that all speeches should be made through the chair, by which I mean that members should refer to other members by their preferred name or title.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-2052, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Advice and Assistance (Limits, Conditions and Representation) (Scotland) Regulations 2008 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-2038.2, in the name of Pauline McNeill, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2038, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the drugs strategy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 57, Against 64, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-2038.3, in the name of Margaret Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2038, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the drugs strategy, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-2038, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the drugs strategy, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  [Resolved,]  That the Parliament welcomes the publication of the national drugs strategy, The Road to Recovery , as a sound framework for tackling drug misuse in Scotland; acknowledges that it is founded on expert advice and has been developed through a wide-ranging and inclusive process; supports the Scottish Government's vision that recovery should be the guiding principle of all services for problem drug users; recognises the breadth of action set out in the strategy and calls on the Scottish Government to provide the leadership and resources necessary to prevent drug use, to make communities safer, to tackle drug use in prisons and to protect children affected by parental substance misuse; recognises the Scottish Government's intention to support action to tackle drug misuse with £94 million from the Justice portfolio alone over the next three years and welcomes the work that Audit Scotland is carrying out into the scale and effectiveness of drugs expenditure, and resolves to support the implementation of the strategy over the coming years.

The final question is, that motion S3M-2052, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Advice and Assistance (Limits, Conditions and Representation) (Scotland) Regulations 2008 be approved.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-2051, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 11 June 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Alternative Business Structure for the Legal Profession followed by Scottish Government Debate: Impact of the Small Business Bonus Scheme followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 12 June 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 12.30 pm Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body Debate: Expenses Scheme 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Public Health etc. (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 18 June 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 1 Debate: Creative Scotland Bill followed by Financial Resolution: Creative Scotland Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 19 June 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Europe, External Affairs and Culture; Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Stage 1 Debate: Scottish Register of Tartans Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

I am afraid that the cabinet secretary is in his last minute.

The cabinet secretary will now take questions on the issues that were raised in her statement. We have around 30 minutes for such questions, after which we must move to the next item of business, which is very tightly subscribed. I remind members that all contributions should be made through the chair. That means that members should refer to other members by their preferred name or by their title.

I remind all remaining members that making contributions through the chair means not calling other members "you".

We now come to questions from back benchers. More people wish to ask questions than I can possibly fit in, so in order to allow in as many as possible, I make a plea for no speeches, no preambles, one question per member and answers that are as brief as possible.

I repeat that there should be one question per member.

Question, please, Mr Brown.

I am afraid that we must move to the next item of business. I apologise to the three members whom I could not call. As I have said, the next debate is extremely tightly subscribed.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-2038, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the drugs strategy.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-2050, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme for today. I call Michael McMahon to move the motion.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 4 June 2008— after 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions insert followed by Ministerial Statement: Scottish Ambulance Service—[ Michael McMahon .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a statement by Nicola Sturgeon on the Scottish Ambulance Service. The cabinet secretary will, of course, take questions at the end of her 15-minute statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions during it.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is the Reverend Stephen Taylor of the Kirk of St Nicholas Uniting in Aberdeen.

There are eight questions to be put as a result of today's business. In relation to the debate on moving Scotland forward, I remind members that if the amendment in the name of Malcolm Chisholm is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Ross Finnie will fall. The first question is, that amendment S3M-2002.3, in the name of Karen Gillon, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2002, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the common agricultural policy health check, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-2002.1, in the name of John Scott, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2002, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the common agricultural policy health check, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 79, Against 2, Abstentions 43.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-2002.2, in the name of Jim Hume, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2002, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the common agricultural policy health check, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 79, Against 2, Abstentions 43.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-2002, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the common agricultural policy health check, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 122, Against 0, Abstentions 2.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament, noting the European Commission's legislative proposals for the health check of the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) reform, welcomes the Scottish Government's commitment to consult on these proposals, and on the longer-term implementation of CAP in Scotland, in order that agriculture remains a dynamic and competitive industry playing its full part in ensuring the long-term viability of our rural communities and enabling farmers to play their part in achieving the Scottish Government's purpose of sustainable economic growth through food production, high standards of animal welfare and the environmental management of our agricultural land but, in so doing, notes the importance of consulting on the potential impact of progressive modulation on Scottish farms and affirms that any increases in European Union-wide modulation should be matched by a corresponding deduction in levels of voluntary modulation; considers that any increase in compulsory modulation must be offset by a corresponding reduction in voluntary modulation to ensure that Scottish producers are not put at a competitive disadvantage within the European Union; further considers that Scotland, with its high proportion of large farm units, must not be disadvantaged by proposals for progressive modulation or capping; believes that, in light of rapidly escalating food and fuel costs, the Scottish Rural Development Programme should be reviewed, with the production of food and food security considered as a key priority, and recognises the correlation between economic activity on the ground and delivery of environmental benefits for all.

The next question is, that motion S3M-2001.2.1, in the name of Murdo Fraser, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-2001.2, in the name of Malcolm Chisholm, on moving Scotland forward, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 74, Against 48, Abstentions 1.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-2001.2, in the name of Malcolm Chisholm, as amended, which seeks to amend motion S3M-2001, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on moving Scotland forward, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 58, Against 48, Abstentions 17.  Amendment, as amended, agreed to.

The amendment in the name of Ross Finnie is pre-empted.  The final question is, that motion S3M-2001, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on moving Scotland forward, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 75, No 49, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.   Resolved,  That the Parliament condemns the self-congratulation and lack of positive policies for the future in the First Minster's statement on Moving Scotland Forward on 14 May 2008; recognises the many SNP broken promises on a whole range of manifesto commitments, from dumping student debt to providing a £2,000 grant to first-time buyers; calls on the Scottish Government to bring forward substantive policies to address climate change, skills development, affordable housing shortages, health inequalities and the other big challenges that confront Scotland, and further calls on the Scottish Government to work constructively with Her Majesty's Government on these and other issues for the benefit of the Scottish people, thus demonstrating the benefits of our historic union with England, Wales and Northern Ireland, a union which continues to attract overwhelming public support.

Order. The minister has made it clear that he will not give way.

It is entirely up to the speaker whether they take an intervention. I have only just come into the chair, so I am not aware of any earlier exchanges.

Order. The minister has made it clear that he is not giving way.

First, I thank the member for giving me notice of her point of order. Karen Gillon has raised two issues. First, she asked whether I wish to ask the First Minister to clarify his position to the chamber. I repeat—I have said this many times before—that it is not the role of the Presiding Officer to establish the veracity of statements made by ministers. It is open to all members, if they feel that ministers have misled the chamber—deliberately or otherwise—to ask them to return to the chamber. It would be expected that they would do so. However, that is a matter for members and not for the Presiding Officers. Secondly, Karen Gillon asked about the completion of the review of the ministerial code. That is a matter for the Scottish Government, but I am sure that members are aware that the matter has been raised at the Parliamentary Bureau in recent weeks. If the member wishes it to be raised again, I suggest that she discuss the matter with her business manager.

I am not entirely certain what point of order the member is raising. I repeat that the veracity of members' replies and answers is for them to determine, not for the Presiding Officers to determine. There was nothing wrong with the question, if that is what Ms MacDonald is asking.

That is a matter for the First Minister, as I have made clear on many occasions.

Briefly please.

We will squeeze in question 14.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-2001, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on moving Scotland forward.

Order. There is too much noise.

Order. I think that the First Minister knows what the question is.

That is enough. We do not need any more sedentary interventions.

Order.

I will take points of order at the end of First Minister's question time.

Order.

As I have repeatedly said, such matters are not points of order. The whole chamber was aware of the question that you asked—as you said, it was clear and succinct. The First Minister would be equally aware of the question, and the whole chamber also heard the response.

We need to have a question, Mr Smith.

Question please, Mr Smith.

Good morning. The first item of business today is a statement by Fergus Ewing on the drugs strategy. The minister will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions.

We have around 30 minutes for questions, after which we will move on to the next item of business. It would be helpful, in managing that process, if members who wish to ask a question pressed their request-to-speak buttons now.

We need a question, Miss Goldie.

We come to questions from back benchers—I emphasise "questions", as I did in yesterday's meeting. We do not have time for speeches or lengthy preambles. A number of members want to ask questions, and I can take no time out of the next debate, which is already oversubscribed.

Time is getting tight. If I am to call everybody who has requested to speak, I must ask for strictly one question per member. Brevity is the key word, and I am afraid that that must apply to the answers as well.

Briefly please, Mr McNeil.

There is only one question to be put as a result of today's business. The question is, that motion S3M-1998, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Fundable Bodies (The Scottish Agricultural College) (Scotland) Order 2008 be approved.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-1998, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Fundable Bodies (The Scottish Agricultural College) (Scotland) Order 2008 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

Members should note that business motion S3M-1996 has been withdrawn and that a revised business motion—S3M-2010—has been lodged. The Business Bulletin has been revised to incorporate the new motion. The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-2010, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 4 June 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Drugs Strategy followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 5 June 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Remote and Rural Health Care 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Justice and Law Officers; Rural Affairs and the Environment 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Investment in Scottish Infrastructure followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 11 June 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 12 June 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions  followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Public Health etc. (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-1997, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 2 of the Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Bill at Stage 2 be completed by 20 June 2008.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The cabinet secretary will take questions on the issues raised in his statement. We have around 30 minutes for questions. Time is very tight, because the next debate is oversubscribed.

Order.

Order.

We come to questions from back-bench members. I emphasise the word "questions". We do not have time for preambles and there should certainly not be speeches. That way, I will be able to get everybody in. I repeat that I have no leeway to take time out of the next debate.

Order.

Before I call the minister to respond, I remind members that all contributions should be made through the chair. That means that members should refer to other members by their name or title and not by the word "you".

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Father Paul Francis Spencer of St Mungo's church in Glasgow.

The next item of business is a statement by John Swinney on the Scottish futures trust. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his 15-minute statement, so there should be no interventions or interruptions during it.

There are 10 questions to be put as a result of today's business. In relation to the debate on the skills strategy, I remind members that if the amendment in the name of Fiona Hyslop is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Murdo Fraser will fall. The first question is, that amendment S3M-1951.3, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1951, in the name of Rhona Brankin, on skills strategy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 47, Against 71, Abstentions 2.  Amendment disagreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-1951.1, in the name of Murdo Fraser, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1951, in the name of Rhona Brankin, on skills strategy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 71, Against 47, Abstentions 2.  Amendment agreed to.

The third question is, that amendment S3M-1951.2, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, which also seeks to amend motion S3M-1951, in the name of Rhona Brankin, on the skills strategy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 57, Against 63, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The fourth question is, that motion S3M-1951, in the name of Rhona Brankin, on the skills strategy, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 70, Against 47, Abstentions 2.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament notes that the Scottish Government's skills strategy was rejected by the Parliament on 12 September 2007; recognises the importance of skills development and utilisation in growing Scotland's economy; voices concern at the decision of the Scottish Government to move away from supporting adult apprenticeships in vital areas such as the tourism, IT and retail sectors without consultation with work-based training providers; calls on the Scottish Government to provide the Parliament, with immediate effect, the evidence to support these moves, and further calls on the Scottish Government to bring forward a revised skills strategy immediately after the summer recess containing detailed information about the level at which its 50,000 training places are being set, its targets for apprenticeships and the performance indicators used to measure success and details of how access will be provided to high quality vocational education for all school pupils aged 14 or above.

The fifth question is, that amendment S3M-1955.1.1, in the name of Ross Finnie, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-1955.1, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Scottish Ambulance Service, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The sixth question is, that amendment S3M-1955.1, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, as amended, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1955, in the name of Margaret Curran, on the Scottish Ambulance Service, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The seventh question is, that motion S3M-1955, in the name of Margaret Curran, on the Scottish Ambulance Service, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament welcomes the improved performance demonstrated by the Scottish Ambulance Service in recent months, particularly in relation to responding more quickly to life threatening calls; congratulates the staff of the Scottish Ambulance Service for their efforts in achieving this improvement for patients; acknowledges the need to ensure that the Scottish Ambulance Service continues to improve across a range of indicators and that it effectively consults staff and communicates with the public about the service it provides for them, and calls on the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing to make a full statement to the Parliament, at the earliest opportunity, on the operation of the Scottish Ambulance Service, specifically the use of single person crews, the deployment of rapid response vehicles, ambulance response times, rates of  assaults on ambulance crews and the impact of journey length on patient safety.

The eighth question is, that amendment S3M-1954.1, in the name of David Stewart, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1954, in the name of Frank Mulholland, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The ninth question is, that amendment S3M-1954.2, in the name of Jim Hume, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1954, in the name of Frank Mulholland, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 16, Against 102, Abstentions 2.  Amendment disagreed to.

The final question is, that motion S3M-1954, in the name of Frank Mulholland, on wildlife crime, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament welcomes the report, Natural Justice: A Joint Thematic Inspection of the Arrangements in Scotland for Preventing, Investigating and Prosecuting Wildlife Crime, by HM Inspectorate of Constabulary for Scotland and the Inspectorate of Prosecution in Scotland; commends the recommendations in the report, the implementation of which will bring to bear the full professional expertise of the agencies who investigate, detect and prosecute those involved in wildlife crime; looks forward to the development of a strong and effective partnership for action against wildlife crime, working to a new agreed strategy on wildlife crime and co-ordinating the fight against the abuse of Scotland's vital natural heritage; supports in full the recommendations of the Tomkins report, and calls on the Scottish Government to produce an action plan on tackling wildlife crime, including a timetable for the implementation of the report.

Order.

This is not a matter for applause—unless of course members are applauding what I am about to say. I thank the member for giving me advance notice of the point of order. I understand that the report's publication was notified to Parliament by inspired parliamentary question at 9.30 am today. I also understand that there is no requirement for the document to which Patrick Harvie referred to be formally laid before Parliament, so chapter 14 of standing orders does not apply. However, I always request that the Government make every effort to ensure that such documents are available to the Parliament as soon as they enter the public domain. As to Mr Harvie's suggestion, I will take it away and ponder it at my leisure. [ Applause. ] That was a matter for applause.

Order. There is too much background noise.

I am sorry to say that we do not have all day, Ms MacDonald.

Question 3 has been withdrawn.

I am sorry, Mr McNeill. Could you lift your microphone, please?

Do you have a question, Mr McNeill?

Order. That is enough.

In the heat of debate, it always helps if all members refer to each other by their chosen names, rather than by nicknames.

Mr McLetchie.

Ms Brankin. Order, thank you.

Ms Brankin. Order, thank you.

I call James Kelly.

I am sorry, Mr Kelly; your name came up in the wrong place. We will move to question 5.

Briefly, please, Ms Baker.

Briefly please, Ms McInnes.

That was very clever of Mr Henry, given that his question is on the next page of my script.

Before we move to First Minister's question time, I am delighted to say that His Excellency Jean-Michel Veranneman De Watervliet, the Belgian ambassador to the United Kingdom, has joined us in the Presiding Officer's gallery today. Ambassador, you are most warmly welcome. [ Applause. ]

Dr Simpson, you must come to a close, please.

You must close, please.

I now call Stuart McMillan.

We come to the open debate. We can be a bit flexible with time, but I ask that members keep their speeches to around four minutes. I call Stuart McMillan, to be followed by Marilyn Livingstone.

I apologise; this is a Labour Party debate. I call Marilyn Livingstone, to be followed by Stuart McMillan.

You have only four minutes in which to mention skills, Mr Fraser.

Good morning. The first item of business is a Labour Party debate on motion S3M-1951, in the name of Rhona Brankin, on the skills strategy.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-1943.1, in the name of Dr Richard Simpson, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1943, in the name of Shona Robison, on hepatitis C, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-1943.2, in the name of Ross Finnie, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1943, in the name of Shona Robison, on hepatitis C, as amended, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The third question is, that motion S3M-1943, in the name of Shona Robison, on hepatitis C, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament recognises the leading role that Scotland is taking in tackling hepatitis C as a significant public health issue; commends the hard work undertaken by those staff involved in delivering 40 out of 41 action points in Phase I of the Scottish Government's Hepatitis C Action Plan and welcomes the launch of the Scottish Government Hepatitis C Phase II Action Plan, backed by funding of £43 million on 19 May 2008 as a significant step forward in seeking to prevent hepatitis C and working to raise awareness among professionals, the public and those at risk of infection and in delivering testing, treatment, support and care services to those affected by the disease, and considers that this will enable NHS boards and others identified in the plan to deliver on the actions set out to improve hepatitis C services for patients and others in Scotland.

With respect, Dr Murray, that is not a point of order.

Order.

I explained at the beginning—if anybody was listening—that there would be one speaker for and one against the motion, if anyone requested to speak against it, and one speaker for and one against the amendment. We have followed that process and I move now to the vote. The question is, that amendment S3M-1956.1, in the name of Robert Brown, which seeks to amend business motion S3M-1956, in the name of Bruce Crawford, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 15, Against 62, Abstentions 44.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-1956, in the name of Bruce Crawford, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 62, Against 14, Abstentions 45.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 28 May 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Scottish Futures Trust   followed by Scottish Government Debate: Climate Change followed by Business Motion  followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 29 May 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Drugs Strategy followed by Scottish Government Debate: Common Agricultural Policy Health Check 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Moving Scotland Forward followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 4 June 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 5 June 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Justice and Law Officers; Rural Affairs and the Environment 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business

Order. Could I bring the chamber to order, please? These are serious issues. We are in unprecedented, uncharted waters and I would like to hear Mr Brown in silence, please.

Order.

Order.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-1956, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. There is an amendment to the business motion today, as amendment S3M-1956.1, in the name of Robert Brown, has gathered the appropriate support. The amendment is set out in the Business Bulletin , as revised at 4 pm today, which is available at the back of the chamber and which has been e-mailed to all members. As it is somewhat unusual to have an amendment to a business motion, I will explain briefly how the procedure will work. Standing orders state that there can be only one speaker for and one speaker against a business motion and any amendment to that motion. Each speaker, in accordance with rule 8.11.3 of standing orders, is permitted to speak for a maximum of five minutes. That being clearly understood, I call on Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-1956.

Members will realise that we are under considerable time pressure. I am keen to call all members who want to ask questions, so I ask all members, including front-bench members, to avoid unnecessary dialogue and to keep questions short and succinct.

Very briefly, please.

I am not sure that Mr Finnie's definition of "briefly" and mine are exactly in tune. I caution members please not to use the second person singular. I do not know how long I am going to have to go on about that, but I will go on as long as it takes.

We come to questions from back-bench members. Ten members wish to ask questions and I have 10 minutes to fit them in, so that is fairly simple.

Second person singular, Ms Grahame.

No—you should say, "Can the minister tell me," not, "Can you tell me." I am the only "you".

Please continue.

Briefly, please.

I ask for strictly one question per member from now on, please.

A question, please.

I thank the member for giving me advance notice of his point of order. The minister has indicated that he would like to respond, so I will give him an opportunity to do so. I refer members to the good practice guidance on announcements by the Scottish Executive or Government, which sets out a number of methods by which the Government can make statements to the Parliament. It is for the Government to decide which of those methods is most appropriate in the circumstances, but this is clearly a matter of some importance. I am sure that the minister heard what the member had to say.

I caution the minister against the use of first names only.

I am not entirely clear what your point of order is.

I do not accept that this is a genuine point of order. What is right or wrong is for me to determine in this chamber. I said in response to Mr Brown's point of order that the matter is of some importance and it is for the Government to decide how to go about making statements. I respectfully suggest that both members have had the opportunity to make their points and that they are now on the record.

Order.

I point out that the matter should be addressed by the good practice guidance on announcements. Given the points raised in the chamber today, I will be amazed if the matter is not raised in the Parliamentary Bureau, which is the right place for such discussions to take place, rather than in the chamber. Members have had their opportunity to put their points on the record and I suggest that we move to the next item of business.

I thank the member for advance notice of his point of order. He raises two issues. With regard to the minister's not informing the member of the visit to his constituency, I ask the member to raise the matter with me in writing under the code of conduct and I will look into it. Secondly, I am unaware of the content of the announcement to which the member refers, but I take the opportunity to remind the Government that major policy announcements should not enter the public domain before or without being communicated to the Parliament. That principle is covered, as we have just discussed, in the good practice guidance on announcements by the Scottish Executive and in the ministerial code. I suggest that we are eating greatly into a very important subject.

Again, if the member raises the issue in writing with me, I will consider it. We really should move to the next—and very important—item of business. We have already eaten severely into the time allowed for questions.

The next item of business is a statement by Shona Robison—[ Interruption. ] Could we please have some order in the chamber? The next item of business is a statement by Shona Robison on the smoking prevention action plan. As the minister will take questions at the end of her 15-minute statement, there should be no interventions.

Good afternoon. As always, the first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is the Rev Tony Stephen, of Banchory Church of Scotland youth ministry.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-1902.3, in the name of Margaret Curran, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1902, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on free personal care, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 59, Against 63, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-1902.1, in the name of Mary Scanlon, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1902, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on free personal care, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 75, Against 0, Abstentions 47.  Amendment agreed to.

The third question is, that amendment S3M-1902.2, in the name of Ross Finnie, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1902, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on free personal care, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The fourth question is, that motion S3M-1902, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on free personal care, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 79, Against 43, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament welcomes the publication of Lord Sutherland's independent review of free personal and nursing care and the Scottish Government's acceptance in full of the report's recommendations, including the commitment to provide £40 million a year in additional funding the source of which will be identified in next year's budget; notes Lord Sutherland's clear conclusion that the UK Government should not have withdrawn the attendance allowance funding in respect of self-funding clients in care homes, currently valued at over £30 million a year; urges the Scottish Government to pursue vigorously with UK Ministers the reinstatement of this funding while longer-term work to re-assess all funding streams relevant to the care of older people in Scotland takes place, and calls on the eight Scottish councils which continue to charge for assisting with food preparation to cease to do so forthwith and all councils which have levied such charges to refund everyone who has been wrongly charged for this service.

Order. I apologise for interrupting the minister, but there is too much noise in the chamber. I ask members who are coming in to respect members who want to listen to the end of the debate.

Question 6 has been withdrawn.

We have a little time in hand, so I will allow a final question.

I am sure that the Parliament wishes to join me in welcoming Dr Gabriele Matzner-Holzer, the Austrian ambassador to the United Kingdom, who is in the gallery. The ambassador is most welcome. [ Applause. ]

Question, please.

Briefly, please.

I thank the member for giving me prior notice of the point of order—I very much appreciate that. While I understand the point that she is trying to make, as I have stated many times previously, it is not the role of the Presiding Officer to establish the veracity of statements made by ministers. I refer the member to the announcement that I made about that in the Business Bulletin of 22 November last year, in which she will find advice that issues of this nature are a matter for the ministerial code. If you wish to pursue the matter, you should take it up—as I think that you have already hinted that you will do—with the First Minister, under the ministerial code.

I think that you have already answered that question, minister.

Question 6 was not lodged.

Good morning. The first item of business is a statement by Stewart Maxwell on equality and diversity. The minister will take questions at the end of his statement, so no interventions should be made.

The minister will now take questions on the issues raised in his statement. We have approximately 20 minutes or so for questions, after which we will move on to the next item of business.

No, I am afraid not; this is just questions and answers.

We come to back-bench questions, for which only 10 minutes are available, so I insist on one question per member.

Question, please.

Question, please.

As the member is aware, I am not responsible for the content of answers. The member has a point, but I am afraid that it is not a point of order.

The next item of business is a debate on the Shucksmith report and the future of crofting in Scotland.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions, S3M-1900 and S3M-1901, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Transport and Works (Scotland) Act 2007 (Access to Land on Application) Order 2008 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Transport and Works (Scotland) Act 2007 (Access to Land by the Scottish Ministers) Order 2008 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

There are four questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-1717, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Bill.

The second question is, that motion S3M-1887, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution for the Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any increase in expenditure of a kind referred to in paragraph 3(b)(iii) of Rule 9.12 of the Parliament's Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.

The third question is, that motion S3M-1900, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Transport and Works (Scotland) Act 2007 (Access to Land on Application) Order 2008 be approved.

The final question is, that motion S3M-1901, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of an SSI, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Transport and Works (Scotland) Act 2007 (Access to Land by the Scottish Ministers) Order 2008 be approved.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-1887, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution for the Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any increase in expenditure of a kind referred to in paragraph 3(b)(iii) of Rule 9.12 of the Parliament's Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.—[ Kenny MacAskill .]

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-1899, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 21 May 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Smoking Prevention Action Plan followed by Scottish Government Debate: Hepatitis C  followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 22 May 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning; Europe, External Affairs and Culture 2.55 pm Ministerial Statement: Fuel Poverty followed by Scottish Government Debate: Wildlife Crime followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 28 May 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 29 May 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

Not during a statement, Lord Foulkes.

Order.

Order. That is enough.

Order. There is too much muttering around the chamber.

As I intimated, the First Minister will now take questions on issues that his statement has raised. I intend to allow about 30 minutes for questions, after which we will move on to the next item of business.

Order, Ms Curran.

We come to back-bench questions. We have far more questioners than we are likely to be able to fit in in the time available, so brief questions and answers would be greatly valued.

Question, please.

Order.

I must press you for a question.

Question, please.

Very briefly, please, Ms Brankin.

That was not a point of order for me, Lord Foulkes. My only role in agreeing the statement was in chairing the Parliamentary Bureau meeting that agreed to allow the statement to be made. It is not my role to edit the statement in any way. That brings us to the end of questions on the statement. We have eaten into the time allowed for the next debate, which was already tight. I apologise to the four members whom I was unable to call to ask questions.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-1717, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Bill.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Mr Rob Parsons, who is the executive chairman of Care for the Family.

The next item of business is a statement by the First Minister on moving Scotland forward. The First Minister will take questions at the end of his statement, therefore there should be no interventions.

There are eight questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-1848.2, in the name of Stewart Maxwell, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1848, in the name of Johann Lamont, on meeting Scotland's housing needs, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 48, Against 75, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-1848.1, in the name of Jamie McGrigor, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1848, in the name of Johann Lamont, on meeting Scotland's housing needs, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 74, Against 46, Abstentions 3.  Amendment agreed to.

The third question is, that amendment S3M-1848.3, in the name of Jim Tolson, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1848, in the name of Johann Lamont, on meeting Scotland's housing needs, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 74, Against 48, Abstentions 1.  Amendment agreed to.

The fourth question is, that motion S3M-1848, in the name of Johann Lamont, on meeting Scotland's housing needs, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 74, Against 48, Abstentions 1.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  [Resolved,]  That the Parliament recognises the broad range of issues that must be tackled in meeting the diverse housing needs of people across Scotland; confirms that the Scottish Government must act to address these issues, including continued work to prevent and reduce homelessness, the further development of housing to meet particular and specialist need, dealing with the blockages to the supply of housing, providing affordable housing to buy and within the socially rented sector, ensuring higher quality and better managed housing for rent in the private sector, seeking solutions to the problems facing local authorities where tenants voted against stock transfer and recognising the distinctive challenges in rural areas, regeneration areas and areas of high demand; notes that the consultation responses to the Firm Foundations document exposed significant flaws in the Scottish Government's approach; urges the Scottish Government to address these flaws and bring forward a coherent strategy for all of Scotland's housing needs and, in particular, agrees that the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing should ensure that the Mazars report into second stage transfer issues in Glasgow Housing Association is subject to open, transparent and independent scrutiny; regrets the failure of the Scottish Government to actively promote housing stock transfer by local authorities to community-based housing associations, with the approval of tenants; urges the Scottish Government to co-operate with HM Treasury and councils to achieve the substantial debt write-offs of over £2 billion which are available and thereby facilitate new investment in social housing; regrets that after two parliamentary debates on the subject since the budget was passed, the Scottish Government has still failed to come forward with clear figures on its housing plans across all sector and tenure types including the number of affordable rented houses to be built from 2008 to 2011, and has further failed to produce a clear trajectory for how it intends to meet its commitment to abolish unintentional homelessness by 2012; calls for improved energy efficiency to be a key objective in plans for new housing, and opposes the Scottish Government's proposals for large scale procurement put forward in Firm Foundations .

The fifth question is, that amendment S3M-1849.2, in the name of Andy Kerr, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1849, in  the name of Bruce Crawford, on effective public services, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 45, Against 64, Abstentions 16.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1849.1, in the name of Derek Brownlee, seeking to amend motion S3M-1849, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on effective public services, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 63, Against 46, Abstentions 16.  Amendment agreed to.

The seventh question is, that amendment S3M-1849.3, in the name of Robert Brown, seeking to amend motion S3M-1849, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on effective public services, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 60, Against 65, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The final question is, that motion S3M-1849, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on effective public services, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 63, Against 60, Abstentions 2.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  [Resolved,]  That the Parliament welcomes the opportunity to debate proposals to deliver better public services by reducing duplication, bureaucracy and overlaps in the public sector with the aim of achieving greater focus and alignment with the Purpose of Government and the outcomes set out in the national performance framework; believes that there is scope for continuous improvement in the design and delivery of public services, and rejects the notion that improvements in public services can only be achieved by increased levels of public spending.

I must reluctantly suspend for half a minute, until decision time at 5 o'clock.

Could we have a question, please?

I was not planning to meet you, Ms Eadie, but I am sure that the minister will answer accordingly.

I am afraid that I can do none of those things, Mr Adam, but I suspect that the minister might be able to.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-1849, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on effective public services.

I call Wendy Alexander. [ Applause. ] Order.

Order.

Order.

Questions are for the First Minister.

I will take a constituency question from Cathie Craigie.

I will take a further constituency question from Stuart McMillan.

Order.

Order.

Question, please.

Before we move to First Minister's questions, I remind members to stay behind at the end for an official photograph for the Parliament's annual report. The photograph will be taken here in the chamber, not on the steps down to the garden lobby, as was previously intimated.

A number of members who, I am led to believe, wish to take part in the debate have not yet pressed their request-to-speak buttons. It would be helpful if they could do so.

Before the minister answers, I point out that too many members on all sides are using the word "you" when they should not be. As I have said many a time, the only you in here is me.

Good morning. The first item of business is a Labour Party debate on motion S3M-1848, in the name of Johann Lamont, on meeting Scotland's housing needs.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-1838.2, in the name of Malcolm Chisholm, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1838, in the name of Linda Fabiani, on the international framework, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 79, Against 0, Abstentions 46.  Amendment agreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-1838.1, in the name of Ted Brocklebank, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1838, in the name of Linda Fabiani, on the international framework, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 77, Against 48, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The third question is, that amendment S3M-1838.3, in the name of Iain Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1838, in the name of Linda Fabiani, on the international framework, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 77, Against 48, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The fourth question is, that motion S3M-1838, in the name of Linda Fabiani, on the international framework, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 76, Against 46, Abstentions 2.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament recognises the importance of ensuring that Scotland is competitive in an increasingly globalised society; agrees that creating the conditions for talented people to live, learn, visit, work and remain in Scotland is crucial to helping to deliver the goals of growing Scotland's population and economy in a sustainable way, and welcomes the Scottish Government's International Framework as part of the means to extend, focus and align the actions and policies of the government and public sector partners to these ends while stressing the need to "make full use of the UK resources at our disposal", including "the Foreign and Commonwealth Office network around the world to maximise business, cultural and educational opportunities for Scotland", and "engage more directly with the British Council in our priority markets with a view to maximising the opportunities to showcase Scotland's cultural and educational excellence abroad", as outlined in the International Framework document, but does not consider it in the best interests of Scotland for the Scottish Government to promote policies which do not command the support of the Parliament and, in particular, does not believe that the International Framework or any of the related documents or actions of the Scottish Government should contain any reference to Scottish independence, for which the minority Scottish Government has no mandate nor any authority from the Parliament to promote.

The fifth question is, that motion S3M-1845, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Victim Notification Scheme (Scotland) Order 2008 be approved.

I would be interested to know under what part of standing orders that point of order is raised.

I do not think that that is an issue for standing orders, so it is not a matter for me to determine. However, I am willing to have a conversation with you on the subject, Ms MacDonald, either later today or tomorrow. That brings us to the end of decision time. We move on to members' business, so I ask members who are leaving the chamber to do so quietly.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-1846, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business─ Wednesday 14 May 2008  2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by First Minister's Statement: Moving Scotland Forward followed by Stage 1 Debate: Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution: Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 15 May 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Equality and Diversity followed by Scottish Government Debate: Schucksmith Report and the Future of Crofting in Scotland 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Free Personal Care followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 21 May 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 22 May 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning; Europe, External Affairs and Culture 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-1845, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Victim Notification Scheme (Scotland) Order 2008 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

As I intimated, the cabinet secretary will now take questions on the issues raised in her statement. We have around 30 minutes for questions, after which we will move to the next item of business.

We come to questions from back benchers. You know the form: brevity is beautiful in both questions and answers.

Four members have indicated that they have questions to ask, but less than four minutes remain for them to do so.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Amanullah De Sondy from the centre for the study of Islam at the University of Glasgow.

The next item of business is a statement by the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing, Nicola Sturgeon, on free personal care.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-1768.2, in the name of Ken Macintosh, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1768, in the name of Maureen Watt, on international education, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 57, Against 64, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-1768.1, in the name of Hugh O'Donnell, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1768, in the name of Maureen Watt, on international education, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 58, Against 16, Abstentions 47.  Amendment agreed to.

The third question is, that motion S3M-1768, in the name of Maureen Watt, on international education, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 104, Against 16, Abstentions 1.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament recognises the importance of preparing young people for life in today's increasingly globalised society; agrees that all our young people should have an international education with opportunities to develop a knowledge and understanding of the world and Scotland's place in it; congratulates the many schools across Scotland that have made and continue to make links with schools across the world; agrees that the Curriculum for Excellence is the ideal vehicle to deliver international education in schools and equip young people with an understanding of, and the skills for, the modern world, and calls for the Scottish Government to bring forward a comprehensive national languages strategy including a rolling programme to introduce a second language early into primary education and to secure economic benefit from the diverse language skills in a multicultural Scotland.

The fourth question is, that motion S3M-1712, in the name of Duncan McNeil, on the Local Government and Communities Committee report on planning application processes in relation to Menie estate, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Local Government and Communities Committee's 5th Report, 2008 (Session 3): Planning Application Processes (Menie Estate) (SP Paper 73).

As I indicated earlier, the minister will now take questions. We have around 20 minutes for those questions, after which we will move to the next item of business.

Order.

We come to questions from back benchers. Members know the form by now. If they are kept short, we will get them all in—although I am not confident that we will be able to do so, as there are quite a few.

Order.

Briefly, please.

Thank you.

I can only apologise to the three members whom I was unable to call.

The next item of business is a statement by John Swinney on industrial action at Grangemouth. The minister will take questions at the end of his statement and therefore there should be no interventions.

I think that appropriate language is called for at this point.

It is more likely to be highlighted, minister.

We move swiftly on to question 2.

I am not convinced that there is much that is of a devolved nature in that question, but it is up to the minister how she wishes to reply.

The question was about culture, Ms Smith, but a lot of your supplementary question seemed to be about trade links. Nevertheless, I will look into the matter and will provide you with a more substantive answer in writing.

Question 3 has been withdrawn.

Question 5 has been withdrawn.

Order.

Order, Mr Gibson.

Question 9 has been withdrawn, for understandable reasons. That gives me the rare opportunity to invite a member to ask the 10 th question.

Order.

Order.

I will take a question from Cathy Peattie, within whose constituency Grangemouth lies.

Briefly, please.

Very briefly, please, Mr Purvis.

I am sure that members will wish to join me in welcoming Ms Conny Seoposengwe MPL, the Speaker of the Northern Cape Provincial Legislature, who has joined us in the Presiding Officer's gallery for First Minister's question time. Madam Speaker, you are most welcome. [ Applause. ]

Could we hear a question, please?

Good morning. The first item of business is a statement by Fiona Hyslop on national qualifications. As the cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of her statement, there should be no interventions.

The minister will now take questions on the issues raised in her statement. I will allow around 30 minutes for questions, after which we will move to the next item of business. It would be helpful if all members who wish to ask questions would press their request-to-speak buttons now.

We come now to questions from back benchers. As ever, brevity is encouraged—indeed, it is essential if we are to get through them all.

There is just time for a final question from John Park.

Very briefly, please.

That brings us to the end of the ministerial statement and questions. Before we move to the next item of business, I inform members that I have received a request from the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth to make an urgent ministerial statement on the industrial action at the Grangemouth refinery. I am of the opinion that the matter is of sufficient urgency for a statement to be made. After consultation with business managers, it is my intention to take that item of business at 5 o'clock this afternoon. As a consequence, decision time will be moved to 5.30. The cabinet secretary will make a 10-minute statement, after which I will allow 20 minutes for questions. The necessary alterations to the daily business will be made and all members will be notified.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-1768, in the name of Maureen Watt, on international education. I call Maureen Watt to speak to and move the motion in her name.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-1751.2, in the name of Malcolm Chisholm, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1751, in the name of Linda Fabiani, on Historic Scotland and local authorities, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 100, Against 0, Abstentions 16.  Amendment agreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-1751.1, in the name of Ted Brocklebank, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1751, in the name of Linda Fabiani, on Historic Scotland and local authorities, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 18, Against 44, Abstentions 54.  Amendment disagreed to.

The third question is, that amendment S3M-1751.3, in the name of Iain Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1751, in the name of Linda Fabiani, on Historic Scotland and local authorities, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The fourth question is, that motion S3M-1751, in the name of Linda Fabiani, on Historic Scotland and local authorities, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament recognises the unique relationship between Historic Scotland and local authorities in the protection of the nation's historic environment and welcomes initiatives to modernise and simplify that relationship to the benefit of local authorities, Historic Scotland and stakeholders, always ensuring that strong safeguards are maintained to protect heritage assets, that the skills required to maintain historic buildings are available and that, in protecting the historic environment, proper account is taken of disability rights and climate change objectives, and encourages Historic Scotland to work with local authorities to improve the consultation with local communities on the designation of listed buildings and scheduled monuments.

The final question is, that motion S3M-1654, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Statute Law (Repeals) Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Statute Law (Repeals) Bill, introduced in the House of Lords on 27 February 2008, relating to Statute Law Repeal, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, should be considered by the UK Parliament.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-1654, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Statute Law (Repeals) Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Statute Law (Repeals) Bill, introduced in the House of Lords on 27 February 2008, relating to Statute Law Repeal, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[ Fergus Ewing. ]

The next item of business is consideration of motions S3M-1763, S3M-1764 and S3M-1765, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme, a completion date for stage 2 of the Public Health etc (Scotland) Bill, and a completion date for stage 1 of the Scottish Register of Tartans Bill.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 30 April 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Implementing the Vulnerable Witnesses (Scotland) Act followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Glasgow Commonwealth Games Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 1 May 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Impact of the UK Budget on Scotland followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 7 May 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 8 May 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions  followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and Law Officers 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Business Motion followed by Members' Business That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Public Health etc. (Scotland) Bill at Stage 2 be completed by 23 May 2008. That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Scottish Register of Tartans Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 13 June 2008.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motions agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-1762, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business motion for this afternoon's business.  Motion not moved.

The next item of business is a statement by Nicola Sturgeon on hepatitis C. As always, the cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of her statement, so there should be no interventions.

The cabinet secretary will take questions on the issues raised in her statement. Around 30 minutes are available for questions, after which we will move to the next item of business.

We come to back-bench questions, which will—as always—need to be slightly more succinct than the front-bench questions that have preceded them, if we are to get through them all.

The next item of business is a debate on S3M-1751, in the name of Linda Fabiani, on Historic Scotland and local authorities.

The first item of business is time for reflection. I am pleased to welcome as our time for reflection leader Father Robert Kane of St Teresa's, Newarthill in Motherwell.

There are seven questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-1715.1, in the name of Patrick Harvie, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1715, in the name of Andy Kerr, on local income tax, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 65, Against 61, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-1715, in the name of Andy Kerr, on local income tax, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 65, Against 62, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament notes the Scottish Government's consultation on the future of local taxation; recognises that this consultation is not due to close until 18 July 2008; notes the wider range of possible options, including local income tax, land value tax, property tax and reform of the council tax; recognises that the existing system of local government taxation is discredited, bureaucratic and unpopular; agrees on the urgent need for substantial changes to the system of local taxation, and agrees that, in developing this future system, due consideration should be given to fairness, local accountability, the need to reduce tax avoidance and the wider social, economic and environmental impact of any proposed system of local tax reform on communities across Scotland.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1706.2.1, in the name of Derek Brownlee, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-1706.2, in the name of Jim Mather, on support for the voluntary sector, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 81, Against 46, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1706.2, in the name of Jim Mather, as amended, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1706, in the name of Elaine Murray, on support for the voluntary sector, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 66, Against 61, Abstentions 0.  Amendment, as amended, agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1706.1, in the name of Robert Brown, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1706, in the name of Elaine Murray, on support for the voluntary sector, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 64, Against 62, Abstentions 1.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-1706, in the name of Elaine Murray, on support for the voluntary sector, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 80, Against 47, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament applauds the vital contribution made to society and the economy by the third sector; believes that co-operation between the third sector, local authorities and the Scottish Government is vital in ensuring a strong role for the third sector; recognises that the Scottish Government is funding Project Scotland and has made clear to Project Scotland that further resources may be available for projects it runs in terms of the Scottish Government's employability agenda; believes that the exemption from payment of water rates extended by the previous administration to 2010 should be further extended; calls on the Scottish Government to work with the third sector to reduce the burden of regulation affecting the sector; recognises the problems facing the voluntary sector caused by short-term funding and re-tendering; believes that there is a pressing need to review the system to provide more stable funding for the sector including longer- term contracts and a national contracts framework; notes the establishment of the voluntary sector compact under the last administration and calls for a revitalised compact between local government and the voluntary sector; believes that this compact must ensure greater dialogue between councils and voluntary groups as to the operation of the local government Concordat and the single outcome agreements, and calls for a review of the operation of the Concordat including its key outcomes and performance indicators following the first year of its implementation.

The final question is, that motion S3M-1560, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Public Health etc (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Public Health etc. (Scotland) Bill.

That concludes the debate on the Public Health etc (Scotland) Bill. I must suspend the meeting until decision time at 5 o'clock.

I will not answer the question, but the minister may.

Question 3 is withdrawn for entirely understandable reasons. If he is quick about it, I will let Michael Matheson put question 4. Your late arrival is a slight discourtesy to the chamber, Mr Matheson.

Before I call the minister, I accept your apology, Mr Matheson, but I point out that Parliament agreed the change to the business programme yesterday.

Questions 7 and 8 have been withdrawn.

Briefly, please.

The next item of business is a 10-minute statement by Stewart Stevenson on the extension of the First ScotRail franchise. As the minister will take questions at the end of his statement, there should be no interventions.

There was no question, First Minister.

Order. There was no question, and therefore there is no need for an answer.

I do not have favourite ministers, Ms Lamont.

Ask a question, please.

Briefly, please.

Order.

Order.

That concludes First Minister's question time.

It is for the chamber to hold the First Minister to account, as I have said many times—it is not for me, as Presiding Officer.

Before the minister speaks, I remind members that the word "you" should be applied only to me. I really have to say that too often.

I remind all members that the only "you" they should refer to in this chamber is me.

Good morning. The first item of business is a Labour Party debate on motion S3M-1715, in the name of Andy Kerr, on local income tax. I invite all members who wish to speak in the debate to press their request-to-speak buttons now. I advise all members that time is extremely tight and I will have to be pretty ruthless.

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motion S3M-1713, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the designation of a lead committee.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee be appointed as the lead committee in consideration of the Scottish Register of Tartans Bill at Stage 1.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The first question is, that motion S3M-1629, in the name of Bill Aitken, on the report on the inquiry into the effective use of police resources, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Justice Committee's 4th Report, 2008 (Session 3): Report on Inquiry into the Effective Use of Police Resources (SP Paper 50) .

The next question is, that motion S3M-1713, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the designation of a lead committee, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee be appointed as the lead committee in consideration of the Scottish Register of Tartans Bill at Stage 1.

The next item of business is consideration of business motions S3M-1718 and S3M-1714, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme and a business programme.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 17 April 2008— after 12 noon First Minister's Question Time delete 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Stage 1 Debate: Public Health etc. (Scotland) Bill and insert 2.00 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.40 pm Ministerial Statement: Extension of the First ScotRail Franchise followed by Stage 1 Debate: Public Health etc. (Scotland) Bill That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 23 April 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Hepatitis C  followed by Scottish Government Debate: Historic Scotland and Local Authorities followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Statute Law (Repeals) Bill - UK Legislation followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 24 April 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement followed by Scottish Government Debate: International Education 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Europe, External Affairs and Culture; Education and Lifelong Learning  2.55 pm Local Government and Communities Committee Debate: 5th Report 2008: Planning Application Processes (Menie Estate)  followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 30 April 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Glasgow Commonwealth Games Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 1 May 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motions agreed to.

Order. There is too much background noise.

I am telling you that it is time to wind up, actually.

I can give you a brief moment to finish your speech.

The First Minister will now take questions on the issues that were raised in his statement. I will allow around 30 minutes for questions before we move to the next item of business.

Order.

Order.

We move to questions from back benchers. Eleven members have questions to put for answer in 18 minutes. I ask for brevity in questions and answers.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-1629, in the name of Bill Aitken, on behalf of the Justice Committee, on its report on its inquiry into the effective use of police resources.

Good afternoon and welcome back. I hope that everybody had a good recess. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our leader for time for reflection today is the Rev Muriel Pearson from Cranhill parish church in Glasgow.

The next item of business is a statement by the First Minister on Scotland week. The First Minister will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions.

There are six questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-1599, in the name of Bill Aitken, on the Home Detention Curfew Licence (Prescribed Standard Conditions) (No 2) (Scotland) Order 2008 (SSI 2008/125), be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 58, Against 66, Abstentions 0.  Motion disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1631.1, in the name of Tavish Scott, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1631, in the name of John Swinney, on the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Amendment Order 2008, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 58, Against 65, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-1631, in the name of John Swinney, on the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Amendment Order 2008, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 107, Against 1, Abstentions 16.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Amendment Order 2008 be approved.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1638.2, in the name of Margaret Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1638, in the name of Frank Mulholland, on fatal accident inquiries, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-1638, in the name of Frank Mulholland, on fatal accident inquiries, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament welcomes the review of the Fatal Accidents and Sudden Deaths Inquiry (Scotland) Act 1976, to be led by Lord Cullen of Whitekirk, which will ensure that Scotland has an effective and practical system of public inquiry into deaths which is fit for the 21st century; considers that there is a pressing need for the Scottish Government to enable inquiries to be held in Scotland into the deaths of military personnel, normally domiciled in Scotland, who are killed in active service overseas, and believes that the Scottish Government should give consideration to all available options, including the holding of fatal accident inquiries on a mandatory basis, so that the families of Scottish military personnel no longer have to suffer from the additional burden of attending coroners' inquests in England."

The final question is, that motion S3M-1646, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Companies Act 2006 (Scottish public sector companies to be audited by the Auditor General for Scotland) Order 2008 be approved.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-1646, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Companies Act 2006 (Scottish public sector companies to be audited by the Auditor General for Scotland) Order 2008 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time. I suspend the meeting until decision time at 5 o'clock.

George Foulkes was to ask question 2, but the silence speaks for itself. Cathy Jamieson will therefore ask question 3.

Thank you for that.

John Scott. Sorry, Richard Lochhead.

I will try again. John Scott.

The next item of business is a debate on S3M-1638, in the name of Frank Mulholland, on fatal accident inquiries. Members might wish to note that a revised section A of the Business Bulletin has been produced—the specific revision is that amendment S3M-1638.1, in the name of Margaret Smith, which had previously been selected for debate, has been replaced by amendment S3M-1638.2, also in the name of Margaret Smith, which has been lodged this afternoon and which I have now selected for debate. On that basis, amendment S3M-1638.1 has been withdrawn.

Order.

She mentioned it.

Order.

Ms Baillie, that is not a point of order; that is a debating matter. I have made my position clear on that before.

We are not here to talk; we are here to ask questions.

Before we move to First Minister's questions, I am sure that the chamber wishes to join me in welcoming to the Presiding Officer's gallery this morning His Excellency Mr Yury Viktorovich Fedotov, the Russian ambassador to the United Kingdom. [ Applause. ]

We come to the wind-up speeches.

I remind members not to use the word "you" unless they are referring to me.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-1599, in the name of Bill Aitken, on the Home Detention Curfew Licence (Prescribed Standard Conditions) (Scotland) (No 2) Order 2008.

The first question is, that amendment S3M-1621.1, in the name of Margaret Curran, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1621, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the health care associated infection task force, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 96, Against 0, Abstentions 16.  Amendment agreed to.

The second question is, that motion S3M-1621, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the health care associated infection task force, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament notes the Scottish Government's commitment to bring infection rates down by investing £54 million to support a far more intensive and targeted three-year programme of healthcare associated infection (HAI) work from 1 April 2008; believes that the Scottish Government is right to introduce a one-year pilot MRSA screening programme to shape a planned, structured and deliverable national screening programme from 2009-10; welcomes the links that will be established between the Patient Safety and Patient Experience programmes and the HAI agenda to bring about a coherency of approach in the way that NHSScotland delivers its service to patients; welcomes the Scottish Government's continuation of the multi-agency HAI Task Force, and agrees with the challenging target that the Scottish Government has set for all staff of NHS boards to achieve at least 90% hand hygiene compliance by November 2008; commends the progress made by the previous Labour-led government in establishing the HAI Task Force and ensuring that Scotland was a model for tackling healthcare associated infections and should continue to be so; asks the Scottish Government to commit to tackling all healthcare associated infections, not just MRSA; notes the importance of combating infections in care homes, and calls for a specific plan of action to do so.

I propose to put a single question on motions S3M-1635 to S3M-1637 inclusive, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments. If any member objects to a single question being put, please say so now. The question is, that motions S3M-1635 to S3M-1637, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of SSIs, be agreed to.  Motions agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Civil Legal Aid (Financial Conditions) (Scotland) Regulations 2008 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Advice and Assistance (Financial Conditions) (Scotland) Regulations 2008 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Protected Trust Deeds (Scotland) Regulations 2008 be approved.

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motions S3M-1635 to S3M-1637 inclusive, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Civil Legal Aid (Financial Conditions) (Scotland) Regulations 2008 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Advice and Assistance (Financial Conditions) (Scotland) Regulations 2008 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Protected Trust Deeds (Scotland) Regulations 2008 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-1633, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 16 April 2008 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Scotland Week followed by Justice Committee Debate: 4th Report 2008 - Report on Inquiry into the Effective Use of Police Resources followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 17 April 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Stage 1 Debate: Public Health etc. (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 23 April 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 24 April 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time  2.15 pm Themed Question Time Europe, External Affairs and Culture; Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-1634, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for completion of stage 1 of the Creative Scotland Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Creative Scotland Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 20 June 2008.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-1632, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 26 March 2008— after Wednesday 26 March 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions insert followed by Ministerial Statement: Scottish Prison Service Report on Robert Foye—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a statement by Kenny MacAskill on the Scottish Prison Service report on Robert Foye. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions.

The cabinet secretary will take questions on the issues that his statement raised. I intend to allow about 20 minutes for questions, after which we will move to the next item of business.

We come to questions from back-bench members. We should manage to fit everyone in, if questions and answers are relatively succinct.

As we are rapidly running out of time, I ask for very brief questions and answers.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-1621, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the health care associated infection task force.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is the Rev Scott Guy from Northfield parish church, Aberdeen.

There are a possible 12 questions to be put as a result of today's business. I remind members, in relation to the debate on housing, that if the amendment in the name of Stewart Maxwell is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Jim Tolson will fall. The first question is, that amendment S3M-1603.3, in the name of Stewart Maxwell, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1603, in the name of Johann Lamont, on housing, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 46, Against 77, Abstentions 2.  Amendment disagreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-1603.1, in the name of Jamie McGrigor, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1603, in the name of Johann Lamont, on housing, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 61, Against 64, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The third question is, that amendment S3M-1603.2, in the name of Jim Tolson, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1603, in the name of Johann Lamont, on housing, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 79, Against 46, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The fourth question is, that motion S3M-1603, in the name of Johann Lamont, on housing, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 78, Against 46, Abstentions 1.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament regrets the SNP government's lack of a coherent housing strategy; notes that the Housing Supply Task Force has no timetable or remit to produce recommendations for action; notes in particular the absence of robust evidence on funding and efficiencies in delivering its housing targets; believes that the Scottish Government's provision of a real terms increase of 9% in affordable housing over the period of the comprehensive spending review falls far short of what is needed to address the affordable housing shortage; further notes concerns about the impact of a single regional developer model, as outlined in the Firm Foundations consultation, on community-controlled housing associations and housing co-operatives; agrees that the Scottish Government should make a statement to the Parliament as soon as possible, clarifying its plans for the clear SNP manifesto commitment on a £2,000 first-time buyers' grant, and urges the Scottish Government to act to secure long-term improvements in housing rather than the short-term appearance of change.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1601.2, in the name of Maureen Watt, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1601, in the name of Rhona Brankin, on schools of ambition, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 49, Against 76, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1601.1, in the name of Murdo Fraser, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1601, in the name of Rhona Brankin, on schools of ambition, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 77, Against 46, Abstentions 2.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1601.3, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1601, in the name of Rhona Brankin, on schools of ambition, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 77, Against 46, Abstentions 2.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-1601, in the name of Rhona Brankin, as amended, on schools of ambition, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 77, Against 48, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament recognises the important contribution that the Schools of Ambition programme has made in giving schools greater freedom to develop creative and innovative approaches to school improvement; notes HM Inspectorate of Education's positive comments on the programme's effect on pupil motivation; deplores the  Scottish Government's decision to axe the Schools of Ambition programme in the face of such success, calls on the Scottish Government to continue the funding of existing schools of ambition and to identify further individual schools that would benefit from becoming schools of ambition and to continue to provide Schools of Ambition funding directly to schools and to support decisions being taken on the expenditure of such funds at school level; and considers that head teachers play a crucial role in leading excellent schools and turning around schools that face challenges, and therefore calls on the Scottish Government to provide additional support and incentives for head teachers to improve their schools, including enhanced contract terms with more flexibility and increased rewards for outstanding leadership.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1602.2, in the name of Sarah Boyack, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1602, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on Scotland's marine environment, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 110, Against 15, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1602.1.1, in the name of Robin Harper, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-1602.1, in the name of Mike Rumbles, on Scotland's marine environment, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 109, Against 16, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1602.1, in the name of Mike Rumbles, as amended, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1602, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on Scotland's marine environment, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 108, Against 1, Abstentions 16.  Amendment, as amended, agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-1602, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on Scotland's marine environment, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 111, Against 0, Abstentions 14.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament welcomes the Scottish Government's commitment to consult on proposals for the sustainable management of Scotland's seas and coast, including coherent framework measures for marine planning, conservation and sea fisheries, and believes that this will enhance Scotland's stewardship of the seas, support sustainable development and provide protection for the marine environment, so ensuring that future generations of Scots will be able to enjoy the many social, cultural and economic benefits that the seas deliver; calls on the Scottish Government to accelerate the timetable for the Marine Bill, and further calls on Scottish Ministers to work constructively with the UK Government and other administrations to ensure that an integrated and joined-up approach to new legislation and its implementation are achieved; believes that Scotland should have responsibility out to 200 nautical miles as part of the Scottish zone for marine spatial planning, fisheries and marine nature conservation including the network of marine protected areas, sufficient to meet Scotland's international obligations under the Oslo Paris Convention and World Summit on Sustainable Development, and calls on the Scottish Government to work constructively with the UK Government to reach agreement on this.

I ask members to ensure that their mobile phones are turned off.

Order.

Because I gave him the nod, there will be a brief supplementary question from Dr Ian McKee.

Order.

Order.

I must press you for a question.

No, I was not.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-1603, in the name of Johann Lamont, on housing.

There is one question to be put as a result of today's business. The question is, that motion S3M-1582, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Housing and Regeneration Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions in the Housing and Regeneration Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 15 November 2007, relating to the executive competence of Scottish Ministers to enter into agreements for the provision of services with the Housing Corporation and/or Welsh Ministers, on such terms and for such payment which they consider appropriate, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, should be considered by the UK Parliament.

The name of the member who requested to speak has been removed from my screen, so no member wants to speak against the motion.  Motion agreed to.

Order. Excuse me, minister, but there is so much  background noise that I am not sure whether you can hear the requests for interventions.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-1600, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. I ask any member who wishes to speak against the motion to press their request-to-speak button now.

Good afternoon. The first item is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Anthony Wedgwood Benn, probably better known to all of us as Tony Benn.

The next item of business is a debate on curriculum for excellence.

There are 13 questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-1549.2, in the name of Des McNulty, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1549, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, on transport, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 45, Against 80, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1549.1.1, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-1549.1, in the name of Alex Johnstone, on transport, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 81, Against 44, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1549.1, in the name of Alex Johnstone, as amended, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1549, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, on transport, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 64, Against 61, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-1549, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, on transport, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 64, Against 61, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament notes the decision to progress the Borders railway taken by the Parliament on 14 June 2006; regrets the delay in construction and the substantial increases in costs since the project's inception, commends the 450,000 tonnes of CO 2 saved by the project, and calls on the Scottish Government to work with Transport Scotland and the relevant local authorities to ensure that the project is completed as quickly and cost effectively as possible.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1550.3, in the name of Stewart Maxwell, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1550, in the name of Liam McArthur, on fuel poverty, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 48, Against 76, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1550.1, in the name of Johann Lamont, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1550, in the name of Liam McArthur, on fuel poverty, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1550.2, in the name of Jamie McGrigor, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1550, in the name of Liam McArthur, on fuel poverty, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 16, Against 109, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-1550, in the name of Liam McArthur, on fuel poverty, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 65, Against 15, Abstentions 45.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament deplores the fact that while household fuel prices have risen by six times the rate of inflation over the past year, power companies' profits have risen by 500%; is concerned that, for every 5% increase in fuel prices, it is estimated that 40,000 more Scottish households become fuel poor, while almost 3,000 deaths per year are linked to living in cold, damp housing; believes that tackling the social, health and environmental impacts of fuel poverty can save people money, improve health and help to tackle climate change; calls for the re-establishment of the Fuel Poverty Forum with a remit to include the development of a one-stop-shop approach to fuel poverty that increases the installation of energy efficiency measures, efficient central heating systems, microgeneration and smart meter technology; recognises the importance of continued support for voluntary and statutory organisations providing debt management, money and energy advice to those most affected by fuel poverty; calls on the Scottish Government to consider the introduction of a local tax rebate to provide a further incentive to householders to invest in energy efficiency and  microgeneration packages, and further calls for changes to planning rules to make it easier to install micropower.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1548.2, in the name of David Stewart, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1548, in the name of Michael Russell, on national parks, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1548.1, in the name of John Scott, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1548, in the name of Michael Russell, on national parks, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 109, Against 0, Abstentions 16.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1548.3, in the name of Jim Hume, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1548, in the name of Michael Russell, on national parks, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 60, Against 64, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-1548, in the name of Michael Russell, on national parks, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament notes the forthcoming strategic review of Scotland's two national parks; welcomes the opportunities that the national parks give to Scotland's citizens and visitors, and in particular commends their contribution to the greener Scotland agenda; believes that the following issues should be included for specific consideration in the review: the effectiveness of the national parks in achieving the main objectives set out in the National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000, the success of the national parks in building community engagement and involvement in the development of both parks, and whether the boundaries of the parks should be reviewed, and calls on the Scottish Government to address concerns regarding the structural effectiveness of the national park authorities as presently constituted with a view to enhancing local participation and to address ongoing issues with regard to the southern boundary of the Cairngorms National Park.

I propose to ask a single question on motions S3M-1541 to S3M-1543 inclusive, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments. The question is, that motions S3M-1541 to S3M-1543 inclusive, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of SSIs, be agreed to.  Motions agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Renewables Obligation (Scotland) Amendment Order 2008 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Official Statistics (Scotland) Order 2008 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Housing Support Grant (Scotland) Order 2008 be approved.

The next item of business is consideration of three Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motions S3M-1541 to S3M-1543 inclusive, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Renewables Obligation (Scotland) Amendment Order 2008 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Official Statistics (Scotland) Order 2008 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Housing Support Grant (Scotland) Order 2008 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The questions on the motions will be put at decision time.

I thank the member for giving me advance notice of what I regret is not actually a point of order for me. As I think the member accepts, access to and distribution of committee reports is a matter for the committee, and particularly the convener of the committee. I will reflect on his words, but if he has any further concerns I suggest that he take them up with the convener of the Local Government and Communities Committee, Duncan McNeil MSP.

I did not give much consideration to that, Mr Scott. You might want to address Sarah Boyack. I refer to your use of the word "you".

It was the use of the word "you" in relation to another member that I objected to, Mr Scott.

One minute.

You may certainly have another minute if you would like one.

That was a sterling effort, Ms Boyack, almost worthy of national park status itself.

I call Sarah Boyack. Ms Boyack, you have quite a long time.

I must ask that the little conversations between the two of you discontinue now. Please address the chair.

We come now to the winding-up speeches. I have a little time in hand, so I can allow members a little flexibility. I call Mike Rumbles, whom I can offer up to eight minutes.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Order.

I am delighted to say that His Excellency Rasoul Movahedian-Attar, the Iranian ambassador to the United Kingdom, has joined us today for First Minister's questions. Ambassador, on behalf of the Scottish Parliament, I welcome you.

The member should be winding up now.

You should be closing, Ms Marwick.

Sit down, please, Mr Hume.

We now move to back benchers' speeches. We have some time available for the debate, so I can be a bit flexible. However, speeches should be no more than five minutes, please.

Mr McNulty, I must ask you not to refer to ministers or other members by their first name.

Well, I've ruled it now.

I should also ask members not to refer to each other as "you".

Order.

Good morning. The first item of business this morning is a debate on motion S3M-1549, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, on transport.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-1486, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on the Home Detention Curfew Licence (Prescribed Standard Conditions) (Scotland) Order 2008 (SSI 2008/36), be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 62, Against 58, Abstentions 1.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that nothing further be done under the Home Detention Curfew Licence (Prescribed Standard Conditions) (Scotland) Order 2008 (SSI 2008/36).

The second question is, that motion S3M-1488, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the draft Home Detention Curfew Licence (Amendment of Specified Days) (Scotland) Order 2008, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 65, Against 60, Abstentions 0.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Home Detention Curfew Licence (Amendment of Specified Days) (Scotland) Order 2008 be approved.

The final question is, that motion S3M-1513, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Pensions Bill, which is UK legislation, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the UK Pensions Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 5 December 2007, which legislate in devolved areas in respect of pension compensation on divorce or dissolution of a marriage or civil partnership, should be considered by the UK Parliament.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-1540, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees— (a) the following programme of business— Wednesday 19 March 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Curriculum for Excellence followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Housing and Regeneration Bill - UK Legislation followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 20 March 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Scottish Marine Bill Consultation followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 26 March 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 27 March 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time  2.15 pm Themed Question Time Justice and Law Officers; Rural Affairs and the Environment 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business (b) that the period for lodging First Minister's Questions for First Minister's Question Time on 27 March 2008 ends at 4.00 pm on Thursday 20 March 2008; (c) that the period for lodging First Minister's Questions for First Minister's Question Time on 8 May 2008 ends at 4.00 pm on Thursday 1 May 2008; (d) that the period for lodging First Minister's Questions for First Minister's Question Time on 29 May 2008 ends at 4.00 pm on Thursday 22 May 2008; and (e) that the period for Members to submit their names for selection for General and Themed Question Time on 17 April 2008 ends at 12 noon on Wednesday 26 March 2008.—[ David McLetchie. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-1513, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the legislative consent motion for the Pensions Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the UK Pensions Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 5 December 2007, which legislate in devolved areas in respect of pension compensation on divorce or dissolution of a marriage or civil partnership, should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[ Fergus Ewing. ]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

We now come to speeches from back benchers. I allowed a little leeway with the opening speeches, as we had a little time in hand. We no longer have time in hand, so I ask for six-minute speeches, please.

Members should ensure that their mobile phones are turned off. One is switched on very close to Ms Curran's microphone.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. I am delighted to welcome as our time for reflection leader His Excellency Archbishop Faustino Sainz Muñoz, the apostolic nuncio.

The next item of business is a debate on national health service independent scrutiny.

There are seven questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-1490.1, in the name of Pauline McNeill, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1490, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Scottish Law Commission's report on rape and sexual offences, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-1490, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Scottish Law Commission's report on rape and sexual offences, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament welcomes the publication of the Scottish Law Commission's final report on the law on rape and other sexual offences and supports the Scottish Government's announcement that it will bring forward legislation to reform the law on rape and sexual offences in light of the consultation on the commission's findings and proposed draft bill to ensure that Scotland has a modern and robust framework of laws in this area; recognises that the proposals from the commission are complex and that it is important for the Parliament to be given every opportunity to interrogate the bill when it is published, and therefore calls on the Scottish Government to aim at an agreement with the Justice Committee on a timetable which gives adequate time to properly scrutinise the bill.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1489.2, in the name of Sarah Boyack, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1489, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development review of Scotland's rural policy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 58, Against 65, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1489.1, in the name of John Scott, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1489, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the OECD review, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1489.3, in the name of Mike Rumbles, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1489, in the name of Richard Lochhead, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 59, Against 64, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-1489, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the OECD review of Scotland's rural policy, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament recognises the progress made in supporting rural development since the establishment of the Scottish Parliament; welcomes the analysis set out in the independent review of rural policy in Scotland by the  OECD, and believes that this report and other reports on the future of rural Scotland published in recent months provide the opportunity to further develop rural policy to ensure that all our rural communities enjoy the economic, social and environmental benefits of sustainable economic growth and that they are empowered to greater influence their own destiny providing that the Scottish Government takes action to address the specific policy delivery concerns identified by the OECD including "centralisation and the lack of adequate bottom-up participation", "weak integration", "an overlap of different approaches and agencies" and "the extreme complexity of both the design and the delivery system linked with rural policy".

The final question is, that motion S3M-1464, in the name of Keith Brown, on behalf of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee, on its report, "Draft Public Appointments Equalities Strategy - Diversity Delivers", be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee's 2nd Report, 2008 (Session 3): Draft Public Appointments Equalities Strategy - Diversity Delivers (SP Paper 65), together with the Official Report of the Parliament's debate on the report, should form the Parliament's response to the consultation by the Office of the Commissioner for Public Appointments in Scotland.

I call Jim Mather—sorry, Jamie Stone.

Order.

They would probably like a question as well, Mr McNulty.

Can we have a question, please.

Can we have a question please, Mr McGrigor.

I have agreed to a request from Alasdair Allan to ask a supplementary question in Gaelic. Members will be relieved to know that he will also provide his own translation.

That is correct. I should have clarified the point.

The member should ask a question.

I believe that this question is about the Sheriffhall junction. The member should ask a question.

Order.

Order.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-1489, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development review of Scotland's rural policy. I invite all members who wish to take part in the debate to press their request-to-speak buttons now.

Order.

Order.

Order. [ Interruption. ] Order. When I ask for order, it is not an invitation to double the noise.

Under the subject of equalities, minister, you are more than welcome to attempt to answer that.

Too many conversations are taking place round the chamber.

Come to the question, please.

I am delighted to say, before we move to First Minister's question time, that His Excellency Ron Prosor, the Israeli ambassador to the United Kingdom, has joined us in the Presiding Officer's gallery this afternoon. Ambassador, on behalf of the Scottish Parliament I bid you a very warm welcome.

I will consider that while you continue, if I may.

Good morning. The first item of business is a statement by Nicola Sturgeon on the redevelopment of the state hospital. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of her 10-minute statement, so there should be no interventions.

The cabinet secretary will take questions on the issues that have been raised in her statement. I will allow around 20 minutes for such questions, after which we will move to the next item of business.

We come to questions from back benchers. Members know the form by now.

Brevity is indeed beautiful.

I am sorry, Ms Gillon, but I must ask you not to use the word "you".

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-1490, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Scottish Law Commission's report on rape and sexual offences.

There are no questions to be put as a result of today's business.

The next item of business is consideration of business motions S3M-1484, S3M-1487 and S3M-1485, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 12 March 2008 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Independent Scrutiny followed by Debate on the Home Detention Curfew Licence (Prescribed Standard Conditions) (Scotland) Order 2008 (SSI 2008/36) and the draft Home Detention Curfew Licence (Amendment of Specified Days) (Scotland) Order 2008 followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Pensions Bill - UK Legislation followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 13 March 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Liberal Democrats Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning; Europe, External Affairs and Culture 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: National Parks followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 19 March 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 20 March 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business. That the Parliament agrees that for the purposes of allowing up to 60 minutes to debate motion S3M-1486 on Wednesday 12 March 2008, the second and third sentences of Rule 10.4.4 of Standing Orders be suspended. That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Glasgow Commonwealth Games Bill at Stage 2 be completed by 28 March 2008.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motions agreed to.

As I indicated earlier, the minister will take questions on the issues that were raised in the statement. We have around 30 minutes for questions.

Order. Excuse me, Mr McNulty. I look to the members on the front benches to set an example in terms of sedentary interventions.

Indeed I am not, Mr McNulty.

Nothing personally, but perhaps the minister would like to give his answer.

Order. Members will have lots more opportunity to ask questions and, if they stop me interrupting, they will have even more time in which to ask them.

We move to questions from back benchers. As always, a large number of members wish to ask questions, but there is a limited amount of time available. Brevity, in both question and answer, is to be encouraged.

A question, please, Ms Grahame.

I am keen that questions and answers should stick to the Borders rail link.

Order.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection, which will be led by Jane Bentley of the Scottish Inter Faith Council youth steering committee.

The next item of business is a statement by Stewart Stevenson on the Borders—

Thank you for giving me notice of your point of order, Mr McNulty. I have had the opportunity to read the press coverage, which, on reflection, I consider to be of a somewhat speculative nature. However, I would always take the opportunity to remind ministers that it is important that matters come, in the first instance, to the Parliament. We come to the statement by Stewart Stevenson on the Borders rail link. As always, the minister will take questions after a 15-minute statement, so there should be no interventions.

There are 11 questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-1434.2, in the name of Murdo Fraser, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1434, in the name of Jackie Baillie, on improving accountability, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 64, Against 48, Abstentions 16.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1434.1, in the name of Mike Rumbles, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1434, in the name of Jackie Baillie, on improving accountability, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 65, Against 63, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-1434, in the name of Jackie Baillie, on improving accountability, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 81, Against 47, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament believes that government should be open and accountable; affirms its support for the Seven Principles of Public Life established in the first report of the Nolan Committee and for the further principles governing ministerial conduct as set out in the Scottish Ministerial Code; notes that the First Minister is reviewing the code, in line with practice after each Scottish parliamentary election; acknowledges the increasing calls for independent oversight of the code; considers that a modern and progressive government has nothing to fear from ensuring transparency and accountability in all that it does, and therefore calls on the First Minister to include independent authority to direct ministers in the appropriate arrangements for ensuring that their conduct as ministers is in accordance with the Scottish Ministerial Code to avoid conflict or potential conflict of interest, and to oversee its administration, and to bring forward a statement to the Parliament on this when the review is concluded and further believes that the best way of ensuring independent oversight is for the Parliament to appoint a person independent of government to investigate alleged breaches of the Scottish Ministerial Code.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1432.1.2, in the name of Bill Aitken, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-1432.1, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on protecting Scotland's children, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 16, Against 111, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1432.1.1, in the name of Margaret Smith, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-1432.1, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on protecting Scotland's children, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 81, Against 46, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1432.1, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, as amended, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1432, in the name of Paul Martin, on protecting Scotland's children, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 82, Against 46, Abstentions 0.  Amendment, as amended, agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-1432, in the name of Paul Martin, on protecting Scotland's children, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 81, Against 46, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament recognises the importance of making further progress on the 33 recommendations published by the Justice 2 Sub-committee on 15 December 2006 in connection with the management of registered sex offenders; believes that ensuring public safety is paramount in the management of registered sex offenders; further recognises that appropriate utilisation of DNA samples and fingerprints can play an important role in identifying offenders but that it is vital to strike the right balance between prosecuting criminals and protecting the innocent and notes the review that the Scottish Government has commissioned from Professor James Fraser; rejects the blanket retention of DNA samples and fingerprints; recognises the extensive powers already available to the police in monitoring sex offenders and ensuring public safety, and notes the Scottish Government's liaison with the Home Office as disclosure pilots progress in four English police areas and the Scottish Government's proposal to monitor the outcomes of these pilots to determine what lessons there might be for Scotland, and welcomes the Scottish Government's proposal to write to the Convener of the Scottish Parliament's Justice Committee to report progress on each of the 33 recommendations made by the Justice 2 Sub-committee report J2SC/S2/06/R1.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1367.1.1, in the name of Murdo Fraser, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-1367.1, in the name of Rhona Brankin, on the Graduate Endowment Abolition (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 63, Against 65, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1367.1, in the name of Rhona Brankin, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1367, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the Graduate Endowment Abolition (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 63, Against 65, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1367.2, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1367, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the Graduate Endowment Abolition (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 66, Against 16, Abstentions 46.  Amendment agreed to.

The final question is, that motion S3M-1367, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, as amended, on the Graduate Endowment Abolition (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 67, Against 61, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Graduate Endowment Abolition (Scotland) Bill be passed and, in so doing, calls on the Scottish Ministers, when taking forward their consultation on student support later this year, to consider a number of wider options to improve financial support for students, including specific reference to the development of a new minimum income guarantee.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-1448, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 6 March 2008— after Thursday 6 March 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions insert followed by Ministerial Statement: Redevelopment of the State Hospital—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

I have no option other than to suspend this meeting until 5 o'clock.

You are in your final minute.

I am about to anticipate it. Miss Campbell, I would be grateful if you could address the amendment that we are meant to be discussing.

I do not think that that is appropriate under the discussion of amendments, Miss Campbell. If you would confine your remarks to the amendments, I would be grateful.

Miss Campbell, I am afraid that you are not referring to the amendment.

I am sorry but I am moving on to the next speaker.

I call Christina McKelvie. [ Interruption. ] Her name seems to have been withdrawn. I call Murdo Fraser.

That ends the consideration of amendments.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-1367, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the Graduate Endowment Abolition (Scotland) Bill.

The next item of business is stage 3 proceedings on the Graduate Endowment Abolition (Scotland) Bill. In dealing with amendments, members should have in front of them the reissued bill—SP Bill 2A (Revised); the reissued marshalled list—SP Bill 2A-ML (Revised); and the groupings, which I have agreed. The division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for five minutes in the event of a division this afternoon, and the period of voting for that and for any other divisions will be 30 seconds.

There is one group with two amendments. Amendment 1, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, is grouped with amendment 2.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-1431, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for stage 3 consideration of the Graduate Endowment Abolition (Scotland) Bill. I call on Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-1431—oh dear, he is not in the chamber. I ask the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning to move the motion in lieu of Mr Crawford. [ Interruption. ] Sorry. It has been pointed out to me that a member of the Parliamentary Bureau must move the timetabling motion. I therefore ask Mr McLetchie whether he is willing to move it.

Dave Thompson has a question. He should bear in mind that Margaret Curran's question was on Strathclyde Police.

That was very astute, Mr Thompson.

Question 5 has been withdrawn.

That is enough. Order.

Order.

Order.

Order. The chamber will come to order.

We will take a constituency question from Elaine Smith.

Briefly please, Dr McKee.

Briefly, please.

A question, please.

The member has one minute left.

That is entirely up to the member concerned. I am sure that he has heard your non-point of order.

The member knows by now that the content of members' speeches is up to them. However, I ask members to be careful about allegations that they make.

Order.

Order.

He does not have time, I am afraid.

You should close now.

You really must close now.

Order.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-1434, in the name of Jackie Baillie, on improving accountability.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-1433, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 5 March 2008 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Borders Rail Link followed by Scottish Government Debate: Organ Donation Taskforce Report followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 6 March 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Scottish Law Commission's Report on Rape and Sexual Offences 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: OECD Review of Scotland's Rural Policy followed by Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee Debate: Report on the Consultation on the Proposed Strategy for Enhancing Equal Opportunities for Scotland's Ministerial Appointments Process followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 12 March 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 13 March 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Liberal Democrats Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning; Europe, External Affairs and Culture 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of six Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motions S3M-1426 to S3M-1430 and S3M-1435, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Community Care (Personal Care and Nursing Care) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2008 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Criminal Proceedings etc. (Reform) (Scotland) Act 2007 (Supplemental Provisions) Order 2008 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 Fixed Penalty Order 2008 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Valuation and Rating (Exempted Classes) (Scotland) Order 2008 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Bankruptcy (Scotland) Act 1985 (Low Income, Low Asset Debtors etc.) Regulations 2008 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Budget (Scotland) Act 2007 Amendment Order 2008 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on the motions will be put at decision time.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-1366, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Glasgow Commonwealth Games Bill, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Glasgow Commonwealth Games Bill.

The second question is, that motion S3M-1062, in the name of John Swinney, on the Glasgow Commonwealth Games Bill financial resolution, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Glasgow Commonwealth Games Bill, agrees to any expenditure payable out of the Scottish Consolidated Fund for a new purpose in consequence of the Act.

I propose to put a single question on motions S3M-1426 to S3M-1430 and S3M-1435, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments. If any member objects to a single question being put, please say so now. As I hear no objections, the question is, that motions S3M-1426 to S3M-1430 and S3M-1435, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments, be agreed to.  Motions agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Community Care (Personal Care and Nursing Care) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2008 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Criminal Proceedings etc. (Reform) (Scotland) Act 2007 (Supplemental Provisions) Order 2008 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 Fixed Penalty Order 2008 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Valuation and Rating (Exempted Classes) (Scotland) Order 2008 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Bankruptcy (Scotland) Act 1985 (Low Income, Low Asset Debtors etc.) Regulations 2008 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Budget (Scotland) Act 2007 Amendment Order 2008 be approved.

The final item of business is a members' business debate on motion S3M-1096, in the name of John Scott, on recreational sea angling. The debate will be concluded without any question being put.  Motion debated,  That the Parliament notes the economic and social importance of recreational sea angling to communities along the west coast and across Scotland; further notes that around 225,000 people participate in the sport annually with an average spend of £1,375 for boat anglers and £861 for shore anglers; recognises that most species of interest to sea anglers have limited commercial value and are returned alive to the sea, representing an excellent financial return for "Scotland plc"; affirms the extremely low environmental cost of recreational sea angling which is at the forefront of sustainable fishing and especially welcomes the Give Fish a Chance initiative from the Scottish Sea Angling Conservation Network, encouraging anglers to keep only those fish which have reached breeding size; regrets the substantial decline of the sport and supporting industries, notably on the Firth of Clyde, due to a loss of stocks with a number of species becoming extinct locally or reduced to the point where only juvenile specimens are now being caught; notes with concern the critically endangered status of key species, such as common skate, porbeagle and spurdog, which bring sea anglers to Scotland, and considers that work between the Scottish Government, sea angling bodies and other relevant agencies should continue to ensure the conservation of key species and the continued growth of sea angling in Scotland.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-1062, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution in respect of the Glasgow Commonwealth Games Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Glasgow Commonwealth Games Bill, agrees to any expenditure payable out of the Scottish Consolidated Fund for a new purpose in consequence of the Act.—[ Stewart Maxwell .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

Order. There is too much background noise in the chamber.

The cabinet secretary will now take questions on the issues raised in her statement. We have a tight 30 minutes for questions, after which we will move on to the next item of business. It would be extremely helpful if members who wish to ask questions would press their request-to-speak buttons now. I assure the chamber that it will probably prove impossible to fit everybody in, therefore brevity in both questions and answers would be greatly appreciated.

No, you cannot, I am afraid. It is the cabinet secretary who is dealing with the matter, not me.

We come to questions from back benchers. I have 18 members with a question to put and 17 minutes in which to do that. It is pretty obvious that I do not want a lot of preamble; I want brief questions and—preferably—brief answers. We will get the doctors up front. I call Dr Ian McKee who will be followed by Dr Richard Simpson.

And final question, please.

Order.

I ask that there be no more multiple questions. One question per member, please.

Could we just have a question, please?

I must ask you to be brief.

I must ask you to be as brief as possible, minister.

That brings us to the end of the statement on accident and emergency reviews. We must move on swiftly. I apologise to the eight members whom I was unable to call.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-1366, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Glasgow Commonwealth Games Bill.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is the Rev Dr Martin Fair, from St Andrew's church in Arbroath.

The next item of business this afternoon is a 15-minute statement by Nicola Sturgeon, on accident and emergency reviews. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of her statement, so, as always, there should be no interventions.

There are potentially seven questions to be put as a result of today's business. I remind members that, in relation to the debate on the future of Scottish Water, if the amendment in the name of Des McNulty is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Liam McArthur falls. The first question is, that amendment S3M-1386.1, in the name of Des McNulty, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1386, in the name of Derek Brownlee, on the future of Scottish Water, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 87, Against 32, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

As I indicated at the start of decision time, amendment S3M-1386.2 is therefore pre-empted and falls. The next question is, that motion S3M-1386, in the name of Derek Brownlee, as amended, on the future of Scottish Water, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 86, Against 33, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament supports the retention of Scottish Water under public ownership and in that context calls on the Scottish Government to keep under review the structure and operations of Scottish Water, the regulatory arrangements for the water industry to ensure that the interests of domestic and business customers are properly protected and alternative public sector models, including mutualisation, and to report back to the Parliament in due course.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1385.2.1, in the name of Margaret Smith, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-1385.2, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on prisons policy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 64, Against 55, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1385.2, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, as amended, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1385, in the name of Bill Aitken, on prisons policy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 64, Against 55, Abstentions 0.  Amendment, as amended, agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1385.1, in the name of Pauline McNeill, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1385, in the name of Bill Aitken, on prisons policy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 41, Against 76, Abstentions 2.  Amendment disagreed to.

The final question is, that motion S3M-1385, in the name of Bill Aitken, on prisons policy, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 64, Against 65, Abstentions 0.

Fifty-five members voted against. What did I say?

Oh well, you know what I am like with numbers by now. [ Laughter. ] For the avoidance of doubt, the result of the division was: For 64, Against 55, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament acknowledges the importance of a criminal justice system in which the public has confidence and which upholds the fundamental right of the public to a secure and safe society; notes that, while the offending rate has been falling, the number of people in prison currently stands at record levels and that Scotland has one of the highest imprisonment rates in the world; welcomes the McLeish Commission into Penal Policy and recognises that, in the case of serious and dangerous individuals, custody is the only appropriate punishment; notes that the Scottish Government is committed to three new prisons and has increased investment in the prisons estate to an average of £120 million a year; recognises the need to reduce the number of low-level receptions into custody for short-term sentences by focusing on tough community sentences that pay back into the community for the harm caused; further notes the need to improve treatment for those with mental health problems and drug and alcohol addictions, thus addressing the underlying causes of offending, and calls on the Scottish Government to build on schemes which provide offenders with education and skills training for work, not crime.

I commend the First Minister for the brevity of his statement; I also commend it as an example to the members who follow.

We have six minutes left. I am unlikely to fit in all back-bench members who want to ask questions, so brevity all round would be greatly appreciated.

I apologise to the three members who pressed their buttons but whom I could not call.

The next item of business is a debate on democracy in local health care.

Mr Rumbles, you have had your question.

Mr Rumbles, that is out of order.

Question 8 was not lodged.

Dr Simpson, you must be brief.

Order.

Please finish quickly.

The next item of business is a statement by the First Minister on the British-Irish Council summit. The First Minister will take questions at the end of his statement and there should therefore be no interventions during it.

I am delighted to inform the chamber that His Excellency Iztok Mirošič, the Slovenian ambassador to the United Kingdom, has joined us in the Presiding Officer's gallery for First Minister's question time. Ambassador, I welcome you warmly. [ Applause. ]

Order.

Order.

Order.

Order.

We started late, so I will allow a final, brief, supplementary from Jamie Stone.

Question, please.

Ask a question, please.

There is time to take question 8 briefly.

Mr Gibson, you should start to wind up now, please.

Order.

You should be closing now, Mrs Eadie.

You really should wind up now.

Mr Johnstone.

Time allows it.

We move to the open debate. I ask for speeches of around four minutes, but—as I keep saying—I can be reasonably generous.

I hope that I have not misrepresented anything, Mr McLetchie.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-1386, in the name of Derek Brownlee, on the future of Scottish Water. I invite members who wish to speak to press their request-to-speak buttons now. The debate is a little undersubscribed, so anybody who would like to speak would be welcome. Mr Brownlee has seven minutes in theory, but we are a little relaxed about the time.

Des McNulty has about six minutes, but we can be quite generous.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-1224, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the Education and Skills Bill, United Kingdom legislation, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Education and Skills Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 28 November 2007, to make provision within the legislative competence of the Parliament and to alter the executive competence of Scottish Ministers in respect of using and sharing information in relation to skills and training of people in Scotland, should be considered by the UK Parliament.

The second question is, that motion S3M-1381, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Agriculture and Horticulture Development Board Order 2007 be approved.

The final question is, that motion S3M-1380, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Quality Meat Scotland Order 2008 be approved.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motions S3M-1381 and S3M-1380, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Agriculture and Horticulture Development Board Order 2007 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Quality Meat Scotland Order 2008 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The questions on the motions will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-1378, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 21 February 2008— after 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing delete 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Democracy in Local Health Care and insert 2.55 pm Ministerial Statement: British-Irish Council Summit followed by Scottish Government Debate: Democracy in Local Health Care—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-1389, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 27 February 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Accident and Emergency Reviews followed by Stage 1 Debate: Glasgow Commonwealth Games Bill followed by Financial Resolution: Glasgow Commonwealth Games Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 28 February 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time  2.15 pm Themed Question Time Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and Law Officers 2.55 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Graduate Endowment Abolition (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 5 March 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 6 March 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-1379, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for legislation.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 23 May 2008.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

Minister, I must ask you to answer that and wind up fairly quickly.

You should close now, please, minister.

We move to the open debate. We are considerably over-subscribed. Speeches should be up to six minutes, but please do not feel that it is compulsory to take six minutes.

You have less than one minute, minister.

The minister will now take questions on the issues that are raised in his statement. I intend to allow around 20 minutes for questions, after which we will move on to the next item of business.

We move to back-bench questions. I ask members to keep their questions relatively brief.

As we have less than four minutes for the four other members who wish to ask questions, brevity will be greatly valued.

Can we have a question, please.

The next item of business is a debate on Malawi.

The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is the Rev Canon Isaac M Poobalan, from the church of St John the Evangelist in Aberdeen.

The next item of business is a statement by Michael Russell on snaring. The minister will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions.

There are six questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-1315.2, in the name of David Stewart, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1315, in the name of Michael Russell, on commercial forestry, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-1315.1, in the name of John Scott, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1315, in the name of Michael Russell, on commercial forestry, as amended, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1315.3, in the name of Jim Hume, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1315, in the name of Michael Russell, on commercial forestry, as amended, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-1315, in the name of Michael Russell, on commercial forestry, as heavily amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament, mindful of the Scottish Government's purpose to achieve sustainable economic growth, acknowledges the contribution that forests and woodlands make through timber, tourism and direct and indirect employment, and recognises the need to support the continued development and expansion of the commercial Scottish forestry sector and the competitive and developing industries which it underpins; and further notes the significant role that Scotland's woodland plays in the mitigation of climate change and the conservation of biodiversity; welcomes the firming up of the 25% target for forest coverage, planted in ways and using techniques which will contribute to carbon capture; further welcomes the fact that the majority of this additional planting is likely to be established through grant aid to the private sector, and supports efforts to increase the biodiversity value of all forestry in receipt of public funds, in particular new schemes which enhance habitats for key native species such as the capercaillie and the Scottish crossbill; further recognises the role that forestry can play in helping to meet Scotland's renewable energy targets through biomass generation; welcomes the work of the previous administration on promoting the biomass sector through the highly successful Biomass Support Scheme, and calls on the Scottish Government to maximise the opportunities for growth, jobs and sustainability offered by the expansion of the biomass sector in Scotland by delivering the previous administration's Biomass Action Plan.

The next question is, that motion S3M-1256, in the name of John Swinney, on the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Order 2008, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 107, Against 0, Abstentions 15.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Order 2008 be approved.

The final question is, that motion S3M-1306, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 106, Against 16, Abstentions 0.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Housing (Scotland) Act 2006 (Prescribed Documents) Regulations 2008 be approved.

Order. There are still too many conversations taking place in the chamber.

Order. Once again, there are too many conversations taking place in  the chamber. That has been mentioned three times now. Could we please hear out the minister in relative silence?

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is questions on Europe, external affairs and culture. Question 1 is from Michael McMahon, who is not in the chamber, I am afraid. Members are already aware of my views on that. We will move on to question 2.

The question has encouraged last-minute arrivals. I call Mr Gibson.

Apology accepted.

I am told that Marilyn Livingstone is unwell, so question 1 has been withdrawn.

Order.

No, but you can ask a question.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-1256, in the name of John Swinney, on the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Order 2008.

Order.

Order, please.

I have received a number of requests from members who wish to ask supplementary questions.

I hope that nobody is in need of a GP after today's First Minister's question time.

Order.

Order.

The first item of business is a statement by Adam Ingram on support for survivors of historical in-care and institutional abuse. The minister will take questions at the end of his statement and there should therefore be no interventions.

The minister will now take questions on issues raised in his statement. I intend to allow around 30 minutes for questions, after which we will move on to the next item of business.

Minister, I encourage you, as I encourage all members, not to refer to other members in the second person singular, but to use their full names. Thank you very much.

I am sorry—my instruction not to use the second person singular applies not just to the minister, but to all members.

We come now to back-bench questions. There are nine members who wish to ask questions and 15 minutes to fit them in—I encourage brevity in questions and answers.

I ask the member to refer to "his" statement, please.

I will not, but we will ask the minister.

I warn members in advance that the debate on motion S3M-1315, in the name of Michael Russell, on commercial forestry, is heavily subscribed.

There are two questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-1296.1, in the name of Iain Gray, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1296, in the name of John Swinney, on the Budget (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 110, Against 1, Abstentions 13.  Amendment agreed to.

The second question is, that motion S3M-1296, in the name of John Swinney, on the Budget (Scotland) Bill, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 64, Against 1, Abstentions 60.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Budget (Scotland) Bill be passed but, in so doing, calls on the Scottish Government to continue throughout 2008-09 to seek ways to expand programmes of skills and training generally and modern apprenticeships specifically; to secure national minimum standards of service for vulnerable groups and to make a statement to the Parliament outlining how it will achieve this.

That concludes decision time. I ask members who are leaving the chamber to do so quietly, although I think it unlikely that they will do so.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-1312, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on a suspension of standing orders rule 10.6.5.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that, for the purpose of allowing up to 20 minutes to debate motion S3M-1306 on Thursday 21 February 2008, the second and third sentences of Rule 10.6.5 of Standing Orders be suspended.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-1308, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 20 February 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Snaring followed by Scottish Government Debate: Malawi followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Education and Skills Bill - UK Legislation followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 21 February 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Democracy in Local Health Care followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 27 February 2008 2.15 pm Time for Reflection  followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body Question Time followed by Stage 1 Debate: Glasgow Commonwealth Games Bill followed by Financial Resolution: Glasgow Commonwealth Games Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 28 February 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and Law Officers 2.55 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Debate: Graduate Endowment Abolition (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

We now move to the division on amendment 1.

The result of the division is: For 110, Against 14, Abstentions 1.  Amendment 1 agreed to.

I certainly can. The result of the division is: For 110, Against 14—

Fourteen is what came up on the screen. I apologise—there were no abstentions. [ Interruption. ] Order. I will read out the result again. The result of the division is: For 110, Against 0, Abstentions 14. I apologise. Does that address your point of order, Ms McInnes?

Does any member object to a single question being put on amendments 2 to 6?

I will put the questions on the amendments one at a time. The question is, that amendment 2 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 110, Against 0, Abstentions 14.  Amendment 2 agreed to.

The question is, that amendment 3 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 109, Against 0, Abstentions 14.  Amendment 3 agreed to.

The question is, that amendment 4 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 110, Against 0, Abstentions 14.  Amendment 4 agreed to.  Amendments 5 and 6 agreed to.

That concludes consideration of amendments.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-1296, in the name of John Swinney, that the Parliament agrees that the Budget (Scotland) Bill be passed.

Order.

I tell Pauline McNeill that I can do none of those things, but I am sure that the cabinet secretary will help.

One minute, cabinet secretary.

The question is, that amendment 1 be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division. As this is the first division, there will be a five-minute suspension.

Order.

Order.

It is timely to remind all members that they should not use the word "you", please, or refer directly to other members.

Order.

The next item of business is stage 3 of the Budget (Scotland) Bill. In dealing with amendments, members should have before them the bill—as the bill was not amended at stage 2, it is the bill as introduced—the marshalled list containing all amendments selected for debate, and the groupings of amendments, which I have agreed. The division bell will sound and proceedings will be suspended for five minutes for the first division this afternoon. The period of voting for the first division and any subsequent divisions will be 30 seconds. Amendment 1, in the name of the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth, is grouped with amendments 2 to 6.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-1307, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 6 February 2008— after followed by Stage 3 Debate: Budget (Scotland) Bill delete followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Education and Skills Bill - UK Legislation—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-1314, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for the stage 3 consideration of the Budget (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that, during Stage 3 of the Budget (Scotland) Bill, debate on groups of amendments shall, subject to Rule 9.8.4A, be brought to a conclusion by the time limit indicated, that time limit being calculated from when the Stage begins and excluding any periods when other business is under consideration or when a meeting of the Parliament is suspended (other than a suspension following the first division in the Stage being called) or otherwise not in progress: Group 1: 45 minutes.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The first item of business is time for reflection. I am very pleased to welcome as our time for reflection leader today, under very difficult circumstances, which she will tell you about, Suzanne Dance, on behalf of the Edinburgh Theravada Buddhist Group.

There are 12 questions to be put as a result of today's business. I remind members that, in relation to the debate on poverty, if the amendment in the name of Margaret Curran is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Ross Finnie will fall. I will remind members of that again when we get there. The first question is, that amendment S3M-1246.2, in the name of Alison McInnes, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1246, in the name of Des McNulty, on accessible passenger transport and the national concessionary fares scheme, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 58, Against 63, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1246.1.1, in the name of Alex Johnstone, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-1246.1, in the name of Patrick Harvie, on accessible passenger transport and the national concessionary fares scheme, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 65, Against 56, Abstentions 1.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1246.1, in the name of Patrick Harvie, as amended, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1246, in the name of Des McNulty, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 65, Against 56, Abstentions 1.  Amendment, as amended, agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-1246, in the name of Des McNulty, on accessible passenger transport and the national concessionary fares scheme, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 65, Against 56, Abstentions 1.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament notes the importance of accessible passenger transport to achieving the Scottish Government's climate change objectives and in tackling the significant inequalities in Scottish society; recognises that it is vital that accessible and affordable public transport is available to help the Scottish Government to meet its climate change objectives and to ensure the continuation of vital urban and rural services; calls on the Scottish Government to provide a substantial increase in the budget for the Bus Service Operators Grant in 2008-09 and to consider keeping fares more affordable for the longer term; notes the Scottish Government's intention to review the national concessionary travel scheme, and calls on ministers during that review to ensure that they maximise the benefits for the public throughout Scotland while guaranteeing the best return on a scheme which represents a significant investment of public money and notes that Labour and Liberal Democrat ministers in the previous administration chose not to grant eligibility to disabled people in receipt of the lower rate of disability allowance and to older and disabled people using community transport in rural areas when they created the National Concessionary Fares Scheme."

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1258.1.1, in the name of Maureen Watt, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-1258.1, in the name of Elizabeth Smith, on education, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 65, Against 13, Abstentions 44.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1258.1, in the name of Elizabeth Smith, as amended, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1258, in the name of Rhona Brankin, on education, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 109, Against 12, Abstentions 1.  Amendment, as amended, agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1258.2, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1258, in the name of Rhona Brankin, on education, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 55, Against 63, Abstentions 3.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-1258, in the name of Rhona Brankin, on education, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 108, Against 0, Abstentions 13.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament recognises the importance of high-quality school buildings to young people's learning; and the need for energy efficiency, quality design including the incorporation of sound ecological and sustainable design principles, and value for money for the public purse in building schools; recognises the need for the Scottish Government and local authorities to continue to improve Scotland's school estate; notes the SNP's commitment to match the previous administration's proposed school building programme "brick for brick", and calls on the Scottish Government to make a statement to the Parliament detailing its plans for new schools and how these will be funded; and further notes that future plans for school buildings will be usefully informed by the imminent publication of Audit Scotland's report on improving the Scottish school estate and the Scottish Government's proposals for the Scottish Futures Trust and the Infrastructure Investment Plan.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1260.2, in the name of Margaret Curran, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1260, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on  poverty, be agreed to. I remind members that if the amendment is passed, the amendment in the name of Ross Finnie falls. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 43, Against 66, Abstentions 13.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1260.1, in the name of Mary Scanlon, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1260, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on poverty, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 65, Against 3, Abstentions 54.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1260.3, in the name of Ross Finnie, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1260, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on poverty, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 13, Against 63, Abstentions 46.  Amendment disagreed to.

The final question is, that motion S3M-1260, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on poverty, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 75, Against 46, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament agrees that poverty, inequality and deprivation are among the greatest challenges to be faced  in Scotland today, that tackling these challenges is core to the delivery of the Government Economic Strategy and that development of a framework for taking forward these aspects of the Government Economic Strategy will contribute to the creation of a fairer Scotland, recognises that the Scottish Government, UK Government and local governments need to work together to get people off welfare and into work where possible and to increase the percentage of benefit take-up ensuring that those most in need of help get it, and calls on the Scottish Government to bring forward proposals to achieve these aims.

First, let me say that I consider that point of order to be a challenge to a ruling that has already been given from the chair. I do not welcome that. There are serious issues involved, but the register of interests is a matter not for the Presiding Officer but for the code of conduct. The matter has been ruled on and I strongly suggest that we move on.

Before I call Margaret Curran, I point out that there is too much background noise in the chamber.

Order. Let me repeat that there are still too many conversations going on.

Good afternoon. We have a single theme for themed question time this afternoon: finance and sustainable growth.

I understand that the minister has damaged his back. I am sure that the Parliament will be understanding if he is not able to stand up.

Could we have a question, please?

Question, please, Mr Scott.

I hope that the number of supplementary questions has helped the minister to stand up and sit down enough to ease his back.

Question please.

I will take a supplementary question from Sarah Boyack.

Order.

The question was on support for science, Mr Doris.

It was specifically on support for science.

You are learning fast, Mr Doris.

I repeat that the question was on support for science. However, the minister may answer the member's question.

Will you ask a question, please, Mr Whitton?

Quickly, I hope.

A brief supplementary, please, from Rhona Brankin.

An equally brief answer, please, minister.

Please avoid the second person, Ms Baillie.

Minister, I did not introduce any scheme. Please do not address members directly.

That concludes the opening speeches and we now come to the open debate. Speeches should be kept to four minutes. Members will have picked up that the time for debate is pretty tight.

The member is in his last minute, I am afraid.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-1246, in the name of Des McNulty, on accessible passenger transport and the national concessionary fares scheme.

There are seven questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-1238.2, in the name of Rhona Brankin, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1238, in the name of Maureen Watt, on the importance of Scottish history in the school curriculum, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 104, Against 0, Abstentions 15.  Amendment agreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-1238.1, in the name of Murdo Fraser, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1238, in the name of Maureen Watt, on the importance of Scottish history in the school curriculum, as amended, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The third question is, that amendment S3M-1238.3, in the name of Hugh O'Donnell, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1238, in the name of Maureen Watt, on the importance of Scottish history in the school curriculum, as amended, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The fourth question is, that motion S3M-1238, in the name of Maureen Watt, on the importance of Scottish history in the school curriculum, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament recognises the importance of ensuring that young people understand Scotland's and their place in the world, both currently and in a historical context, and in pursuit of this aim welcomes the opportunities for more exciting, engaging and relevant teaching presented by the Curriculum for Excellence and, in particular, the publication of the draft social studies outcomes and experiences by Learning and Teaching Scotland, along with the recent decision by the Scottish Qualifications Authority to include questions on Scottish history as a compulsory component of the Higher History examination; further recognises that without basic literacy and numeracy skills young people have difficulty accessing the curriculum, including history; calls on the Scottish Government to provide leadership to tackle literacy and numeracy in Scottish schools which will facilitate an improved understanding of history; however, emphasises that it is important that Scottish history is taught in a balanced manner, which encourages young people to evaluate the evidence critically and come to their own conclusions, and that it is taught in its rightful context, namely alongside local, British, European and world history, and further emphasises that courses must be of a high quality with teachers being supported by new teaching resources and continuing professional development training as necessary, and believes that history should be taught without political interference.

The fifth question is, that motion S3M-1201, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Criminal Justice and Immigration Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Criminal Justice and Immigration Bill, reintroduced in the House of Commons on 7 November 2007, relating to investigation of bribery and corruption by foreign officers,  violent offender orders and repatriation of prisoners, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, should be considered by the UK Parliament.

The sixth question is, that motion S3M-1254, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the referral of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Order 2008 be considered by the Parliament.

The final question is, that motion S3M-1253, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of an SSI, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Management of Offenders etc. (Scotland) Act 2005 (Members' Remuneration and Supplementary Provisions) Order 2008 be approved.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-1254, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the referral of a Scottish statutory instrument, and motion S2M-1253, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the approval of an SSI.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Order 2008 be considered by the Parliament. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Management of Offenders etc. (Scotland) Act 2005 (Members' Remuneration and Supplementary Provisions) Order 2008 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on the motions will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-1259, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on a suspension of standing orders.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that, for the purpose of allowing up to 2 hours 5 minutes to debate motion S3M-1256 (Local Government Finance (Scotland) Order 2008) on Thursday 7 February 2008, the final sentence of Rule 10.7.1 of Standing Orders be suspended.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-1252, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 6 February 2008 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Debate: Budget (Scotland) Bill followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Education and Skills Bill - UK Legislation followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 7 February 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Support for Survivors of Historic In-care and Institutional Abuse followed by Scottish Government Debate: Commercial Forestry 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Europe, External Affairs and Culture; Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Local Government Finance (Scotland) Order 2008 followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time  followed by Members' Business Wednesday 20 February 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 21 February 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-1201, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on the Criminal Justice and Immigration Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Criminal Justice and Immigration Bill, reintroduced in the House of Commons on 7 November 2007, relating to investigation of bribery and corruption by foreign officers, violent offender orders and repatriation of prisoners, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[ Kenny MacAskill .]

As I said, the First Minister will take questions on the issues that are raised in his statement. I intend to allow about 40 minutes for questions. I anticipate that a large number of back-bench members will want to ask questions, so I ask their front-bench leaders to show a good example by keeping their questions as short as possible.

Order.

Ms Eadie, could you please speak through the chair and not directly to the First Minister? Thank you.

As Mr Rumbles is fully aware, that is not a point of order. I have no doubt at all that the First Minister heard the question.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-1238, in the name of Maureen Watt, on the importance of Scottish history in the school curriculum.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. I am especially pleased to welcome as our time for reflection leader today the Right Rev Sheilagh Kesting, moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland.

The next item of business is a statement by the First Minister on delivering more effective government. The First Minister will take questions at the end of his statement, therefore there should be no interventions.

There are seven questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-1200.1.1, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-1200.1, in the name of Jackie Baillie, on the Dormant Bank and Building Society Accounts Bill—United Kingdom legislation—be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 17, Against 65, Abstentions 45.  Amendment disagreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-1200.1, in the name of Jackie Baillie, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1200, in the name of Jim Mather, on the Dormant Bank and Building Society Accounts Bill—UK legislation—be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The third question is, that motion S3M-1200, in the name of Jim Mather, on the Dormant Bank and Building Society Accounts Bill—UK legislation—as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament supports the principle of clauses in the Dormant Bank and Building Society Accounts Bill, introduced in the House of Lords on 7 November 2007, providing for the collection and distribution of sums released from dormant bank and building society accounts for social and environmental purposes, and agrees that the provisions in the Bill that relate to the distribution of such sums in Scotland should be considered by the UK Parliament and, in so doing, calls on ministers to ensure a full and open consultation involving all interests with a social or environmental purpose and, in particular, organisations providing services, facilities or opportunities to meet the needs of young people; notes that a further vote will be required in the Scottish Parliament, and calls on ministers to return to the Parliament at the conclusion of the consultation exercise for further consideration of the distribution of the funds not later than September 2008.

The fourth question is, that amendment S3M-1204.1, in the name of David Stewart, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1204, in the name of Michael Russell, on the Scottish biodiversity strategy report, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The fifth question is, that amendment S3M-1204.2, in the name of Jim Hume, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1204, in the name of Michael Russell, on the Scottish biodiversity strategy report, as amended, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

Decision time is very consensual today. The sixth question is, that motion S3M-1204, in the name of Michael Russell, on the Scottish biodiversity strategy report, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament welcomes the collaborative work being undertaken by a wide variety of partners across the public, private and voluntary sectors to take forward implementation of the Scottish Biodiversity Strategy from 2004 to 2007, as set out in Scotland's Biodiversity: It's In Your Hands - A Progress Report 2005-07 ; commends the enthusiasm and commitment of all those involved in that work, and acknowledges that continued effort by all the partners engaged in conserving biodiversity in Scotland is required in order to address the challenges identified in the progress report such as climate change, invasive non-native species, river basin management, sustainable management of the natural world, the development of the ecosystems approach, wildlife crime and the need for the broader engagement of all citizens so that Scotland can play its part in delivering our national and international commitments to the cause of halting biodiversity loss; calls on the Scottish Government to confirm the commitment to meeting the 2010 EU Gothenburg biodiversity targets; and notes that land users, land managers, inshore fishery interests, sea fishing interests and land practitioners are charged with delivering environmental benefits, and recognises that there is a need for these stakeholders in particular to be formally involved in the strategy at all levels, to understand the objectives, and thereafter to contribute practical solutions to the strategy and its overall aim.

The seventh and final question is, that motion S3M-1193, in the name of Mike Pringle, on behalf of the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body, on the reappointment of the Scottish Information Commissioner, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament nominates Kevin Dunion to Her Majesty The Queen for reappointment as the Scottish Information Commissioner from 24 February 2008 until 23 February 2012.

There is no one else to speak, so I have no choice but to suspend the meeting until 5 o'clock.

Good afternoon. I ask Fergus Ewing whether he is deputising for the Cabinet Secretary for Justice this afternoon.

I think that you have asked enough questions, Lord Foulkes.

I do.

The next item of business is a statement by Richard Lochhead on waste. As the cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, there should be no interventions.

I call Malcolm Chisholm. I am quite relaxed about timing, but he should keep his speech at around four minutes.

Good morning. Before I invite Jim Mather to open this morning's debate, members might want to note that a revised section A of the Business Bulletin  has been issued. The specific revision to the business programme is the addition of an amendment in the name of Jeremy Purvis to the amendment in the name of Jackie Baillie. Amendment S3M-1200.1.1 was lodged this morning and I selected it for debate. On that basis, amendment S3M-1200.2, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, has been withdrawn. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-1200, in the name of Jim Mather, on the Dormant Bank and Building Society Accounts Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-1176.1, in the name of Andrew Welsh, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1176, in the name of John Swinney, on the Budget (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 65, Against 1, Abstentions 62.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1176.2, in the name of Iain Gray, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1176, in the name of John Swinney, on the Budget (Scotland) Bill, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 46, Against 82, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1176.3, in the name of Tavish Scott, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1176, in the name of John Swinney, on the Budget (Scotland) Bill, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 62, Against 66, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The fourth question is, that motion S3M-1176, in the name of John Swinney, on the Budget (Scotland) Bill, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 64, Against 62, Abstentions 2.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Budget (Scotland) Bill but, in so doing, recommends that the Scottish Government (a) brings forward proposals setting out how, over the period covered by the spending review, the level of police recruitment can be increased beyond that currently planned and (b) considers whether there is scope to increase the business rate reductions applying in 2008-09 beyond those stated in the Spending Review as the first stage of the acceleration of the reductions, setting out what changes will be required to the 2008-09 Budget as a result.

The next question is, that motion S3M-1199, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Emergency Workers (Scotland) Act 2005 (Modification) Order 2008 be approved.  Meeting closed at 18:04.

The next item of business is consideration of one Parliamentary Bureau motion, motion S3M-1199, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Emergency Workers (Scotland) Act 2005 (Modification) Order 2008 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time, to which we now come.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-1197, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 24 January 2008— after 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions insert followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Dormant Bank and Building Society Accounts Bill - UK Legislation—[ Bruce Crawford ].  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-1198, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 30 January 2008 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Delivering More Effective Government followed by Scottish Government Debate: Importance of Scottish History in the School Curriculum followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Criminal Justice and Immigration Bill - UK Legislation followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 31 January 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time— Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Poverty  followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 6 February 2008 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Debate: Budget (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 7 February 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time— Europe, External Affairs and Culture; Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

Order. There is too much background noise.

That brings us to the end of the debate. I thank all members for making the Presiding Officers' job easier in managing it. I am genuinely grateful.

We now move to open debate. As I have already made very clear, this debate is oversubscribed and speaking times will be kept to a tight maximum of six minutes.

Order.

You must close please, Mr Gray.

I am sorry; I gave fair warning at the start of the debate that I would keep people strictly to time.  Amendment S3M-1176.2 moved:  "insert at end 'and, in so doing, calls on the Scottish Government to bring forward proposals setting out how, over the spending review period: funding can be provided to increase the modern apprenticeship programme by 15,000 places per year; vocational training opportunities can be provided as an option for secondary school pupils throughout Scotland; new direct air services from Scotland can be supported through replacement of the existing route development fund with a scheme which complies with European competition law; additional funding for universities can be provided through end-year flexibility or otherwise; the level of police establishment will be increased to 17,261; vulnerable two-year-olds can be provided with nursery education, and services for disabled children, the homeless, victims of domestic abuse and those suffering from mental health problems can be expanded beyond existing levels in every part of Scotland, setting out what changes will be required to the 2008-09 Budget as a result of these proposals.'"— [Iain Gray.]

I am afraid that the member does not have time to take an intervention.

You must close, Mr Welsh.

I invite all members who wish to participate in the debate to press their request-to-speak buttons now, if they have not already done so. I call Andrew Welsh, on behalf of the Finance Committee, to speak to and move amendment S3M-1176.1. Mr Welsh has a very strict 15 minutes.

Good afternoon. Our first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Margaret Peacock from the Religious Society of Friends.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-1176, in the name of John Swinney, on the Budget (Scotland) Bill. The debate is considerably oversubscribed and the Presiding Officers have agreed that they will be extremely strict in ensuring that members finish their speeches in the allotted time. I give members fair warning of that.

There are nine questions as a result of today's business. I wish to remind members—they might want to listen to this carefully—that in relation to the debate on energy, if the amendment in the name of Lewis Macdonald is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Liam McArthur falls. In relation to the debate on firearms, if the amendment in the name of Pauline McNeill is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Bill Aitken falls. The first question is, that amendment S3M-1152.2.1, in the name of Gavin Brown, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-1152.2, in the name of Lewis Macdonald, on energy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 59, Against 62, Abstentions 3.  Amendment disagreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-1152.2, in the name of Lewis Macdonald, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1152, in the name of Jim Mather, on energy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 59, Against 64, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The third question is, that amendment S3M-1152.1, in the name of Liam McArthur, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1152, in the name of Jim Mather, on energy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 64, Against 15, Abstentions 45.  Amendment agreed to.

The fourth question is, that motion S3M-1152, in the name of Jim Mather, on energy, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 63, Against 58, Abstentions 2.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament notes the Energy Bill introduced by the UK Government; welcomes the Bill's provisions in relation to promotion of renewable energy which will allow the Scottish Parliament to determine levels of support for emerging technologies; recognises the potential of carbon capture and storage for reducing carbon emissions and supports further dialogue with the UK Government on exercise of powers in relation to regulation of carbon storage; welcomes the Scottish Government's position that new nuclear power stations are not necessary to meet renewable electricity targets or carbon emissions targets and are not wanted in Scotland; welcomes the UK Government's recognition that the Bill's provisions on nuclear decommissioning should not extend to Scotland, and believes that Scotland can have a secure, low-carbon, non-nuclear energy future through a combination of a growing renewables sector exploiting a range of technologies, including marine energy, cleaner energy from fossil fuels, microgeneration and biomass; acknowledges the important role of the enterprise networks in helping to achieve this and the need for renewables to remain a priority for a well-resourced Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise, and further recognises the central importance of improved energy efficiency resulting from better insulated buildings and increased awareness of the benefits that accrue from behavioural change and demand reduction.

The fifth question is, that amendment S3M-1153.2, in the name of Pauline McNeill, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1153, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on firearms, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 59, Against 64, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The sixth question is, that amendment S3M-1153.1, in the name of Bill Aitken, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1153, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on firearms, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 31, Against 49, Abstentions 44.  Amendment disagreed to.

The seventh question is, that motion S3M-1153, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on firearms, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 51, Against 73, Abstentions 0.  Motion disagreed to.

For what should be fairly obvious reasons, there were seven questions rather than nine. I apologise.

I ask members to take their seats as quickly as possible. I am aware of the exchanges that took place before I came back into the chair, I have discussed the situation with my Deputy Presiding Officers and with officials, and I would like to make the following brief statement. I received intimation that the Minister for Parliamentary Business wished to withdraw motion S3M-1087. I reiterate that standing orders are absolutely clear that any member has the right to withdraw a motion in their name up to the point at which that motion is moved in Parliament. As motion S3M-1087 had not been moved in Parliament, under standing orders the Minister for Parliamentary Business had an inalienable right to withdraw it. The motion can therefore no longer be considered. Following that, Mr Jeremy Purvis sought leave for Parliament to consider a motion without notice. Given what I understand to be a commitment by the minister to bring the matter back to Parliament next week and the fact that that proposal will go through the Parliamentary Bureau and normal parliamentary procedures, I am not minded to accept such a motion.

Members may say no as often as they like, but that is the reality of the situation.

I would like to give the Minister for Parliamentary Business an opportunity  to respond on the commitment that I believe he made earlier.

I will take the point of order, but I take it from what the minister has said that a commitment has been made to bring the matter back to Parliament next week, as I said in my statement.

Order. These are serious issues.

I do not believe that we have got it wrong, Miss Baillie, and I am not persuaded by your argument. The member has the right to withdraw the motion; there is no doubt about that. If the motion is withdrawn, the amendment is no longer relevant because the motion will not be debated.

I certainly cannot rule out its coming back in the same form, if that is what you are asking. Next week's business will be up to next week.

Order. These are serious issues and I would like to be able to hear the points of order.

I understand where Mr Purvis is coming from, but I do not consider that the actions of the Presiding Officers have negated a debate. This matter will come back to the Parliament next week. It will have to be approved by the Parliamentary Bureau and I would be surprised if the Parliamentary Bureau did not allocate time to ensure that there is at least as much debate as there would have been today. I suggest that we move on.

Order. That is not helpful.

My view is what the Parliament decides at decision time at 5 o'clock. I repeat that the minister has the inalienable right, under standing orders, to withdraw the motion—whether anybody likes it or not. That is what has happened. I strongly suggest that we move to decision time.

Clearly my view is not shared.

It is not for me to reflect on the member's second point. I have no doubt that the discussion will take place at the bureau next week. It is open to any member to refer matters to the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee if they wish to do so. I have already forgotten what the member's first point was—[ Interruption. ] I can only go back to the fact that the reasons for withdrawing the motion are not for me to determine. The standing orders are quite clear. I will say this for the last time: the member whose name is on the motion has the right to withdraw that motion before it is moved in Parliament. That is what has happened, whether we like it or not.

The original question was actually about remote and island communities, but I am willing to allow that supplementary if the minister wants to answer it.

That is quite a lot of questions. Over to you, minister.

I am not aware of anything, Mrs Eadie—I should correct that; I am aware of the odd thing. You should refer to the minister in the third person.

Mrs Eadie—

Mrs Eadie, that is enough. We have the gist of the question.

Mrs Eadie, order.

Will Mr Adam please ask a question?

I do not know what to say to that. [ Laughter. ]

Mr Henry, being an experienced politician, will know that he is perfectly free to take that point to the Procedures Committee himself. I will reflect on what he has said.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-1153, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on firearms.

Ms Alexander, your final question.

A final question from Ms Alexander.

Order. It is totally within order to offer a final question to Ms Alexander.

Order.

I will take a question from Jeremy Purvis on a constituency issue.

Members will forgive me if we overrun slightly on this important question. I call Kenneth Gibson.

That brings us to the end of First Minister's question time.

What is the point of order, Ms Marwick?

I assure the member that I spend half my life reflecting on First Minister's questions. Questions are asked and answers are given—both sides of the equation add to the length of the session.

Margo MacDonald knows perfectly well that that is not a point of order for me. I think that we should all go to lunch.

Thank you, Mr Swinney. I will be doing the immortal memory.

Question 6 was not lodged.

It was not really a question, so that is all you need to do.

I am afraid that the minister is in his final minute.

We come now to open debate. Members will have noticed that I am not at my most autocratic when it comes to timing. We have a little bit of time in hand, but I ask for speeches of around six minutes.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-1152, in the name of Jim Mather, on energy.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-1131.2, in the name of Rhona Brankin, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1131, in the name of Maureen Watt, on the report by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development into Scottish education, "Quality and Equity of Schooling in Scotland", be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 55, Against 47, Abstentions 19.  Amendment agreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-1131.1, in the name of Elizabeth Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1131, in the name of Maureen Watt, on the report by the OECD into Scottish education, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 57, Against 46, Abstentions 18.  Amendment agreed to.

The third question is, that amendment S3M-1131.3, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1131, in the name of Maureen Watt, on the report by the OECD into Scottish education, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 106, Against 15, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The fourth question is, that motion S3M-1131, in the name of Maureen Watt, on the report by the OECD into Scottish education, as heavily amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 59, Against 46, Abstentions 16.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament welcomes the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development's (OECD) Reviews of Policies for National Education: Quality and Equity of Schooling in Scotland and its findings; notes the many positive aspects of our school education system highlighted by the OECD; agrees that this report is an invaluable international evidence base on which to debate and develop Scotland's educational policies for the future, recognising the significant challenges identified by the OECD; recognises the challenge in closing the gap in achievement associated with poverty and deprivation and the need for improved vocational education and high quality training; calls on the Scottish Government to take leadership and place an emphasis on literacy and numeracy, devolve power further to head teachers, develop leadership in schools and further develop vocational studies linked to high quality training, and regrets that this government has failed to address these priorities and has failed to deliver on key pledges made in the SNP manifesto; further notes that the report's key challenge to Scottish schools is to make them work consistently well and equitably and that this outcome is dependent upon greater autonomy within school management, much greater emphasis within the curriculum on basic skills in English and mathematics and greater opportunities for pupils to follow vocational opportunities; welcomes the recognition of the success of educational innovations and developments in Scotland since 1999, and believes that the OECD recommendations for further development of the vocational provision of education, for the development of further leadership in school head teams and for a greater emphasis on transition into primary and between primary and secondary education, with greater devolved but more transparent funding to deliver them, should be the priorities of the Scottish Government in improving even further Scotland's strong internationally renowned education system.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-1143, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 23 January 2008 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 1 Debate: Budget (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 6.00 pm Decision Time Thursday 24 January 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Health Improvement 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time followed by Members' Business 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Justice and Law Officers; Rural Affairs and the Environment 2.55 pm Ministerial Statement: Waste followed by Scottish Government Debate: Scottish Biodiversity Strategy Report followed by Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body Motion: Reappointment of the Scottish Information Commissioner followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 30 January 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 31 January 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business  11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

Order. There is too much background noise in the chamber.

Thank you. At this stage, I remind all members that the only time they should use the word "you" is when they are speaking to me.

The cabinet secretary will now take questions on the issues raised in his statement. Around 30 minutes are allowed for questions, after which we will move on to the next item of business. I would be grateful if all those who wish to ask questions would press their request-to-speak buttons now.

Order, Mr Rumbles.

We come to questions from back benchers. I would be grateful if members could bear in mind the fact that this is a time for questions, not speeches.

Order.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-1131, in the name of Maureen Watt, on the report by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development on Scottish education, "Quality and Equity of Schooling in Scotland".

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection, and our time for reflection leader today is Canon Andrew Mann from St Columba's Catholic church in Banchory.

The next item of business is a statement by Richard Lochhead on fisheries. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions.

There are eight questions to be put as a result of today's business. I remind members that, in relation to the debate on the spending review 2007, if the amendment in John Swinney's name is agreed to, the amendment in Tavish Scott's name will fall. The first question is, that amendment S3M-1105.2.1, in the name of Derek Brownlee, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-1105.2, in the name of John Swinney, on the spending review 2007, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 81, Against 44, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1105.2, in the name of John Swinney, as amended, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1105, in the name of Iain Gray, on the spending review 2007, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 64, Against 60, Abstentions 1.  Amendment, as amended, agreed to.

Amendment S3M-1105.3, in the name of Tavish Scott, therefore falls. The next question is, that motion S3M-1105, in the name of Iain Gray, on the spending review 2007, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 63, Against 61, Abstentions 1.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament looks forward to the replacement of significant amounts of ring-fencing by single outcome agreements with local authorities that will support the achievement of national outcomes set out in the spending review; recognises that the effectiveness of the national outcomes and the removal of ring-fencing will require to be monitored; looks forward to the continuation of full scrutiny of the Scottish Government's budget in the Finance Committee and the Parliament as part of the budget process; notes the decision of the Parliament on 8 November 2007 in relation to a review of the budget process for future years, and calls on all interested parties to participate fully in that review when it commences.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1110.3.1, in the name of Annabel Goldie, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-1110.3, in the name of Andy Kerr, on the Gould report, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 109, Against 16, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1110.3, in the name of Andy Kerr, as amended, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1110, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the Gould report, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 107, Against 16, Abstentions 2.  Amendment, as amended, agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1110.2, in the name of Iain Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1110, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the Gould report, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 18, Against 59, Abstentions 48.  Amendment disagreed to.

The final question is, that motion S3M-1110, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the Gould report, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 109, Against 15, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament welcomes the Gould report, including the recommendation calling for the further devolution of executive and legislative powers to the Scottish Government and the Parliament for the administration of its own elections and the decoupling of future elections to this Parliament and Scotland's councils; calls on Her Majesty's Government and the Scottish Government to discuss, agree and publish a timetable for appropriate implementation of the report's recommendations having regard to the conclusions from both the Scottish Parliament's Local Government and Communities Committee and the House of Commons'  Scottish Affairs Select Committee, and believes that the proposed Scottish Constitutional Commission should consider the full legislative framework for Scottish Parliament elections.

Before we come to decision time, I understand that there will be a point of order. I will be very happy if no one wants to raise a point of order.

Is it on the same subject?

I thank members for giving prior notification of their points of order. I have reviewed the Official Report of yesterday's statement and today's press coverage, and it appears that information that the Minister for Communities and Sport did not consider it appropriate to disclose during proceedings in the  chamber yesterday was later detailed in the press. It is appropriate for me to invite the minister to comment at this stage.

I am grateful for the minister's response, but the good practice guidance that I issued on statements and announcements said that, among other things, members should be informed quickly about the detail of statements and that they should have the opportunity to question ministers on the detail of Government proposals. I appreciate the candid nature of the minister's response, but I ask the Scottish Government to reflect on that guidance, to ensure that such a situation does not arise again.

You have one minute.

That brings us to the end of the debate on the Gould report. I am sure that members will join me in welcoming to the gallery Josep-Lluís Carod-Rovira, who is the vice-president of the Generalitat of Catalonia. [ Applause. ]

Question 6 has been withdrawn.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-1110, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the Gould report. Members may wish to note that a further revised section A of the Business Bulletin has been produced. For clarity, I am referring to the section A that shows a revision time of 12.30 pm on its cover. The specific revision to the business programme is the addition of an amendment in the name of Annabel Goldie to the amendment in the name of Andy Kerr. Amendment S3M-1110.3.1 was lodged this morning, and I have selected it for debate. On the basis of that selection, amendment S3M-1110.1, in the name of Annabel Goldie, has been withdrawn.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Order. Excuse me, First Minister—

Order. I am sorry to interrupt the First Minister, but I must have better order in the chamber. Members will obviously make interventions when they wish to do so, but when I cannot hear the answers I think that it has gone too far.

I do not need to point out to somebody of Lord Foulkes's experience that I have no control over ministerial answers. I will get better order in the chamber when members obey my instructions, please, to make fewer sedentary interventions. I speak to members of all parties—there is no need for any members to point fingers at others. I have an impossible number of requests for supplementaries, but I will do my best to get in as many as possible.

That is not a point of order for me.

I accept that the approach has normally been to take points of order at the end of First Minister's question time, but that is entirely at the behest of the Presiding Officer. Today, I took points of order as they were made, but I will reflect on what you have said.

There is a lot of interest in the question, so brief questions and answers would be appreciated.

Before we move to First Minister's question time, I am sure that the chamber would like to join me in welcoming to my gallery today Senator Alan Ferguson, who is accompanied by his wife. Senator Ferguson is the President of the Australian Senate. [ Applause. ] If I may say so, it is a fine name for any Presiding Officer or President to have.

Order!

We now move to the open debate, with speeches of a tight six minutes—and I mean tight.

Order.

You are now in your final minute, Mr Brownlee.

You should close now, Mr Brownlee.

Let me deal with Richard Baker's point of order first, if I may. The reports on the committee's deliberations are private, but anything that is already in the public domain by way of evidence that has been given to those committees can, of course, be referred to.

I do not think that that is a point of order, but it is a reality.

Please speak through the chair.

I call Derek Brownlee to speak to and move amendment S3M-1105.2.1, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-1105.2, in the name of John Swinney. After all that, Mr Brownlee, you have seven minutes.

Good morning. Members should have on their desks a revised section A of the Business Bulletin , which shows the amendment in Derek Brownlee's name as an amendment to John Swinney's amendment rather than to the motion in Iain Gray's name. That corrects an administrative error before publication of the Business Bulletin yesterday evening. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-1105, in the name of Iain Gray, on the spending review 2007. I remind members that committee reports for the 2008-09 budget process have not yet been published and are private documents. I am sure that members will bear that in mind when making their speeches.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-1101.1, in the name of Pauline McNeill, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1101, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on serious organised crime, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-1101.2, in the name of Margaret Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1101, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, as amended, on serious organised crime, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 72, Against 49, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The third question is, that motion S3M-1101, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on serious organised crime, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 72, Against 48, Abstentions 1.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament recognises that serious organised crime is a major problem that has a devastating impact on communities and businesses in Scotland; believes that tackling this menace should be a key priority for a safer and stronger Scotland; supports the Scottish police service and UK and European law enforcement agencies in ramping up their efforts to disrupt and destroy the criminal networks which inflict misery on law-abiding citizens; commends the agencies responsible for recovering over £17 million worth of assets using the provisions of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002; supports the view that serious organised crime cannot be seen to pay and supports further measures to ensure that criminals are stripped of the profits made from the misery they cause in order to reinvest in the youth of Scotland and communities, and supports the role of the newly established Serious Organised Crime Taskforce in spearheading a renewed drive and commitment to address this type of crime; calls on the Scottish Government to ensure that the necessary resources are in place to effectively implement the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002, but regrets the Scottish Government's continued failure to implement the SNP's election promise of 1,000 extra police officers, which would contribute to the fight against serious crime.

The fourth and final question is, that motion S3M-1044, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Health and Social Care Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation, be agreed to. Are we agreed?  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the UK Health and Social Care Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 15 November 2007, which legislate in devolved areas in respect of provisions relating to the regulation of the healthcare professions should be considered by the UK Parliament.

That concludes decision time. As always, I ask members who are leaving the chamber to do so quietly.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-1109, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on the suspension of rule 5.6.1(c) of standing orders.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that Rule 5.6.1(c) of Standing Orders be suspended for the purposes of Members' Business on Wednesday 23 January 2008.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-1108, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 16 January 2008 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Fisheries followed by Scottish Government Debate: OECD Report into Scottish Education: the Quality and Equity of Schooling in Scotland followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 17 January 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Energy 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Justice followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Dormant Bank and Building Society Accounts Bill - UK Legislation followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 23 January 2008  2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 1 Debate: Budget (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 6.00 pm Decision Time Thursday 24 January 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time followed by Members' Business 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Justice and Law Officers; Rural Affairs and the Environment 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-1107, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for legislation.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Graduate Endowment Abolition (Scotland) Bill at Stage 2 be completed by 1 February 2008.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-1044, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Health and Social Care Bill, which is United Kingdom legislation.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the UK Health and Social Care Bill, introduced in the House of Commons on 15 November 2007, which legislate in devolved areas in respect of provisions relating to the regulation of the healthcare professions should be considered by the UK Parliament.—[ Nicola Sturgeon. ]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

Order.

Before we move to questions, I know that members will be keen to know one of my many new year resolutions with regard to the chamber. The questions that follow statements are a superb opportunity for back benchers, in particular, to question ministers on the subject of the statement. The way to do that most effectively is to get as many of them in as possible, and the way to do that is to keep questions and answers as succinct as possible, please. Some leeway has always been given to front benchers, but I ask all members please to keep questions succinct, short and to the point, and ministers to do likewise with their answers.

I remind members that they should not refer to people in the second person singular.

Order.

We come now to questions from back benchers. I repeat my earlier stricture: we have 11 back-bench questions and answers to fit in to 15 minutes, so I ask for one succinct question per member, please. The first question is from Michael Matheson, who will be followed by Patricia Ferguson.

Could we have a question, please?

Order.

Order.

Could we have a question, please.

Good afternoon, and welcome back after what I hope has been a peaceful break for you all. The first item of business this year is time for reflection, and our time for reflection leader today is the Rev Albert Bogle from St Andrew's parish church in Bo'ness. Among many other things, he is the founder of the Vine Trust and currently he chairs the church without walls project.

The next item of business is a statement by Stewart Maxwell on sportscotland. The minister will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions.

In calling the minister to respond, I will be forgiven for pointing out that, had I not been precluded from taking part in debates because of my office, I would have brilliantly encapsulated all the points that have been made tonight in a further four-minute speech.

A number of members wish to participate in the debate, so I ask for speeches of a fairly tight four minutes. I call Elaine Murray.

There are two questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-1053.1, in the name of Malcolm Chisholm, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1053, in the name of Linda Fabiani, on the European Union reform treaty, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 61, Against 64, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that S3M-1053, in the name of Linda Fabiani, on the EU reform treaty, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 64, Against 17, Abstentions 45.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament believes that the UK Government should hold a referendum on the EU Reform Treaty.

The final item of business is a members' business debate on motion S3M-464, in the name of John Lamont, on support for Border television news. The debate will be concluded without any question being put.  Motion debated,  That the Parliament considers that moves by ITV to merge some of its smaller regional news services should be opposed; believes that these proposals pose a significant threat to the future of Border television and would be damaging to regional news in the region; considers that a merger of Border television news with STV news services would also be a bad move for television in Scotland and would provide a downgraded service for the customer, and believes that local and regional television services provide a valuable role in an increasingly centralised market.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-1061, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on the suspension of rule 5.6.1(c) of standing orders.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that Rule 5.6.1(c) of Standing Orders be suspended for the purposes of Members' Business on Thursday 20 December 2007.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-1060, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 20 December— after 12 noon First Minister's Question Time delete 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Abolition of Bridge Tolls (Scotland) Bill followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Climate Change Bill - UK Legislation followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S3M-953 Bill Butler: Support Project Scotland and insert  followed by Members' Business - debate on the subject of S3M-953 Bill Butler: Support Project Scotland 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Abolition of Bridge Tolls (Scotland) Bill followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Climate Change Bill - UK Legislation followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 4.30 pm Decision Time.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-1059, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 9 January 2008 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement followed by Scottish Government Debate: Serious Organised Crime followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Health and Social Care Bill - UK Legislation followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 10 January 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning; Europe, External Affairs and Culture 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Gould Report followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 16 January 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 17 January 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing  2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The cabinet secretary will take questions on the issues that his statement raised. I will allow about 30 minutes for questions, after which we will move to the next item of business. It would be extremely helpful if members who wished to ask a question pressed their request-to-speak buttons. A huge number of members have done that, so the shorter the questions, the more we will be able to fit in.

We come to questions from back-bench members. I strongly urge members to ask only one question each.

Ask a question please.

That was three questions.

A question, please.

Briefly, please.

There is time for a very brief question from Patrick Harvie.

Briefly, please.

The next item is consideration of business motion S3M-1063, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 19 December 2007— after 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions insert  followed by Ministerial Statement: Transport—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a statement by John Swinney on transport. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement and therefore there should be no interventions.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection, and our time for reflection leader today is the Rev Kathy Galloway from the Iona Community.

There are six questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-1018.2, in the name of Stewart Maxwell, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1018, in the name of Ross Finnie, on sport and young people be agreed to. I point out that, if the amendment is agreed to, Jamie McGrigor's amendment will be pre-empted. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 45, Against 79, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1018.1, in the name of Jamie McGrigor, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1018, in the name of Ross Finnie, on sport and young people, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, therefore, that motion S3M-1018, in the name of Ross Finnie, on sport and young people, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 81, Against 44, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament rejects the case for the abolition of sportscotland without prejudice to any proposals which may improve the performance of that body; notes the importance of grass-roots sport and the opportunities that currently exist to increase sporting participation and enhance sporting performance, particularly among young people, in Scotland as we look forward to the London Olympics of 2012 and the Glasgow Commonwealth Games of 2014; recognises that sportscotland has established itself as an effective arms-length body for distributing both Treasury and lottery funding as well as successfully performing important co-ordinating and strategic functions in the development of integrated sporting performance pathways, and therefore calls for sportscotland to be retained.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1017.1, in the name of Bill Aitken, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1017, in the name of Margaret Smith, on civil liberties, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 16, Against 18, Abstentions 91.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-1017.2, in the name of Patrick Harvie, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1017, in the name of Margaret Smith, on civil liberties, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 64, Against 16, Abstentions 42.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-1017, in the name of Margaret Smith, on civil liberties, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 64, Against 1, Abstentions 60.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament believes that the fundamental liberties enjoyed by generations of our citizens must not be eroded; welcomes the commitment by the previous Scottish Executive that ID cards would not be needed to access devolved services and its proportionate position on DNA retention; is concerned at the threat to civil liberties from the UK Government's expensive and unworkable proposal to introduce compulsory ID cards; believes that the Scottish Government should not put citizens' privacy at risk by allowing the UK ID database to access personal information held by the Scottish Government, local authorities or other devolved public agencies; therefore calls on the Scottish Government to ensure that all data protection procedures comply with the principles of data protection, namely that personal information must be fairly and lawfully processed, processed for limited purposes, adequate, relevant and not excessive, accurate and up to date, not kept for longer than necessary, processed in line with individuals' rights, secure and not transmitted to other countries without adequate protection, and that audit of data under its jurisdiction is independent of government  and accountable to the Parliament; further calls on the Scottish Government to review plans for Scottish Citizens Accounts on the basis of these principles, and takes the view that there should be no blanket retention of DNA samples and that the Assistant Information Commissioner for Scotland should have specific powers to carry out spot checks on the compliance by Scottish government agencies and bodies with the Data Protection Act 1998.

Order.

Order.

Excuse me, Mr Neil. I will have order in the chamber, please.

Robert Brown has a point of order, which I will take now.

Let me say to both points of order, because I think that they both fall into the same category, that, as I have repeatedly made plain, members are themselves largely responsible for what they say in the chamber. The allegations are very much of the "he said, she said" variety. If members, on reflection or on the uncovering of other facts, find that they have inadvertently misled the Parliament, I am sure that they will act accordingly. These are not points of order for me, as I have repeatedly made plain, and I would like to move to decision time.

Members have protection but not to the same extent as in the House of Commons, as I understand it. Before we move to decision time, I am sure that members would like to join me in welcoming to the gallery this evening the United States Under-secretary of State for Political Affairs, Ambassador Nicholas Burns. Ambassador, you are very welcome. [ Applause. ]

Order, Mr Kerr.

You have one minute left, Mr Swinney.

Minister, you should be winding up now.

You should close now.

Order. Briefly, please.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is themed questions on rural affairs and the environment.

Question 4 has been withdrawn.

I am not sure that that was entirely within the context of the question, but I will leave it to the minister to decide how to respond.

Question 9 was not lodged.

I will allow a final supplementary on the question from Tom McCabe.

The next item of business is a statement by John Swinney on the local government finance settlement for 2008 to 2011. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, but I stress that those are to be for clarification only, as a full debate will follow. There should be no interventions during the statement.

Order.

Order. Order.

Order.

I have received a number of requests for supplementary questions. I will take one from Margo MacDonald.

I will take a further supplementary from Roseanna Cunningham.

We started late, so I will take a very brief final question from Jackie Baillie.

I remind all members that during their speeches they should not speak directly to other members across the chamber. They should always speak through the chair and refer to other members in the third person. I do not know for how long I will have to keep going on about the issue, but I will do so for as long as is necessary.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-1018, in the name of Ross Finnie, on sport and young people.

The next item of business is consideration of one Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-1015, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Scottish Police Services Authority (Police Support Services) (Modification) Order 2007 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-1008.3, in the name of Des McNulty, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1008, in the name of Michael Russell, on the benefits of woodland and green spaces, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 54, Against 62, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-1008.2, in the name of Nanette Milne, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1008, in the name of Michael Russell, on the benefits of woodlands and green spaces, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The third question is, that amendment S3M-1008.4, in the name of Jim Hume, which seeks to amend motion S3M-1008, in the name of Michael Russell, on the benefits of woodlands and green spaces, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 53, Against 62, Abstentions 2.  Amendment disagreed to.

The fourth question is, that motion S3M-1008, in the name of Michael Russell, on the benefits of woodlands and green spaces, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament recognises the value of the physical environment in promoting health and wellbeing; recognises the role that woodland and other greenspace plays in this through increased opportunities for physical activity, relaxation and social interaction in people's everyday lives, further recognises the economic significance of woodlands and the need to support the development and expansion of Scotland's commercial forestry sector and calls on the environmental and health sectors to work together to further develop the contribution of woodland and other greenspace to Scotland's health.

The fifth question is, that motion S3M-1015, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Scottish Police Services Authority (Police Support Services) (Modification) Order 2007 be approved.

Order.

Order.

The rules state fairly clearly that the First Minister answers questions on matters for which he has general responsibility.

Order.

I am sure that it is not beyond some of the more experienced members to phrase their questions so that they fall within the First Minister's general area of responsibility. I cannot clarify that point any further at present. The question is, that motion S3M-1014, in the name of Bruce Crawford, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 19 December 2007 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: EU Reform Treaty followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 20 December 2007 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 1 Debate: Graduate Endowment Abolition (Scotland) Bill 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time  2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Abolition of Bridge Tolls (Scotland) Bill followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Climate Change Bill - UK Legislation followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 9 January 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 10 January 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning; Europe, External Affairs and Culture 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-1014, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 19 December 2007 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: EU Reform Treaty followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 20 December 2007 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 1 Debate: Graduate Endowment Abolition (Scotland) Bill 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 3 Proceedings: Abolition of Bridge Tolls (Scotland) Bill followed by Legislative Consent Motion: Climate Change Bill - UK Legislation followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 9 January 2008 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 10 January 2008 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning; Europe, External Affairs and Culture 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford .]

I will give the Minister for Parliamentary Business an opportunity to respond.

Before I call the cabinet secretary to reply, I remind members that they may refer to her in many ways—as "cabinet secretary", as "minister" or as "Nicola Sturgeon"—but not as "you".

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Jack Glenny, from Greenock and Paisley presbytery.

The next item of business is a statement by Nicola Sturgeon on the Scottish Government's health strategy. The Deputy First Minister and Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing will take questions at the end of her statement, and there should be no interventions.

The next item of business is consideration of one Government motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-982, on membership of the Committee of the Regions and of the regional chamber of the Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of the Council of Europe.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament endorses the Scottish Government's proposal to nominate as representatives of the Parliament Alex Neil MSP as full member and Malcolm Chisholm MSP as alternate member on the UK delegation to the regional chamber of the Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of the Council of Europe, and Keith Brown MSP and Irene Oldfather MSP as full members and Alison McInnes MSP and Ted Brocklebank MSP as alternate members on the UK delegation to the Committee of the Regions for the remainder of the current session to 2010, and notes that the representation from local government to the Committee of the Regions will be Councillor Corrie McChord and Councillor Roger Knox as full members and Councillor Graham Garvie and Councillor Jim McCabe as alternate members.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

There are six questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-976.2, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, which seeks to amend motion S3M-976, in the name of Wendy Alexander, on a new agenda for Scotland, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 46, Against 76, Abstentions 3.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-976, in the name of Wendy Alexander, on a new agenda for Scotland, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 76, Against 46, Abstentions 3.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament, recognising mainstream public opinion in Scotland, supports the establishment of an independently chaired commission to review devolution in Scotland; encourages UK Parliamentarians and parties to support this commission also and proposes that the remit of this commission should be: "To review the provisions of the Scotland Act 1998 in the light of experience and to recommend any changes to the present constitutional arrangements that would enable the Scottish Parliament to better serve the people of Scotland, that would improve the financial accountability of the Scottish Parliament and that would continue to secure the position of Scotland within the United Kingdom", and further instructs the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body to allocate appropriate resources and funding for this review.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-983.1, in the name of Bill Aitken, which seeks to amend motion S3M-983, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on summary justice reform, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-983.2, in the name of Margaret Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-983, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on summary justice reform, as amended, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-983, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on summary justice reform, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament recognises that a summary justice system should deal with offending behaviour quickly and effectively; believes that the implementation of the provisions contained in the Criminal Proceedings etc. (Reform) (Scotland) Act 2007 will help bring about improvement in how the summary justice system deals with offending behaviour; recognises also that the success of a revised summary justice system will be dependent on fine payments being enforced and a much tighter and rigorous  control of community service orders, and that in some cases custodial sentences are the only appropriate disposal; considers that the legal aid system should complement the reformed summary justice system and ensure that solicitors receive fair remuneration for their work in advising clients while also providing best value to taxpayers; looks forward to the Justice Committee providing effective post-enactment scrutiny on the impact of the programme of summary justice reform; and further calls on the Scottish Government to ensure that the views of professionals are taken into account in the consultation on summary justice to ensure that access to justice for the weakest and most disadvantaged in society is protected.

The final question is, that motion S3M-982, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on membership of the Committee of the Regions and of the regional chamber of the Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of the Council of Europe, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament endorses the Scottish Government's proposal to nominate as representatives of the Parliament Alex Neil MSP as full member and Malcolm Chisholm MSP as alternate member on the UK delegation to the regional chamber of the Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of the Council of Europe, and Keith Brown MSP and Irene Oldfather MSP as full members and Alison McInnes MSP and Ted Brocklebank MSP as alternate members on the UK delegation to the Committee of the Regions for the remainder of the current session to 2010, and notes that the representation from local government to the Committee of the Regions will be Councillor Corrie McChord and Councillor Roger Knox as full members and Councillor Graham Garvie and Councillor Jim McCabe as alternate members.

Order.

This afternoon, for the first time, the sole subject of themed question time is health and well-being.

I am sorry, Ms Lamont, but I cannot explain that. Could you please refer to the minister in the third person?

Question 4 has been withdrawn.

Order.

Question 7 has been withdrawn.

A question please, Ms Whitefield.

A question, please.

I am not sure whether a question has been asked, but if the minister would like to answer, she may.

Before we move to the next item of business, I acknowledge the fact that Karen Whitefield's supplementary included a question. I am afraid that I lost it while I was exhorting her to ask a question. I say to members from all parties that I expect supplementaries to be short, sharp and to the point. There is a growing tendency for members from all parties to turn them into brief speeches, which is not particularly welcome.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-983, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on summary justice reform.

We come now to First Minister's question time. I call Wendy Alexander. [ Applause. ] Order.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Before we move to question 4, I am sure that members will wish to join me in welcoming from the Isle of Man Mr Steven Rodan MHK, the Speaker of the House of Keys, and a parliamentary delegation of members of the Tynwald. [ Applause. ]

Order.

Quickly please, Mr Neil.

We move to the comparative serenity of general question time.

Too many conversations are taking place around the chamber.

I am afraid that that question was not relevant to the question that was lodged.

Order.

Order.

You should close now.

Order.

Order.

Given that it was made in the very early part of the speech, I will not rule it as discourteous, but I ask Nicola Sturgeon to stick to the subject matter of the debate.

Order.

Order.

I have asked members to try to stick to the subject matter of the motion.  Given today's political temperature, it would be very helpful if they did so.

Order in the chamber, please.

The member is in her last minute.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-976, in the name of Wendy Alexander, on a new agenda for Scotland.

I would be grateful if members remembered to speak through the chair, not directly to other members.

Order, Mr McNeil.

Order.

There are two questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-965, in the name of Adam Ingram, on fostering and kinship care, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament recognises that the needs of a child are paramount and that families should be supported to stay together; agrees that, where the child needs to live away from his or her birth parents, care within the family circle by a kinship carer should be the first option unless it is not in the best interests of the child; believes that all placements for a child who must live away from his or her birth parents must provide a safe and nurturing home, whether for a planned short-term period or on a permanent basis, and affirms its commitment to the provision of equitable and appropriate support for all carers of looked-after children, with systems in place to ensure that carers can provide the best possible opportunities and chances to all looked-after children.

I propose to ask a single question on motions S3M-977, S3M-978 and S3M-979, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on approval of Scottish statutory instruments. If any member objects to a single question being put, please say so now. As no member objects to a single question being put, the next question is, that motions S3M-977, S3M-978 and S3M-979 be agreed to.  Motions agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Transport and Works (Scotland) Act 2007 (Inquiries and Hearings Procedure) Rules 2007 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Transport and Works (Scotland) Act 2007 (Applications and Objections Procedure) Rules 2007 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Transport and Works (Scotland) Act 2007 (Consents under Enactments) Regulations 2007 be approved.

The next item of business is consideration of three Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motions S3M-977, S3M-978 and S3M-979, on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Transport and Works (Scotland) Act 2007 (Inquiries and Hearings Procedure) Rules 2007 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Transport and Works (Scotland) Act 2007 (Applications and Objections Procedure) Rules 2007 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Transport and Works (Scotland) Act 2007 (Consents under Enactments) Regulations 2007 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The questions on the motions will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-980, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 6 December 2007— after 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Summary Justice Reform insert  followed by Scottish Government Motion: Membership of the Committee of the Regions and the Regional Chamber of the Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of the Council of Europe—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-981, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 12 December 2007 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Scottish Government's Health Strategy followed by Scottish Government Debate: The Benefits of Woodland and Greenspaces followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 13 December 2007 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Liberal Democrats Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and Law Officers  2.55 pm Ministerial Statement: Local Government Finance Settlement 2008-2011 followed by Scottish Government Debate: Local Government Finance Settlement 2008-2011 followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.30 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 19 December 2007 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Stage 1 Debate: Graduate Endowment Abolition (Scotland) Bill followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 20 December 2007 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Stage 3 Debate: Abolition of Bridge Tolls (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The minister should close now.

The cabinet secretary will take questions on the issues that were raised in her statement. I intend to allow around 30 minutes for such questions.

Briefly, please, Ms Curran.

Mr Finnie, could I ask you not to refer—

Mr Finnie, I was not trying to hurry you up; I am asking you not to speak directly to the cabinet secretary but to speak through the chair.

We now come to questions from back benchers. There are 15 members who wish to ask questions, and less than 15 minutes for that to take place. It follows that questions should be short, sharp and to the point. I call Christine Grahame, to be followed by Dr Richard Simpson.

I ask you to be brief.

Question, please, Mr McNulty.

Very briefly, Mr McNulty.

I apologise to the three members whom I was unable to call.

The next item of business is a statement by Fiona Hyslop on class sizes. Again, the cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of her statement, so there should be no interventions.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader is the Rev Neil Urquhart, from Fullarton church in Irvine.

The next item of business is a statement by Nicola Sturgeon on prescription charges. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of her statement; there should therefore be no interventions.

Several members still wish to speak. I am minded to accept a motion, under rule 8.14.3, that the debate be extended by up to 30 minutes.  Motion moved,  That, under Rule 8.14.3, the debate be extended until 6.08 pm.—[ Cathy Jamieson. ]  Motion agreed to.

You should close now, Mr Coffey.

You must close now, Mr Coffey.

I am sorry to press members on time, but we are very short of it: "a tight four minutes" means four minutes, not five.

Many members wish to speak, so I ask that speeches be a tight four minutes, please.

The next item of business is decision time. There are nine questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-945.2, in the name of Lewis Macdonald, which seeks to amend motion S3M-945, in the name of Jim Mather, on tourism, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 58, Against 61, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-945.3, in the name of Gavin Brown, which seeks to amend motion S3M-945, in the name of Jim Mather, on tourism, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The third question is, that amendment S3M-945.1, in the name of Liam McArthur, which seeks to amend motion S3M-945, in the name of Jim Mather, on tourism, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 56, Against 63, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-945, in the name of Jim Mather, on tourism, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament recognises the vital role that tourism has in increasing sustainable economic growth in line with the Scottish Government's Economic Strategy; reiterates its support for the ambitions set out in the Tourism Framework for Change that tourism revenue should increase by 50% in real terms in the decade to 2015 and that Scotland should be one of Europe's most sustainable tourism destinations; recognises the appetite in the industry to improve and exceed visitor expectation; welcomes the fact that these ambitions are shared between the public, private and third sectors; further recognises the important work done by the excellent network of tourist information centres; believes that decision-making at a local level is a crucial element of an effective tourism strategy, and calls on the Scottish Government to give a more detailed explanation as to how the 50% growth ambition is to be met and the role of the public, private and third sectors in doing so.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-946.3, in the name of Malcolm Chisholm, which seeks to amend motion S3M-946, in the name of Linda Fabiani, on St Andrew's day, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 44, Against 60, Abstentions 15.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-946.2, in the name of Ted Brocklebank, which seeks to amend motion S3M-946, in the name of Linda Fabiani, on St Andrew's day, be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

That is agreed.

That is not agreed—I beg your pardon. I thought that it was too good to be true. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 78, Against 42, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-946.1, in the name of Iain Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-946, in the name of Linda Fabiani, on St Andrew's day, as amended, be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 72, Against 46, Abstentions 2.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-946, in the name of Linda Fabiani, on St Andrew's day, as amended, be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 74, Against 46, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament believes in the importance of celebrating Scotland's national day; recognises the opportunity that it offers both to celebrate what it means to be Scottish in the 21st century and to promote a fair and inclusive society; notes the Scottish Government's proactive support of a programme of events throughout the country and all of Scotland's cities, including the cathedral city of St Andrews itself and urges it to build on St Andrew's Day as a launch-pad for a winter tourist season; commends the work of schools and community groups across Scotland in teaching our young people about St Andrew's Day and its importance in a national as well as an international context and promoting diversity through their celebrations, and furthermore thanks the St Andrew's societies, Caledonian societies, Scottish Development International, Globalscots, the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and all the other overseas organisations who have planned over 100 wide-ranging celebrations in countries around the world but notes the failure of the SNP government to keep the SNP manifesto promise to "make St Andrew's Day a full national holiday".

The final question is, that motion S3M-884, in the name of Pauline McNeill, on behalf of the selection panel on the appointment of the chair of the Scottish commission for human rights, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament nominates Professor Alan Miller to Her Majesty The Queen for appointment as Chair of the  Scottish Commission for Human Rights.

That brings us to the end of decision time. I ask members leaving the chamber to do so quietly. [ Interruption. ] Ms McNeill, do not walk across the floor of the chamber, please. Members should know by now not to walk across the floor of the chamber when Parliament is sitting.

The final item of business is a members' business debate on motion S3M-524, in the name of Cathy Jamieson, on the Coalfields Regeneration Trust. The debate will be concluded without any question being put.  Motion debated,  That the Parliament commends the work of the Coalfields Regeneration Trust in Scotland in supporting and helping to rebuild coalfield communities; notes the positive impact made by the trust throughout the former Scottish coalfields; welcomes the support that the trust has provided for community-based organisations in East Ayrshire, such as Yipworld.com, the Muirkirk Enterprise Group and the Bellsbank Women's Project, and for other projects in local authority areas throughout Scotland that provide opportunities and activities for local people, and hopes that support will continue for the work of the Coalfields Regeneration Trust in helping to create healthy, prosperous and sustainable communities in Scotland's coalfield areas.

I am very grateful to you, as it happens. Thank you very much indeed.

I call Margo MacDonald to ask a supplementary question—I ask her to bear in mind that the subject is the Scots language.

Mr Purvis!

Briefly, Dr Simpson.

Question 6 is in the name of Charlie Gordon, who is not present.

I will take two supplementary questions, which must be brief, because we are over time.

I am sure that members will be interested to know that I am opening the Gaelic debating competition tonight. In doing so, I will be speaking Gaelic on live television. Given my previous performance on live television, I look forward to it with some trepidation.

We started the session late, but we have just time for a quick question from Tricia Marwick and a quick answer from the minister.

As briefly as possible, please, minister. I am sorry to hurry you.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-946, in the name of Linda Fabiani, on St Andrew's day. You have 11 minutes, minister, but I would be grateful if your speech was a little shorter than that.

Order.

We started slightly late, so I will allow a final question from Johann Lamont.

Order.

Order.

Order.

That is not a point of order, but it is now on the record.

Do you have a point of order, Ms Baillie?

This is not a point of order for me, Ms Baillie.

This is not a point of order for me. I ask you to close.

That brings us to the end of First Minister's question time.

Ask a question, please, Mr Tolson.

I am advised that that ruling was on a sub judice issue, Mr McNulty. I invite the minister to continue.

Question 8 has been withdrawn.

Before we move to First Minister's question time, I am sure that the chamber would wish to join me in welcoming to the gallery His Excellency Ihor Kharchenko, the Ukrainian ambassador to the United Kingdom, and Daniel Ona Ondo, the deputy speaker of the National Assembly of Gabon, with his cross-party delegation of parliamentarians. [ Applause. ]

Time allows for an intervention.

Brian Adam should begin to wind up now.

We come now to the open debate. We have a little time in hand, but speeches should be of about six minutes.

I am not suggesting anything, Mr Gibson. Lewis Macdonald might be, and I am sure that he would like to answer.

I have tried to make it clear to members that they should not use the term "you" in the chamber. It is preferred that they refer to members by their proper names.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-945, in the name of Jim Mather, on tourism.

If members are keen to intervene, time is available in the debate. Members who press their request-to-speak buttons will be able to contribute properly.

They are following a previous example, I think, Mr Scott.

There are six questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-928.2, in the name of Johann Lamont, which seeks to amend motion S3M-928, in the name of Stewart Maxwell, on equality and diversity, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-928.1, in the name of Hugh O'Donnell, which seeks to amend motion S3M-928, in the name of Stewart Maxwell, on equality and diversity, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 15, Against 61, Abstentions 41.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-928, in the name of Stewart Maxwell, on equality and diversity, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament is committed to securing equality of opportunity and a fairer Scotland in which diversity of need is recognised, respect for others is fostered, stereotypes and discriminatory attitudes and behaviours are challenged and people have more control over their lives and welcomes Equality and Diversity Week, the creation of the Equality and Human Rights Commission and the commitment of the Scottish Government to promoting and mainstreaming equality and to working in partnership with public bodies, the voluntary sector, business interests and communities to tackle disadvantage and the barriers to equality; further recognises that equality impact assessment tools should be used in determining and assessing policy priorities and spending allocations, and calls on the Scottish Government to bring forward a statement to the Parliament detailing how the above commitments on equality and diversity will be delivered through the Scottish budget.

The next question is, that motion S3M-938, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Budget (Scotland) Act 2007 Amendment Order 2007 be approved.

The next question is, that motion S3M-939, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on approval of an SSI, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Criminal Proceedings etc. (Reform) (Scotland) Act 2007 (Incidental, Supplemental and Consequential Provisions) Order 2007 be approved.

The next question is, that motion S3M-937, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on a committee duration and remit, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees to amend the remit and duration of the Scottish Parliamentary Pension Scheme Committee as follows: Remit: To inquire into and report with recommendations for a Committee Bill on a replacement for the Scottish Parliamentary Pension Scheme rules and the Grants to Members and Officeholders Order; Duration: Until the Parliament has completed its consideration of the committee's report and any ensuing Bill.

That concludes decision time. As ever, I ask members leaving the chamber to do so quietly.

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motion S3M-939, on approval of an SSI.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Criminal Proceedings etc. (Reform) (Scotland) Act 2007 (Incidental, Supplemental and Consequential Provisions) Order 2007 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motion S3M-937, on a committee remit and duration.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees to amend the remit and duration of the Scottish Parliamentary Pension Scheme Committee as follows: Remit: To inquire into and report with recommendations for a Committee Bill on a replacement for the Scottish Parliamentary Pension Scheme rules and the Grants to Members and Officeholders Order; Duration: Until the Parliament has completed its consideration of the committee's report and any ensuing Bill.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The questions on the motions will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-942, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 5 December 2007 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Health followed by Ministerial Statement: Class Sizes followed by Scottish Government Debate: National Fostering and Kinship Care followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.15 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 6 December 2007 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Summary Justice Reform followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 12 December 2007 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 13 December 2007 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Liberal Democrats Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time  2.15 pm Themed Question Time Rural Affairs and the Environment; Justice and Law Officers 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-940, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for legislation.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Glasgow Commonwealth Games Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 29 February 2008.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-938, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Budget (Scotland) Act 2007 Amendment Order 2007 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

Tavish Scott wishes to speak against the motion. Mr Scott, you have up to three minutes.

I call on the cabinet secretary to respond. Mr Swinney, you also have up to three minutes.

The minister is now in his final minute.

The minister is in his final minute.

That is up to the minister, but it is not a point of order.  The minister should be winding up now.

The cabinet secretary will take questions on the issues that he raised in his statement. We have around 20 minutes for questions.

We now move to questions from back benchers. I ask that those questions be brief.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-928, in the name of Stewart Maxwell, on equality and diversity.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-941, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 28 November 2007— after 2.30 pm Time for Reflection insert  followed by Ministerial Statement: Pension Benefits Statements.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a statement by John Swinney on pension benefits statements. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader is Father David Borland, from St Andrew's and St Cuthbert's in Kirkcudbright.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-893.2, in the name of Sarah Boyack, which seeks to amend motion S3M-893, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on annual sea fisheries negotiations, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-893.1, in the name of John Scott, which seeks to amend motion S3M-893, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on annual sea fisheries negotiations, as amended, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The third question is, that motion S3M-893, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on annual sea fisheries negotiations, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament supports the Scottish Government, working with the UK Government, in negotiating a deal which is fair and just for Scotland's fishing communities and which reflects in full the leadership which Scotland's fishermen are showing the rest of Europe on sustainable fisheries; agrees that the precautionary principle should prevail in setting levels of permissible fishing activity; acknowledges that much more work needs to be done to create a truly sustainable fishery in the North Sea, including measures to reduce dramatically if not eliminate discards, recognising that one good year class does not of itself create a sustainable fishery stock, and further agrees that there needs to be dialogue between the fishing industry, scientists and conservation interests to ensure continuous improvement in stocks and a long-term sustainable future for the industry.

The fourth question is, that amendment S3M-894.1, in the name of Johann Lamont, which seeks to amend motion S3M-894, in the name of Adam Ingram, on a better future for Scotland's children: ending domestic abuse against women, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The fifth question is, that motion S3M-894, in the name of Adam Ingram, on a better future for Scotland's children: ending domestic abuse against women, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament believes that it is unacceptable that thousands of children in Scotland are affected by domestic abuse, seriously impacting on their wellbeing, safety,  health, schooling and life experience; pays tribute to those working in the field to help women and children affected by domestic abuse and those taking on the challenge of wider issues of violence against women; acknowledges the need to review the effect of current enforcement measures to tackle violence against women, in order to ensure that women and children receive the protection and security that they require; reaffirms its commitment to ending violence against women and recognises as part of its support for the UN 16 days of activism against gender violence, the importance of tackling not only domestic abuse, rape and sexual assault but also emerging issues such as human trafficking, and welcomes the establishment of the National Delivery Group on Children Affected by Domestic Abuse, the cross-cutting approach being taken and the involvement of children and young people.

Before we move to decision time, I would like to make a brief statement. I take this opportunity to clarify to members that, further to the Presiding Officer's ruling in February 2004 in relation to allegations of misleading Parliament, I will not allow the use of the words "lies", "liar" or "lying" in any circumstances. Any member using such terminology will be ruled out of order, as occurred this afternoon, but will in the future also be asked to withdraw the comment and to apologise. I hope that that is quite clear. [ Applause. ] This is not a matter for applause by any members of Parliament, I hasten to add.

Come to your point of order please, Ms Baillie.

As the member is aware, and as I have made plain before, the ministerial code is not a matter for me. However, I am sure that Jackie Baillie will wish to put her suggestion in writing to the First Minister.

I realise that the Business Bulletin was delivered late this morning, so Mr Baker may not have had a chance to read it. I refer him to the announcement that I made in today's bulletin on that very matter.

You are in your last minute, minister.

I am intrigued to know how the Borders railway line impinges on Rutherglen, so I call James Kelly.

I am sorry, Mr Kelly, but the question was about the Borders railway. That was a good try.

I repeat my previous cautions against members using the second person.

As I am sure the member is aware, that is not a point of order for the chair. I am not responsible for the content of ministerial answers.

The next item of business is a statement by Nicola Sturgeon, on pandemic flu. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of her statement, so there should be no interruptions.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Order.

I confirm to members that I will take points of order at the end of First Minister's question time—my intention is to get in as many back benchers as possible.

Mr Purvis, I am sorry to interrupt, but you have accused the First Minister of lying. I think that you might want to reflect on that.

I still find that unacceptable terminology. I ask you to rephrase.

Order. Mr Purvis, you are entitled to ask the First Minister for clarification—that would be in order.

We have had a number of interruptions, so I will allow Malcolm Chisholm to ask a final supplementary.

Question 1 has been withdrawn.

Dave Thompson.

I am sorry, Mr Thompson. You had your button pressed so I assumed that you wanted to ask a supplementary to the first question. I apologise. You do not need to press your button if you are asking the main question.

Question 4 has been withdrawn.

Order.

Order.

As the member is aware, that is not a point of order for me to rule on. I am afraid that we now do not have time for question 8.

Please refer to the member as Mr Scott or Tavish Scott. Please do not use first names, Sarah—I mean Ms Boyack. [ Laughter. ]

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-893, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the annual sea fisheries negotiations.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-883.3, in the name of Iain Gray, which seeks to amend motion S3M-883, in the name of John Swinney, on the Scottish Government's economic strategy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 53, Against 64, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-883.1, in the name of Derek Brownlee, which seeks to amend motion S3M-883, in the name of John Swinney, on the Scottish Government's economic strategy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 62, Against 3, Abstentions 52.  Amendment agreed to.

The third question is, that amendment S3M-883.2, in the name of Tavish Scott, which seeks to amend motion S3M-883, in the name of John Swinney, as amended, on the Scottish Government's economic strategy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 53, Against 63, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The fourth question is, that motion S3M-883, in the name of John Swinney, on the Scottish Government's economic strategy, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 62, Against 3, Abstentions 53.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament recognises the importance of creating a more successful country with opportunities for all of Scotland to flourish and notes the publication of The Government Economic Strategy , which sets out the Scottish Government's approach to aligning the public, private and voluntary sectors to achieve this objective and, recognising the importance of small businesses to the Scottish economy, calls on the Scottish Government, if additional resources become available, to prioritise the acceleration of the full implementation of the reductions in business rates for small businesses announced in the budget on 14 November 2007.

The fifth question is, that motion S3M-891, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on approval of a Scottish statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Licensing (Mandatory Conditions No. 2) (Scotland) Regulations 2007 be approved.

That concludes decision time. As always, I ask members who are leaving the chamber to do so quietly. As always, they will probably ignore me.

The next item of business is consideration of one Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-891, on the approval of a Scottish statutory instrument.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Licensing (Mandatory Conditions No. 2) (Scotland) Regulations 2007 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

Members will recall that, in response to points of order relating to conduct in the chamber, I previously undertook to discuss matters with business managers with a view to setting out the relative places of the Parliament's standing orders, the code of conduct for MSPs and the Scottish ministerial code. I am pleased to say that I have now spoken to all the business managers and an announcement will be published in tomorrow's Business Bulletin . I ask members to have regard to the terms of that announcement.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-890, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 22 November 2007— after 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth; Justice and Law Officers delete 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: A Better Future for Scotland's Children: Ending Domestic Abuse Against Women followed by Appointment of the Chair of the Scottish Commission for Human Rights and insert  2.55 pm Ministerial Statement: Pandemic Flu followed by Scottish Government Debate: A Better Future for Scotland's Children: Ending Domestic Abuse Against Women .—[Bruce Crawford .]

Is Mr Scott paying attention?

He is. The question is, that motion S3M-890, in the name of Bruce Crawford, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 28 November 2007 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Equality and Diversity followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 29 November 2007 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Tourism  11.40 pm General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time-  Education and Lifelong Learning; Europe, External Affairs and Culture 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: St Andrew's Day followed by Appointment of the Chair of the Scottish Commission for Human Rights followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 5 December 2007 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 6 December 2007 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time-  Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business .  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Public Health etc. (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 18 April 2008 .  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Abolition of Bridge Tolls (Scotland) Bill at Stage 2 be completed by 7 December 2007.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motions agreed to.

Order.

Order. Too much conversation is taking place in the chamber.

The minister is in her last minute.

Order.

Order.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader is Anne McIntyre, the national director of Parliamentary Prayer Scotland.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-883, in the name of John Swinney, on the Scottish Government's economic strategy.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-691, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution in respect of the Abolition of Bridge Tolls (Scotland) Bill.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Abolition of Bridge Tolls (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any increase in expenditure of a kind referred to in paragraph 3(b)(iii) of Rule 9.12 of the Parliament's Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.—[ Stewart Stevenson .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-847.1, in the name of Pauline McNeill, which seeks to amend motion S3M-847, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on competition, regulation and business structures in the Scottish legal services market, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The second question is, that motion S3M-847, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on competition, regulation and business structures in the Scottish legal services market, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament notes the Office of Fair Trading's response to the super-complaint by Which? on restrictions on business structures and direct access in the Scottish legal profession and the Law Society of Scotland's consultation on alternative business structures; believes that the regulatory and business structures of the Scottish legal profession should reflect Scottish circumstances and support improved access to high-quality legal services in a competitive and appropriately regulated market in accordance with competition law, and notes the Scottish Government's approach of working closely with the legal profession to secure reforms that will allow the Scottish legal profession to compete internationally while enhancing access to justice in local communities and considers that this approach should also widen choice, provide easier access to legal services and create the conditions for more affordable services so that social justice will be at the heart of future changes.

The next question is, that motion S3M-780, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, that the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Abolition of Bridge Tolls (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

We are forcibly agreed.

My apologies. I failed to hear members. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 107, Against 4, Abstentions 2.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Abolition of Bridge Tolls (Scotland) Bill.

The final question is, that motion S3M-691, in the name of John Swinney, on the financial resolution in respect of the Abolition of Bridge Tolls (Scotland) Bill, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 110, Against 3, Abstentions 0.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament, for the purposes of any Act of the Scottish Parliament resulting from the Abolition of Bridge Tolls (Scotland) Bill, agrees to any increase in expenditure of a kind referred to in paragraph 3(b)(iii) of Rule 9.12 of the Parliament's Standing Orders arising in consequence of the Act.

Ms Brankin, is the point of order about the veracity of the First Minister's statement?

I have made clear that that is not a point of order for the chair.

I have made that clear in the past, Ms Brankin.

I would like you to come to your point of order.

The only thing that I am prepared to say in relation to that so-called point of  order is that it is not a point of order for the chair. [ Applause. ] It is not a matter for applause, either. I have stated repeatedly that it is not the role of the Presiding Officer to verify any ministerial response—that is a matter for the ministerial code of conduct. I can say no more than that in this instance.

Order. There is too much background noise.

Charlie who, minister? We are not on first-name terms in the chamber.

I call Patrick Harvie to speak on behalf of the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee.

I call Bill Kidd.

We will move on to the next question.

Question 3 has been withdrawn.

I am afraid that I must now move on to questions on rural affairs and the environment. I will allow a moment for ministers to change places.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-780, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, that the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Abolition of Bridge Tolls (Scotland) Bill.

Question, please, Mr Gibson.

That is enough, Mr Gibson.

As a reward for the most extraordinary persistence, I call Margo MacDonald.

In that case I can go straight to the First Minister.

Question 1 has been withdrawn.

I remind members that many other areas are available for casual conversations. They should not take place in the chamber.

A question, please, Mr Tolson.

A question, please.

We can have a very brief supplementary question from Christopher Harvie. Alternatively, as he is not here, before we move on to First Minister's question time, I am sure that members will wish to join me in welcoming our visitors in the Presiding Officer's gallery: His Excellency Carlos Miranda, Count of Casa Miranda, who is the Spanish ambassador to the United Kingdom; and Mr Jaime Crombet Hernández-Baquero, who is vice-president of the National Assembly of Cuba. [ Applause. ]

That brings us to the end of the debate. I commend members, who have filled the time extremely successfully.

I now call Mike Pringle, to whom the instructions that I gave Mr Aitken also apply.

I call Bill Aitken. Mr Aitken, as you have picked up, you basically have as long as you like.

Good morning. The first item of business today is a debate on motion S3M-847, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on competition, regulation and business structures in the Scottish legal services market. I invite members who wish to speak in the debate—and perhaps even those who do not—to press their request-to-speak buttons. We have a little time in hand, so I am happy to be flexible with opening speakers. We will see how the debate goes.

There are three questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-842, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the designation of a lead committee, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the Local Government and Communities Committee be appointed as the lead committee in consideration of the Glasgow Commonwealth Games Bill at Stage 1.

I propose to ask a single question on motions S3M-840 and S3M-841, both on approval of Scottish statutory instruments. As no member objects to a single question being put, the next question is, that motions S3M-840 and S3M-841, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on approval of SSIs, be agreed to.  Motions agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Fundable Bodies (Scotland) (No. 2) Order 2007 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Protection of Charities Assets (Exemption) (Scotland) Amendment Order 2007 be approved.

I propose to ask a single question on motions S3M-839, on rule 2.3.1, and motion S3M-843, on the office of the clerk. As no member objects to a single question being put, the next question is, that motions S3M-839, on rule 2.3.1, and S3M-843, on the office of the clerk, both in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, be agreed to.  Motions agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees the following parliamentary recess dates under Rule 2.3.1: 11 - 26 October 2008 (inclusive). That the Parliament agrees that the Office of the Clerk will be closed on 27, 28 and 31 December 2007.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-837, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees— (a) the following programme of business— Wednesday 21 November 2007 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Scottish Government's Economic Strategy followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 22 November 2007 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Annual Sea Fisheries Negotiations 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth; Justice and Law Officers 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: A Better Future for Scotland's Children: Ending Violence Against Women followed by Appointment of the Chair of the Scottish Commission for Human Rights followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 28 November 2007 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 29 November 2007 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business  11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning; Europe, External Affairs and Culture 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business (b) that the period for members to submit their names for selection for Question Times on 10 January 2008 ends at 12.00 noon on Wednesday 19 December 2007; (c) that the deadline for lodging questions for Question Times on 10 January 2008 shall be 12.00 noon on Thursday 3 January 2008; and (d) that the period for members to submit their names for selection for Question Times on 17 January 2008 ends at 12.00 noon on Thursday 3 January 2008.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of five Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-842, on the designation of a lead committee; motions S3M-840 and S3M-841, on approval of Scottish statutory instruments; motion S3M-839, on rule 2.3.1; and motion S3M-843 on the office of the clerk.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Local Government and Communities Committee be appointed as the lead committee in consideration of the Glasgow Commonwealth Games Bill at Stage 1. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Fundable Bodies (Scotland) (No. 2) Order 2007 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Protection of Charities Assets (Exemption) (Scotland) Amendment Order 2007 be approved. That the Parliament agrees the following parliamentary recess dates under Rule 2.3.1: 11 - 26 October 2008 (inclusive). That the Parliament agrees that the Office of the Clerk will be closed on 27, 28 and 31 December 2007.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The questions on the motions will be put at decision time.

Order.

I am sorry, Mr Swinney, but we have a point of order.

No. The Parliamentary Bureau has already considered the matter. A parliamentary resolution has been made.

The minister is just going into his last minute.

Order. This is a statement, not a debate, and it should be heard as such.

Order.

Order. The cabinet secretary will now take questions on the issues raised in his statement. I intend to allow about 50 minutes for questions, after which we will move on to the next item of business.

A question please, Mr Stephen.

Order.

Order. Questions to the minister, please.

Order.

Order.

We come to questions from back benchers. Understandably, an enormous number of members want to ask questions, so I will appreciate it if questions can be kept as brief as possible.

Order.

I cannot, but I am sure that the cabinet secretary can.

We just might get through everyone who wants to ask a question if members would please stick to one question per person from now on.

Question, please.

I can take a brief final question from Richard Baker.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-788.1, in the name of Derek Brownlee, which seeks to amend motion S3M-788, in the name of Jackie Baillie, on holding the SNP Government to account, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 64, Against 59, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-788.2, in the name of Tavish Scott, which seeks to amend motion S3M-788, in the name of Jackie Baillie, on holding the SNP Government to account, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 59, Against 63, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The third question is, that motion S3M-788, in the name of Jackie Baillie, on holding the SNP Government to account, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 63, Against 44, Abstentions 16.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament recognises the critical importance of the forthcoming three-year spending review to meeting the hopes and aspirations of the people of Scotland; welcomes the detailed scrutiny of the SNP Government's spending plans by parliamentary committees as a central part of the budget process; believes that an effective budget scrutiny process is critical in ensuring that public services are delivered in a way which provides optimal value for money; believes that the process should be sufficiently robust to cope with majority and minority government; believes that there is scope to review the operation of the current procedures as laid down in the Standing Orders and the agreement between the Finance Committee and the Scottish Government; believes that the appropriate vehicle for such a review would be the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee, in consultation with the other committees of the Parliament, particularly the Finance Committee, and requests that the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee undertakes a review of the budget process for future years.

The fourth and final question is, that motion S3M-793, in the name of Linda Fabiani, on the Scottish Government's European Union priorities, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament notes the importance of EU policies and legislation to the Parliament, its Committees and to Scotland and notes the priorities identified by the Scottish Government for particular attention.

The minister is in her last minute.

A brief answer will suffice, minister.

That is a judgment for the chair, as I know you are aware, Ms Marwick. I will deal with the matter at the appropriate time and in the appropriate place.

Question 3—I am sorry, I am at it again. Question 2.

I think that I am about to deal with it, Mr Butler. If you wish to come in again, you may do so. I say to the minister that I am slightly concerned that she used the phrase, "if she was telling the truth". That comes very close to accusing the member of deliberately misleading Parliament. I offer you the opportunity to clarify the situation, minister.

On this occasion, you may, Ms Baillie.

The original question was about music and song, minister, so I do not require you to answer that.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-793, in the name of Linda Fabiani, on the Scottish Government's European Union priorities.

I think that the minister heard you, but he is not taking an intervention.

Minister, you have one minute.

He is in his last minute.

We now come to open debate. I strongly recommend that the number of sedentary interventions be reduced from now on. Speeches should be of six minutes.

I think the member has made it clear that he is not doing so.

Order.

Order.

Order.

Order. The member has a right to be heard.

Mr Brownlee, you have one minute.

The member is in his last minute.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-788, in the name of Jackie Baillie, on holding the SNP Government to account.

That is not a point of order. It is entirely up to the person who is speaking.

Order.

I remind members that the second person singular—that is, the word "you"—should be used only by me.

We come now to decision time. Rather worryingly, from my perspective, there are four questions to be put as a result of today's business. Members will note that I have my glasses on, so I will try to get them in the right order. The first question is, that amendment S3M-784.3, in the name of Sarah Boyack, which seeks to amend motion number S3M-784, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on a national food policy for Scotland, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-784.1, in the name of John Scott, which seeks to amend motion S3M-784, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on a national food policy for Scotland, as amended, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The third question is, that amendment S3M-784.2, in the name of Mike Rumbles, which seeks to amend motion S3M-784, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on a national food policy for Scotland, as amended, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The fourth question is, that motion S3M-784, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on a national food policy for Scotland, as heavily amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament believes that Scotland should have a national food policy and would benefit greatly by having a clear, consistent and coherent approach to food covering health, environmental, social, cultural and economic factors; believes that a national policy must include more assistance for public procurement of home-grown Scottish food to be achieved by improved co-operation between Scotland's local food producers and government; welcomes the Scottish Government's commitment to launch a national debate and consultation on a food policy for Scotland, building on work done by the previous administrations, and believes that policy priorities should include local procurement, affordability, sustainability and reducing Scotland's climate footprint, taking into account the views of the Parliament, industry and wider society; believes that educating children about where their food comes from must be central to any national food policy; resolves that early action is required to amend public procurement policy to ensure greater use of freshly produced healthy food in the public sector, including in our schools, hospitals and other public bodies; and calls on the Scottish Government to assist in the development of farmers' co-operatives and farmers' markets, and further calls on the Scottish  Government to work with retailers to encourage more use of local Scottish produce in stores.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-789, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 14 November 2007 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Strategic Spending Review followed by Scottish Government Debate: Strategic Spending Review followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.30 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 15 November 2007 9.15 am Scottish Government Debate: Competition, Regulation and Business Structures in the Scottish Legal Services Market 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing; Rural Affairs and the Environment 2.55 pm Stage 1 Debate: Abolition of Bridge Tolls (Scotland) Bill followed by Financial Resolution: Abolition of Bridge Tolls (Scotland) Bill followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 21 November 2007 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 22 November 2007 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions  followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am Genreral Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth; Justice and Law Officers 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

Order.

I apologise to the back-bench members whom I was unable to call. We now move to the winding-up speeches.

You should close now, please, Mr Peacock.

I point out to members again that we are very tight for time in the debate.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-738, on alternative dispute resolution, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament recognises the need to develop a broad range of appropriate dispute resolution schemes, as alternatives to the formal court system, which can offer more flexibility, quicker resolution, less stress and reduced expense for citizens.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-739.1, in the name of Des McNulty, which seeks to amend motion S3M-739, in the name of Michael Russell, on the environment, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 54, Against 63, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The third question is, that amendment S3M-739.2, in the name of Mike Rumbles, which seeks to amend motion S3M-739, in the name of Michael Russell, on the environment, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The fourth question is, that motion S3M-739, in the name of Michael Russell, on the environment, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament notes the important relationships among Scotland's natural and built environment, culture and history, which together make us who we are; recognises the achievements over the centuries of artists such as Sir Walter Scott, James Hogg, Alexander Naysmith, Robin Jenkins, Sorley MacLean, Joan Eardley and Ian Hamilton Finlay and, continuing those connections today, Angus Farquhar, Alasdair Gray, Andy Scott and Frances Walker among many others; is glad that so many artists from Scotland and from elsewhere have taken their inspiration from Scotland's people, landscape and natural resources and the ways of life which they support and continue to do so, and recognises the need for the Scottish Government to work closely with cultural and environmental organisations, local authorities, community groups and individuals to celebrate, explore and reveal the diversity and ever-changing nature of Scotland, its people and its place within the United Kingdom and the wider world.

The next item of business is a statement by Adam Ingram, the Minister for Children and Early Years, on child protection. The minister will take questions at the end of his statement; therefore, there should be no interventions.

Mr Kerr, you have already made that point.

I am sure that members will already be aware that the Scotland branch of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association is this week hosting the 19 th CPA parliamentary seminar in the Scottish Parliament. All the delegates are in the Presiding Officer's gallery and the public gallery, and I am absolutely delighted to welcome them to First Minister's question time. [ Applause. ]

Order.

Order.

Order. Come to a question, please.

Order.

I am slightly disappointed that the question is not about links between Glasgow and Edinburgh, but I will leave it up to the First Minister to decide whether he wishes to respond.

Mr McNeil, it would be helpful if contributions were confined to those whom I call to make them. [ Interruption. ] I call Derek Brownlee.

I detected more than one question there, First Minister.

Order.

I commend members for managing to get that debate to overrun.

I am sure that members will have noted that, when it comes to verbosity, Mr Aitken is a match for anybody.

No.

Thank you. In this debate, at this stage, there is no such thing as going over time. I call Bill Aitken. Mr Aitken, you have quite a long time.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-738, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on alternative dispute resolution. We have a little time in hand.

As I indicated at the beginning, I can be quite flexible with time this morning.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-722.2, in the name of Rhona Brankin, which seeks to amend motion S3M-722, in the name of Adam Ingram, on early years and early intervention, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 75, Against 45, Abstentions 2.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-722.3, in the name of Elizabeth Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-722, in the name of Adam Ingram, on early years and early intervention, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 59, Against 62, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The third question is, that amendment S3M-722.1, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, which seeks to amend motion S3M-722, in the name of Adam Ingram, on early years and early intervention, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 107, Against 15, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The fourth question is, that motion S3M-722, in the name of Adam Ingram, on early years and early intervention, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 61, Against 45, Abstentions 15.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament recognises the importance of early years policy in delivering improved outcomes for children and young people; believes that early intervention has a crucial role to play in reducing inequalities, particularly in health and education, but also more widely; welcomes the intention to develop a long-term early years strategy; agrees that parenting, support for families and community capacity-building are areas which require a strong focus; believes that services must work more closely together to support children and families, and highlights the importance of a highly skilled and collaborative workforce in delivering a new strategic approach to early years policy; notes the failure of the SNP Government to provide a statement on its commitment to reduce class sizes to 18 in primary 1 to primary 3 by 2011, as called for by the Parliament on 13 September 2007, and agrees that the Scottish Government should bring forward detailed plans and costings on its commitment to reduce class sizes within the imminent strategic spending review statement; and further believes that the Scottish Government's approach to early years must incorporate a strategy for play and communication, give greater support for play provision for two-year-olds and develop primary 1 into a transition year from nursery to formal education.

I propose to put a single question on motion S3M-732, on designation of a lead committee, and motion S3M-733, on membership of a committee, both of which are in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau. The question is, that motions S3M-732, on designation of a lead committee, and S3M-733, on membership of a committee, in the name of Bruce Crawford, be agreed to.  Motions agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the Health and Sport Committee be appointed as the lead committee in consideration of the Public Health etc. (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1. That the Parliament agrees that Nigel Don be appointed to replace Tricia Marwick as a member of the Public Petitions Committee.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-732, on the designation of a lead committee, and motion S3M-733, on membership of a committee.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the Health and Sport Committee be appointed as the lead committee in consideration of the Public Health etc. (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1. That the Parliament agrees that Nigel Don be appointed to replace Tricia Marwick as a member of the Public Petitions Committee.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The questions on the motions will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-731, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 7 November 2007 2.15 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body Question Time followed by Ministerial Statement: Creative Scotland and Cultural Policy followed by Scottish Government Debate: National Food Policy for Scotland followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 8 November 2007 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Europe, External Affairs and Culture; Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Scottish Government's EU Priorities followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 14 November 2007 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 15 November 2007 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business  11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Health and Wellbeing; Rural Affairs and the Environment—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-730, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for legislation.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Graduate Endowment Abolition (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 21 December 2007.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

Order. Too many conversations are taking place around the chamber. Could we have some quiet, please.

Order. I am sorry to interrupt again, but I have to repeat that too many conversations are taking place around the chamber. Could we please have some quiet.

Ms Baillie has indicated that she would like to respond to that. I think it is appropriate that she should do so.

Order. Please allow Ms Baillie the courtesy of listening to her response.

I think it is best if this matter is left and we move on, but I will say just one thing: any suggestion that the ruling that I made earlier was in any way influenced by any other party is very wide of the mark. I think that we should move on to other business.

Before we come to the next item of business, it is with some regret that I have to say that concerns that the content of this afternoon's statement has been covered in press reports this morning have been brought to my attention. Members will be aware that this is not the first time that such concerns have been raised. The fundamental point is that we should not be reading in the press what is going to be said in the chamber; we should read what has been said. I object strongly to detailed pre-announcement of ministerial statements, which constitutes a discourtesy to this Parliament and, by extension, to the people of Scotland. Having made my position clear on such matters previously, I was somewhat surprised and dismayed to hear the trailing on radio and television this morning of the announcements to be made this afternoon. There can be no doubt that, by whatever means, information found its way into the public domain before being presented to the Parliament. The Scottish Government has to take full responsibility for that. I have now had the opportunity to consider an advance copy of the statement, which confirms my view that information was put into the public domain before being announced in the chamber. I fully acknowledge that, during the course of the day, the Minister for Parliamentary Business has gone to some lengths to ameliorate the situation. It is therefore with some regret that I inform the Parliament that I intend to take the statement as read in its entirety, and to move straight to questions to the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing. In fairness to her, there are matters in the statement that were not covered in the press. I will therefore allow her some leeway in her responses to questions to allow those issues to be addressed.

Order.

Order. I remind the Minister for Parliamentary Business that I will allow the cabinet secretary some leeway in her answers in order to raise those issues.

I think that it will serve all purposes best if we simply move on to question number 1, which is from Johann Lamont.

Jackie Baillie has a point of order.

My apologies. Question number 1 is from Margaret Curran.

A question would be helpful around now. [ Interruption. ]

Order. Members will have an opportunity to ask questions.

I should explain to members that the interruptions to sound are due to a problem. Apparently, there is no sound in the gallery, and the technicians are trying to fix the problem.

I think that that is enough questions for one member.

No—we will go straight to the minister.

Order.

We have virtually no chance of getting in all the members who want to  ask a question, so one question per member would be extraordinarily helpful.

I asked for one question per member, Ms MacDonald.

Once I discover what "that look" is, I might use it more often. Because we started late, I am going to take questions until 5 past 3.

A question, please.

A question, please, Mr McMillan.

I will have a brief final question from Michael McMahon. I apologise to all members who pressed their request-to-speak buttons—I am afraid that time has run out.

Good afternoon. Our time for reflection leader today is Father Michael John Galbraith, from St Kentigern's, in Edinburgh.

There are nine questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-679.1, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, which seeks to amend motion S3M-679, in the name of Mary Scanlon, on free personal care, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 64, Against 61, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-679.2, in the name of Ross Finnie, which seeks to amend motion S3M-679, in the name of Mary Scanlon, on free personal care, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 61, Against 64, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The third question is, that motion S3M-679, in the name of Mary Scanlon, on free personal care, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 64, Against 61, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament notes with concern that the interpretation, implementation and funding of the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002 have raised difficulties, many of which remain unresolved; notes that the decision of Lord Macphail dated 17 October 2007 on the Petition of Argyll and Bute Council reflects the guidance issued in July 2003; wishes to reassure those assessed, either now or in the future, as requiring free personal or nursing care that their entitlement to receive it is not affected by Lord Macphail's decision; agrees, however, that the current operation of the law, although in line with existing guidance, may in some cases result in an undue delay between assessment and a local authority care contract being concluded; therefore supports the Scottish Government's ongoing dialogue with COSLA to address issues such as waiting lists, eligibility criteria and food preparation, together with its assurance that it will take action, if necessary, to clarify the law, and considers that Lord Sutherland's review of the level and distribution of resources for free personal care will make a valuable contribution to ensuring that the policy is put on a secure and sustainable basis for the long term.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-677.1, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, which seeks to amend motion S3M-677, in the name of Bill Aitken, on police numbers, be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 46, Against 77, Abstentions 2.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-677, in the name of Bill Aitken, on police numbers, be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 77, Against 48, Abstentions 0.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament notes with serious concern that, almost six months after its election, the Scottish Government has made no progress towards the SNP's manifesto commitment of 1,000 more police officers; expresses concern also at an apparent dilution of that commitment, and calls on the Scottish Government to keep that election promise by increasing the number of police officers from 16,234 to 17,234 by the end of this parliamentary session.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-681.2, in the name of Pauline McNeill, which seeks to amend motion S3M-681, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on alcohol, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-681.1, in the name of Bill Aitken, which seeks to amend motion S3M-681, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on alcohol, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 16, Against 109, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-681.3, in the name of Ross Finnie, which seeks to amend motion S3M-681, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on alcohol, be agreed to.  Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 31, Against 92, Abstentions 2.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-681, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on alcohol, be agreed to.

I do apologise. The question is, that motion S3M-681, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on alcohol, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 108, Against 16, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament notes Scotland's first Alcohol Awareness Week and endorses the partnership approach between the government, industry and the voluntary sector to educate consumers about alcohol units, while recognising that further work is needed to ensure that alcohol is accepted as different to any other product for sale; further notes the high incidence of underage drinking and the harm done to those young people and the negative effect that underage drinking can have on Scottish communities; believes that the Scottish Government should call a summit of all relevant stakeholders to develop an effective strategy to tackle underage drinking; further agrees that tackling the problems surrounding the misuse of alcohol is one of the great social and public health challenges of our time, requiring direct, innovative, long-term and sustained action; recognises that this includes tougher enforcement action against those who sell and promote alcohol irresponsibly; notes the importance of close co-operation with, and support of, Scotland's police forces and licensing boards in this respect; welcomes the recent commitments by the Scottish Government to regulate the display and promotion of alcohol in off-sales premises and to find a method of ensuring that those licensees who profit from Scotland's alcohol culture help offset the damage done by that culture, as well as to develop a long-term strategy to tackle the negative effects of alcohol misuse, and further notes the need for the NHS to play its part in early identification and intervention for those individuals drinking at harmful or hazardous levels.

You are over time, Ms Whitefield.

I remind members that they may not speak to points of order for more than 3 minutes. I thank the member for advance notice of that point of order, but she will be aware from the experience of several weeks in our recent history that it is simply not a matter for me. However, this point of order gives me an opportunity to say something. Members will recall that, just before the October recess, similar questions were raised about the relative places of the standing orders, the code of conduct for members of the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish ministerial code when it comes to conduct in the chamber. In order to provide the greatest degree of clarity on those issues, I am currently discussing the matter with the business managers and, when those discussions are complete, I will spell out the role of each of the relevant documents as they relate to conduct in the chamber. In the mean time, I will make two points. First, members must accept responsibility for their conduct in carrying out duties for which they are elected. That includes things that they say in the chamber. As I have said previously, I am not an arbiter of the accuracy of what is said in the chamber. Secondly, I inform members that my deputies and I, having discussed the matter, simply cannot continue to allow, through spurious points of order, the rerunning of debates that have already been closed. [ Applause. ] It does nobody any good to point at other members. Rerunning debates does not serve the Parliament or anyone else well, and I advise members to guard strongly against doing so in future.

Order. Apologies, minister—there are too many conversations. Members have all day to talk to each other. They do not have to do it in the chamber.

I thank members for helping us to keep on track in what was a very tight debate.

We move to the open debate, with speeches of a tight six minutes, please.

I should have said that we will be extremely tight for time if we are to fit everyone in, so I ask members to watch their time.

Without repeating yourself, minister.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-681, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on alcohol. I invite members who wish to take part in the debate to press their request-to-speak buttons now.

Order.

I point out to members that they always listen to questions reasonably courteously; I ask them to reflect on how they listen to answers.

Order.

I have some brief constituency questions.

I will take two supplementary questions, but I ask that they be kept as brief as possible.

I am sure that the member is aware that that is not a point of order.

Could we have a question, please?

I call Tavish Scott. He should bear it in mind that the question is about the runway at Barra.

That was a lesson in opportunism.

I ask whoever has a mobile phone on to turn it off.

No, he will not, I am afraid.

No, I do not, Dr Simpson. I do not need to come out with any guidance.

The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-679, in the name of Mary Scanlon, on free personal care.

The next item of business is consideration of four Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motions S3M-671, S3M-672, S3M-673 and S3M-674, all on the approval of Scottish statutory instruments.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Club Gaming and Club Machine Permits (Scotland) Regulations 2007 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Licensed Premises Gaming Machine Permits (Scotland) Regulations 2007 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Sheriff Courts (Scotland) Act 1971 (Privative Jurisdiction and Summary Cause) Order 2007 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Small Claims (Scotland) Amendment Order 2007 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on the motions will be put at decision time.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today's business. In relation to the debate on agriculture, if the amendment in the name of Sarah Boyack is agreed to, the amendment in the name of John Scott will fall. The first question is, that amendment S3M-667.2, in the name of Sarah Boyack, which seeks to amend motion S3M-667, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on agriculture, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 59, Against 65, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-667.1, in the name of John Scott, which seeks to amend motion S3M-667, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on agriculture, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

That is agreed.

Sorry, I did not hear that—you will have to speak more clearly. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 111, Against 14, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The third question is, that motion S3M-667, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on agriculture, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

We are agreed.

We are not agreed—I beg your pardon. I am afraid that my hearing must be failing. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 79, Against 46, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament notes with concern the impact on our livestock industry, particularly the sheep sector, of the recent outbreaks of foot and mouth disease in England; calls on the UK Government to recognise its financial and moral responsibility to reimburse Scotland's farmers; acknowledges the work being done in Scotland to support the sustainability of the Scottish livestock industry and the viability of rural communities; believes that the Scottish Government should introduce additional measures to support Scotland's sheep industry; welcomes the review, to be led by Professor Jim Scudamore and commissioned by the Scottish Government, into Scotland's response to the outbreaks, and recognises the need to reduce the risk of future outbreaks and minimise the impact of future disruption.

I propose that a single question be put on motions S3M-671 to S3M-674 inclusive, on approval of Scottish statutory instruments. As no member objects to a single question being put, the question is, that motions S3M-671 to S3M-674, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on the approval of SSIs, be agreed to.  Motions agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Club Gaming and Club Machine Permits (Scotland) Regulations 2007 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Licensed Premises Gaming Machine Permits (Scotland) Regulations 2007 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Sheriff Courts (Scotland) Act 1971 (Privative Jurisdiction and Summary Cause) Order 2007 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Small Claims (Scotland) Amendment Order 2007 be approved.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-676, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 31 October 2007 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Housing followed by Scottish Government Debate: Early Years and Early Intervention followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 1 November 2007 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Alternative Dispute Resolution 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Justice and Law Officers; Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Ministerial Statement: Child Protection followed by Scottish Government Debate: The Environment followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 7 November 2007 2.15 pm Time for Reflection followed by Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body Question Time followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 8 November 2007 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions  followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 pm General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Europe, External Affairs and Culture; Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

Order. There is an awful lot of background noise.

As I indicated previously, the First Minister will now take questions on the issues that were raised in his statement. I intend to allow about 20 minutes for questions, after which we will move on to the next item of business. It will be helpful if members who wish to ask a question will press their request-to-speak buttons now. I call Andy Kerr first, to be followed by Annabel Goldie.

Order.

We come now to back-bench questions. The shorter they are, the more we will get into the nine minutes that are available.

I understand that Michael McMahon has deferred to Duncan McNeil. This will be the last question.

I am sorry. It is not only independent voices that were unable to be heard. Many other members had pressed their buttons, but I am afraid that time militated against my calling anybody else.

I will certainly reflect on it.

The next item of business is a statement by Nicola Sturgeon on waiting times. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of her statement, which will be a 15-minute statement; therefore, there should be no interventions.

Good afternoon. Our time for reflection leader today is Claire Martin from Holyrood secondary school in Glasgow.

Before we move to the next item of business, members should by now be aware that the First Minister has requested that a statement be scheduled on the "Scottish Elections Review". I have used my powers under rule 13.2.2 of standing orders to allow a statement on that report to proceed in place of the scheduled statement. The next item of business, therefore, is a statement by Alex Salmond on the Gould report. As the First Minister will take questions at the end of his statement, there should be no interventions.

That is a matter for the Government to bring forward to the Parliamentary Bureau.

There are seven questions to be put as a result of today's business. Please pay attention, because this is quite complicated. In relation to this morning's debate on the Scottish National Party's broken promises, if the amendment in the name of Nicola Sturgeon is agreed to, the amendments in the names of Murdo Fraser, Jeremy Purvis and Patrick Harvie will fall. If the amendment in the name of Jeremy Purvis is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Patrick Harvie will fall. The first question is, that amendment S3M-607.3, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, which seeks to amend motion S3M-607, in the name of Iain Gray, on the Scottish National Party's broken promises, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 46, Against 71, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-607.1, in the name of Murdo Fraser, which seeks to amend motion S3M-607, in the name of Iain Gray, on the Scottish National Party's broken promises, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 71, Against 46, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-607.2, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, which seeks to amend motion S3M-607, in the name of Iain Gray, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 70, Against 48, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

Amendment S3M-607.4, in the name of Patrick Harvie, falls. The next question is, that motion S3M-607, in the name of Iain Gray, on the Scottish National Party's broken promises, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 70, Against 48, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament notes the SNP Government's failure to implement a range of policies that the SNP pledged to take forward in its election manifesto and its document, It's time to look forward , including reneging on the promise to set out plans to employ 1,000 additional police officers, backtracking on a council tax freeze, failing to implement smaller class sizes in every primary school, shelving the commitment to adopt the Better Regulation Commission's policy of "one in one out" and not delivering on plans to give £2,000 to first-time house buyers; further notes the SNP Government's reluctance to keep its promise to students and dump student debt by writing off the debt to the Student Loans Company for Scottish domiciled graduates; notes the SNP Government's refusal to meet its manifesto pledge for mandatory carbon reduction targets of 3% per annum; recognises that the SNP gained votes on these pre-election promises to the people of Scotland which they are now failing to keep, and calls on Scottish ministers to make a statement to the Parliament explaining which of these pre-election promises are no longer government policy and why, and which promises they do intend to implement and by when.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-609.1, in the name of Sarah Boyack, which seeks to amend motion S3M-609, in the name of Michael Russell, on wildlife crime, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-609, in the name of Michael Russell, on wildlife crime, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament notes the collaborative work being undertaken by a variety of agencies to fight wildlife crime and commends the enthusiasm and commitment of those involved in that fight; regrets that, despite these efforts and some highly successful prosecutions, 2006 was the worst year ever for recorded wildlife poisoning incidents and figures so far for 2007 show no improvement; condemns those responsible for such acts which destroy vital parts of our natural and national heritage while damaging our international reputation, and welcomes the thematic inspection of arrangements for the prevention, investigation and prosecution of wildlife crime which will be undertaken by HM Chief Inspector of Constabulary in association with HM Chief Inspector of Prosecutions in Scotland which will make recommendations by 31 March 2008 and urges ministers to ensure that each Scottish police force appoint at least one full-time police wildlife crime co-ordinator, that wildlife crime cases are prosecuted wherever possible by fiscals with specialist training and that guidance is produced which pulls together all legislation relevant to wildlife crime for use by landowners, managers and their staff, and further urges ministers to monitor the effectiveness of such guidance and report back to the Parliament.

Thank you for the point of order. As I have said before in the chamber, I am not responsible for what is said by members in the chamber. Members themselves are responsible for the veracity of their statements.

As I have just said, I am not responsible for what is said by members in the chamber. Members are themselves responsible for the truth of what they say. Allegations about a minister misleading Parliament are a matter for the Scottish ministerial code. Mr Brown will be delighted to know that he will have to take that up with the First Minister.

I am not convinced that that is a point of order. I have nothing to add, I am afraid, to what I have already said.

I am sorry. I missed the second part of what you said.

If it is an allegation about a minister, including the First Minister, misleading Parliament, that is a matter for the Scottish ministerial code and should be taken up by the First Minister. If it is an allegation against the First Minister, it is referred to—

I fully accept that the chair is responsible for the behaviour of MSPs, but my understanding is that allegations under the ministerial code of conduct should be referred to the First Minister. I do not believe that we can usefully continue with this at the moment and I would like to move on to decision time.

This is coming perilously close to challenging the chair, but I am willing, given the fact that I have a fortnight in front of me to do so, to consider what has been said this afternoon.

Use full names, please.

Final question, Ms Alexander.

Order.

I will allow one brief final supplementary, Ms Alexander.

I am sorry that I find myself still having to remind members that they should not refer to other members directly in the second person but should refer to them using their full names. Sadly, I still have to remind them of that.

Before I allow a couple of supplementary questions, I am sure that the chamber will wish to join me in welcoming to the public gallery Mr Eric Tomas, the President of the Brussels Regional Parliament, who is accompanied by the clerk of the Parliament, Mr Serge Govaert, and a delegation of cross-party members from its parliamentary corporate body. [ Applause. ]

Question 7 is withdrawn.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-589, in the name of John Swinney, on the Crerar review, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament welcomes the Crerar review work commissioned by the previous administration; notes the broad principles and vision of a simplified scrutiny landscape, with a proportionate, co-ordinated and risk-based approach, as set out in the Independent Review of Regulation, Audit, Inspection and Complaints Handling of Public Services in Scotland; thanks Professor Crerar and his team for their work; commits to joint working with the Scottish Government over the relevant recommendations, and calls on the Scottish Government to carefully consider the review before returning to the Parliament with further proposals to take forward the conclusions of the report.

The second question is, that motion S3M-587, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the draft Provision of School Lunches (Disapplication of the Requirement to Charge) (Scotland) Order 2007, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Provision of School Lunches (Disapplication of the Requirement to Charge) (Scotland) Order 2007 be approved.

I propose to ask a single question on motions S3M-599 and S3M-600, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on approval of Scottish statutory instruments. If any member objects to a single question being put, they should say so now. There being no objection, the third question is, that motions S3M-599 and S3M-600, on approval of SSIs, be agreed to.  Motions agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Licensing (Mandatory Conditions) (Scotland) Regulations 2007 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Housing Grants (Assessment of Contributions) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2007 be approved.

I propose to ask a single question on motion S3M-608, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on membership of a committee, and motions S3M-601 to S3M-604, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on substitution on committees. If any member objects to a single question being put, they should say so now.  There being no objection, the fourth question is, that motion S3M-608, on membership of a committee, and motions S3M-601 to S3M-604 inclusive, on substitution on committees, be agreed to.  Motions agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that George Foulkes be appointed to replace Trish Godman as a member of the Audit Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Elizabeth Smith be appointed as the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party substitute on the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Trish Godman be appointed as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Alison McInnes be appointed as the Scottish Liberal Democrat substitute on the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Alasdair Morgan be appointed as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee.

I undertook last week to come back to the chamber in response to a point of order that was raised by Margo MacDonald about resolutions of the Parliament. Having now clarified the point that she was making, I confirm that a majority decision in favour of a motion or an amended motion results in a resolution of the Parliament. In relation to the specific resolution to which she referred, I have said previously that where a resolution of the Parliament has implications for the Government, it becomes a matter for the Government to decide how to respond.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-598, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 24 October 2007 2.00 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: First Minister's Visit to the United States followed by Ministerial Statement: Waiting Times followed by Scottish Government Debate: Agriculture followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 25 October 2007 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time— Rural Affairs and the Environment; Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Alcohol followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 31 October 2007 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 1 November 2007 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business  11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time— Justice and Law Officers; Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motions S3M-599 and S3M-600, on approval of Scottish statutory instruments.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Licensing (Mandatory Conditions) (Scotland) Regulations 2007 be approved. That the Parliament agrees that the draft Housing Grants (Assessment of Contributions) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2007 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The next item of business is consideration of five Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-608, on membership of a committee, and motions S3M-601 to S3M-604, on substitution on committees.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that George Foulkes be appointed to replace Trish Godman as a member of the Audit Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Elizabeth Smith be appointed as the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party substitute on the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Trish Godman be appointed as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Alison McInnes be appointed as the Scottish Liberal Democrat substitute on the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Alasdair Morgan be appointed as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

Questions on the motions will be put at decision time.

He does not have time.

I offer the minister a brief opportunity to wind up, if he would like to do so. Minister, you can have two minutes at the maximum.

That is not a point of order. Please sit down.

Please sit down.

Members should be aware that we have a minute or two in hand, otherwise I might have been slightly stricter in the time that I have allowed to members. I call Derek Brownlee, who has six minutes or so.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-597, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau. The motion sets out a revision to the business programme that suspends part of rule 10.6.5 of standing orders, to allow up to 15 minutes to debate motion S3M-587 later today.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that, for the purpose of allowing up to 15 minutes to debate motion S3M-587 on Wednesday 3 October 2007, the second and third sentences of Rule 10.6.5 of Standing Orders be suspended.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-589, in the name of John Swinney, on the Crerar review.

Good afternoon. Our time for reflection leader is the Rev Valerie Ott from Gatehouse of Fleet parish church. I also welcome, from Deaf Action, Nigel Ashbrook, who will be signing alongside the Rev Valerie Ott, and Roseanne Butler-Stoney, who will be signing in the public gallery, as part of learn to sign week.

I hear what Mr Brown says, but that is a matter for the Government in the first order and for the Parliamentary Bureau in the second.

That is not a point of order, but I find it helpful.

With the greatest respect to Ms MacDonald, I would like to reflect on that issue. I apologise for not coming back with an immediate answer, but the answer needs to be got right. I will reflect on the point and come back to the Parliament next week.

There are seven questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-545.2, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, which seeks to amend motion S3M-545, in the name of Ross Finnie, on waiting times, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 48, Against 76, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-545.1, in the name of Margaret Curran, which seeks to amend motion S3M-545, in the name of Ross Finnie, on waiting times, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 60, Against 65, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-545, in the name of Ross Finnie, on waiting times, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 77, Against 48, Abstentions 0.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament is concerned that the Scottish Government's approach to waiting times will lead to an increase in bureaucracy, placing an administrative burden on clinicians; believes that introducing a legally binding guarantee will put further pressure on health professionals leading to a litigation culture in the NHS; regrets the decision by the SNP to put political dogma before patient need in ruling out the use of the private sector to reduce waiting times; regrets the lack of commitment from the Scottish Government to invest further in primary health care facilities; calls on the Scottish Government to continue making progress in reducing the longest waits, while prioritising shorter waiting times for the most serious conditions; calls on the Scottish Government to make an early statement on how it intends to implement its maximum waiting time guarantee without impacting on those with the greatest clinical need, and believes that the Scottish Government must, as a matter of urgency, publish a comprehensive assessment identifying the additional administrative and bureaucratic burdens that these new proposals will place on the NHS, how much they will cost and where the money will come from.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-546.1, in the name of Iain Gray, which seeks to amend motion S3M-546, in the name of John Swinney, on rail links to Edinburgh airport, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 61, Against 64, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-546, in the name of John Swinney, on rail links to Edinburgh airport, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 65, Against 60, Abstentions 0.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament supports the Scottish Government's plans to develop rail links to Edinburgh airport and to improve other rail services.

The next question is, that motion S3M-497, in the name of Keith Brown, on behalf of the Procedures Committee, on merging the Procedures Committee and the Standards and Public Appointments Committee, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament notes the Procedures Committee's 1st Report, 2007 (Session 3), Merging the Procedures Committee and the Standards and Public Appointments Committee (SP Paper 7), and agrees that the changes to Standing Orders set out in Annexe A to the report be made with effect from 28 September 2007.

The final question is, that motion S3M-543, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on the establishment of a committee, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees to establish a committee of the Parliament as follows: Name of Committee: Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Remit: To consider and report on- (a) the practice and procedures of the Parliament in relation to its business;  (b) whether a member's conduct is in accordance with these Rules and any Code of Conduct for members, matters relating to members' interests, and any other matters relating to the conduct of members in carrying out their parliamentary duties; (c) the adoption, amendment and application of any Code of Conduct for members; and (d) matters relating to public appointments in Scotland. Where the Committee considers it appropriate, it may by motion recommend that a member's rights and privileges be withdrawn to such extent and for such period as are specified in the motion. Number of members: 7 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Labour Party. Membership: Keith Brown, Cathie Craigie, Marlyn Glen, Jamie McGrigor, Christina McKelvie, Hugh O'Donnell, Dave Thompson.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-543, on the establishment of a committee.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees to establish a committee of the Parliament as follows: Name of Committee: Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Remit: To consider and report on- (a) the practice and procedures of the Parliament in relation to its business; (b) whether a member's conduct is in accordance with these Rules and any Code of Conduct for members, matters relating to members' interests, and any other matters relating to the conduct of members in carrying out their parliamentary duties; (c) the adoption, amendment and application of any Code of Conduct for members; and (d) matters relating to public appointments in Scotland. Where the Committee considers it appropriate, it may by motion recommend that a member's rights and privileges be withdrawn to such extent and for such period as are specified in the motion. Number of members: 7 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Labour Party. Membership: Keith Brown, Cathie Craigie, Marlyn Glen, Jamie McGrigor, Christina McKelvie, Hugh O'Donnell, Dave Thompson.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

I call Cathie Craigie to wind up the debate. Ms Craigie, you have one minute.

The next item of business is a short debate on motion S3M-497, in the name of Keith Brown, on behalf of the Procedures Committee, on merging the Procedures Committee and the Standards and Public Appointments Committee.

I thank the member for notification of this point of order. Members will be aware that allegations of information being leaked to the press before announcements are made in Parliament are serious matters that are taken very seriously. Any such leaks represent a gross discourtesy to Parliament and will not be tolerated by me or by my deputies. In that spirit, I have closely examined the coverage of rail links to Edinburgh airport over the past few days. Although the coverage is unattributed, there is little doubt that information  has passed into the public domain before this afternoon's proceedings. However, on this occasion, I am prepared to allow the statement to be made, as sufficient matters in it have not been trailed in the press and in order to allow members to examine the minister. I take this opportunity to inform members that the good practice guidance on Government announcements is to be reviewed in consultation with the Parliamentary Bureau. I very much hope that the review will contribute to ensuring that such regrettable events do not occur in future.

I cannot tell you at this stage, because I do not want to pre-empt the findings of any review.

We are sticking to the parliamentary business that was agreed yesterday in Parliament.

The next item of business is a statement by Stewart Stevenson on rail links to Edinburgh airport. The minister will take questions at the end of the statement; therefore, there should be no interventions.

Yes would do, minister.

Very briefly, please.

I ask members to bear in mind that the question is about Dumfries and Galloway.

That showed commendable initiative, Mr Matheson.

Question 4 was not lodged.

We have a constituency question from Elaine Murray.

Could you ask a question, please?

I will take points of order at the end of First Minister's question time, if I may.

I am sure that Mr Hughes will be relieved to discover that.

I understand that Annabel Goldie wishes to make a point of order.

The member is well aware that that is not a point of order.

Any member putting a supplementary question should remember that question 1 is about Edinburgh's housing debt. I hope that supplementaries will be on the same subject.

I am not sure that there was a question to answer, but you are welcome to have a go, minister.

Briefly, please.

That is enough, I am afraid. Minister, will you reply, please?

I remind members yet again that the only "you" in this chamber should be the Presiding Officer. Please use members' proper names.

I am sure that you meant to say "will he provide", Ms Jamieson.

Ask a question, please.

Please use members' full names.

I repeat that the only "you" in this chamber is me.

I remind members to refer to other members by their full names. The only "you" in this chamber is me, and I am not taking part in the debate.

No, Mr Finnie—I am afraid that she is almost out of time.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-545, in the name of Ross Finnie, on waiting times.

We have had enough sedentary interventions.

You should be winding up, Mr Finnie.

Can we have one debate at a time, please?

We move to question time—I apologise—to decision time, which sometimes masquerades as point of order time. There are three questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-539.1.1, in the name of Jim Tolson, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-539.1, in the name of Johann Lamont, on the Glasgow Housing Association inspection report, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 74, Against 46, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-539.1, in the name of Johann Lamont, as amended, which seeks to amend motion S3M-539, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Glasgow Housing Association inspection report, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 60, Against 60, Abstentions 0. Members have clearly got it in for me. I use my casting vote against the amendment.  Amendment disagreed to.

The third question is, that motion S3M-539, in the name of Nicola Sturgeon, on the Glasgow Housing Association inspection report, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

Perhaps unsurprisingly, the result of the division is: For 60, Against 60,  Abstentions 0. As the motion promotes a change of position, I vote against it.  Motion disagreed to.

That concludes decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-544, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees— (a) the following programme of business— Wednesday 3 October 2007 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Crerar Review followed by Debate on the draft Provision of School Lunches (Disapplication of the Requirement to Charge) (Scotland) Order 2007 followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 4 October 2007 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time— Education and Lifelong Learning; Europe, External Affairs and Culture 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Wildlife Crime followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 24 October 2007 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 25 October 2007 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions  followed by Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time— Rural Affairs and the Environment; Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business and b) that the period for members to submit their names for selection for General and Themed Question Times on 25 October 2007 should end at 12.00 noon on Wednesday 3 October.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

No, I will not, because that is a matter to take up with the committee's convener.

Order.

I am not entirely clear what the point of order that the member raised was.

I would like to deal with this point of order, Mr Doris, although I am not sure whether it was a point of order. I repeat my response to points of order that were raised last Thursday: I am not here to adjudicate on the accuracy of what members say in exchanges in the chamber. I also take the opportunity to remind members that, under the rules, points of order should concern whether proper procedures are being, or have been, followed. I am not prepared to allow a continual run of points of order on what are essentially debating matters. That being the case, I would like to consider the matter closed.

I will allow the minister to refer to that, should he wish to do so.

Order.

I am sorry; the minister has finished. The question is, that motion S3M-542, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 106, Against 14, Abstentions 0.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 27 September 2007— after 2.55 pm Ministerial Statement: Rail Links to Edinburgh Airport delete  followed by Ministerial Statement: Broadcasting and insert followed by Scottish Government Debate: Rail Links to Edinburgh Airport.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-542, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 27 September 2007— after 2.55 pm Ministerial Statement: Rail Links to Edinburgh Airport delete  followed by Ministerial Statement: Broadcasting and insert followed by Scottish Government Debate: Rail Links to Edinburgh Airport.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

I call Robert Brown.

Order.

As I indicated earlier, the cabinet secretary will now take questions on the issues that were raised in his statement. It would be helpful if members who wish to ask questions could press their buttons now, and we will endeavour to fit in as many members as possible; that will obviously depend on the length of the questions and, indeed, of the answers.

We come to open questions, for which we have exactly 15 minutes. I repeat my plea for members to keep their questions as brief as possible.

Points of order are about procedures in the chamber, so Mr Gibson's lengthy peroration does not constitute a point of order.

I am not responsible for what committee conveners advise members to do. Frankly, if someone is accused of misleading the chamber, it is up to them to reflect on that and to come back to the chamber. In saying that, I am not asking Ms Alexander to do so.

The next item of business is a statement by John Swinney on enterprise networks. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. I am pleased to welcome the president of Hindu Mandir, Shobha Nagpal.

There are seven questions to be put as a result of today's business. [ Interruption. ] I hope that members are paying attention, because there are quite a lot of questions to be got through. The first question is, that amendment S3M-499.1, in the name of Mike Rumbles, which seeks to amend motion S3M-499, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on managing the risk of flooding in Scotland, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 57, Against 62, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The second question is, that motion S3M-499, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on managing the risk of flooding in Scotland, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament notes that a Flooding Bill will be introduced during this parliamentary session; acknowledges the need for Scotland to take a more sustainable approach to flood risk management in order to tackle the increased risk of flooding associated with issues such as climate change; recognises the importance of the publication of the final report of the Flooding Issues Advisory Committee, which ran for two years, and considers that similar positive engagement with stakeholders, including those who have suffered the effects of flooding, should continue throughout the development of the draft Flooding Bill.

The third question is, that amendment S3M-498.1, in the name of Pauline McNeill, which seeks to amend motion S3M-498, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on penal policy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 44, Against 75, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The fourth question is, that amendment S3M-498.2, in the name of Margaret Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-498, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on penal policy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 13, Against 62, Abstentions 44.  Amendment disagreed to.

The fifth question is, that motion S3M-498, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on penal policy, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament believes that Scotland should develop a progressive penal policy which improves public safety, delivers appropriate and proportionate punishment, ensures that the interests of victims and communities are given proper consideration, contributes to reducing reoffending and encourages rehabilitation in order to build a safer and stronger Scotland; recognises that, in the case of some offenders, custody is the only appropriate disposal, and welcomes the proposal to establish an independent commission to consider the purpose and use of prison.

The sixth question is, that motion S3M-500, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on approval of a statutory instrument, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Scotland Act 1998 (Transfer of Functions to the Scottish Ministers etc.) Order 2007 be approved.

I propose to ask a single question on motions S3M-502 to S3M-515, and motion S3M-525, on membership of committees, and motions S3M-516 to S3M-523, on substitution on committees. If any member objects to a single question being put, please say so now. There being no objections, the next question is, that motions S3M-502 to S3M-515, and motion S3M-525, on membership of committees, and motions S3M-516 to S3M-523, on substitution on committees, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, be agreed to.  Motions agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that Hugh Henry be appointed to replace Charlie Gordon on the Audit Committee.  That the Parliament agrees that Trish Godman be appointed to replace Dr Richard Simpson on the Audit Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Claire Baker be appointed to replace Mary Mulligan on the Audit Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Lewis Macdonald be appointed to replace Iain Gray on the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Mary Mulligan be appointed to replace Pauline McNeill on the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Michael McMahon be appointed as a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Malcolm Chisholm be appointed to replace Jackie Baillie on the European and External Relations Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Dr Richard Simpson be appointed to replace Lewis Macdonald on the Health and Sport Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Helen Eadie be appointed to replace Karen Gillon on the Health and Sport Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Rhoda Grant be appointed to replace Malcolm Chisholm on the Health and Sport Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Patricia Ferguson be appointed to replace Michael McMahon on the Local Government and Communities Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Des McNulty be appointed to replace Sarah Boyack on the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Karen Gillon be appointed to replace Richard Baker on the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Charlie Gordon be appointed to replace Des McNulty on the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Richard Baker be appointed to replace Dr Richard Simpson on the Subordinate Legislation Committee. That the Parliament agrees that George Foulkes be appointed to replace Irene Oldfather as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Richard Baker be appointed to replace George Foulkes as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Jackie Baillie be appointed to replace Karen Gillon as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the European and External Relations Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Irene Oldfather be appointed to replace Helen Eadie as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Health and Sport Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Marlyn Glen be appointed to replace Mary Mulligan as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Justice Committee.  That the Parliament agrees that Trish Godman be appointed to replace David Whitton as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Standards and Public Appointments Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Elaine Smith be appointed to replace Richard Baker as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Subordinate Legislation Committee. That the Parliament agrees that John Park be appointed to replace Malcolm Chisholm as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee.

That is not a point of order.

That is not a point of order either. I take the opportunity to say that members are themselves responsible for what they say in the chamber. I am not here to act as a policeman of some sort by adjudicating on the accuracy of what is said during exchanges. The fact of the matter is that those points have been raised and are now in the Official Report . I hope that members are satisfied at that and that we can now move to decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-500, on approval of a statutory instrument.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Scotland Act 1998 (Transfer of Functions to the Scottish Ministers etc.) Order 2007 be approved.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The next item of business is consideration of 23 Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motions S3M-502 to S3M-515 inclusive, and motion S3M-525, on membership of committees; and to move motions S3M-516 to S3M-523 inclusive on substitution on committees.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that Hugh Henry be appointed to replace Charlie Gordon on the Audit Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Trish Godman be appointed to replace Dr Richard Simpson on the Audit Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Claire Baker be appointed to replace Mary Mulligan on the Audit Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Lewis Macdonald be appointed to replace Iain Gray on the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Mary Mulligan be appointed to replace Pauline McNeill on the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Michael McMahon be appointed as a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Malcolm Chisholm be appointed to replace Jackie Baillie on the European and External Relations Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Dr Richard Simpson be appointed to replace Lewis Macdonald on the Health and Sport Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Helen Eadie be appointed to replace Karen Gillon on the Health and Sport Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Rhoda Grant be appointed to replace Malcolm Chisholm on the Health and Sport Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Patricia Ferguson be appointed to replace Michael McMahon on the Local Government and Communities Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Des McNulty be appointed to replace Sarah Boyack on the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee.  That the Parliament agrees that Karen Gillon be appointed to replace Richard Baker on the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Charlie Gordon be appointed to replace Des McNulty on the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Richard Baker be appointed to replace Dr Richard Simpson on the Subordinate Legislation Committee. That the Parliament agrees that George Foulkes be appointed to replace Irene Oldfather as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Richard Baker be appointed to replace George Foulkes as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Jackie Baillie be appointed to replace Karen Gillon as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the European and External Relations Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Irene Oldfather be appointed to replace Helen Eadie as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Health and Sport Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Marlyn Glen be appointed to replace Mary Mulligan as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Justice Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Trish Godman be appointed to replace David Whitton as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Standards and Public Appointments Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Elaine Smith be appointed to replace Richard Baker as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Subordinate Legislation Committee. That the Parliament agrees that John Park be appointed to replace Malcolm Chisholm as the Scottish Labour Party substitute on the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

Questions on the motions will be put at decision time.

I remind all members to speak through the chair, please.

A number of members have requested to ask supplementary questions, which should be exactly that—not supplementary speeches. I am keen for members to ask supplementaries, but such questions must be short and succinct.

I am not prepared to let members have a sedentary argument across the chamber. I apologise for interrupting Cathie Craigie's question.

The member should ask a question, please.

Too many conversations are going on in the chamber.

You should stop now please.

Question 3 is withdrawn.

Are meant for questions, Lord Foulkes.

I am happy to confirm that we have bumped into each other on the odd occasion, Lord Foulkes. However, your point was not a point of order.

Order.

Order.

Before we come to First Minister's question time, I am sure that members will join me in warmly welcoming the Lord Speaker, the right hon Baroness Hayman, who is in the gallery. [ Applause. ]

Minister, will you raise your microphone?

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-499, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on managing the risks of flooding in Scotland.

Minister, you have one minute.

My apologies, minister. You have another two and a half minutes.

I call Mike Rumbles to speak to amendment S3M-499.1. If I have this right, Mr Rumbles, you have 11 minutes.

I thank the minister for that response. I confirm that Parliamentary Bureau motions are a collective responsibility. I also confirm that any bureau member has the absolute right to challenge business motions. However, I take the opportunity to stress that if business managers intend to raise issues when a business motion is moved, I would expect them to have made their position clear when the draft motion was being discussed at the bureau meeting. I have made it clear in the past that I take the release of statements to the press very seriously, because that calls into question the integrity of Parliament. I will continue to monitor the situation carefully. Members are not slow to make me aware when they have concerns on these issues. This is a subject in which I take a close interest and, as I said, I will continue to monitor the situation.

Please continue to make your point.

I am not aware that the primacy of the Parliament is being called into question in any shape or form. I said that I would expect business managers to raise issues to do with the business motion in the bureau, which is where they rightfully belong.

You have clarified your position through your point of order and your contribution on the business motion. That is now clear to the Parliament. I believe that I have made clear my position. The fact is that the Minister for Parliamentary Business undertook to come back to the bureau next Tuesday with a possible timetable for the consideration of EARL.

Yes. I am happy to confirm that.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 26 September 2007 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Enterprise Networks followed by Scottish Government Debate: Housing followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 27 September 2007 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Liberal Democrats Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time— Finance and Sustainable Growth; Justice and Law Officers 2.55 pm Ministerial Statement: Rail Links to Edinburgh Airport followed by Ministerial Statement: Broadcasting followed by Procedures Committee Debate: 1st Report 2007 (Session 3), Merging the Procedures Committee and the Standards and Public Appointments Committee  followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 3 October 2007 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 4 October 2007 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning; Europe, External Affairs and Culture 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business

There are no questions to be put as a result of today's business.

Order.

The next item is consideration of business motion S3M-493, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 26 September 2007 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Enterprise Networks followed by Scottish Government Debate: Housing followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 27 September 2007 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Liberal Democrats Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time— Finance and Sustainable Growth; Justice and Law Officers 2.55 pm Ministerial Statement: Rail Links to Edinburgh Airport followed by Ministerial Statement: Broadcasting followed by Procedures Committee Debate: 1st Report 2007 (Session 3), Merging the Procedures Committee and the Standards and Public Appointments Committee followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 3 October 2007 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 4 October 2007 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions  followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Education and Lifelong Learning; Europe, External Affairs and Culture 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

As I intimated earlier, the cabinet secretary will now take questions on the issues that were raised in her statement. I hope to allow around 40 minutes for questions before moving to the next item of business.

This is not a debate; it is a question-and-answer session.

The next item of business is a debate on the European treaty.

I thank the member for the point of order. I have not found any reason to believe that any guidance or guidelines have been broken in relation to today's statement. In general, I hope that members are aware—I have made this known in the past to the Minister for Parliamentary Business and others—that I take the subject very seriously. I monitor it on a regular basis, and I will continue to do so.

As I said before, I am satisfied that there has not been a breach with regard to this afternoon's statement.

We move to the statement by the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing on national health service waiting times. The cabinet secretary will take questions at the end of her statement, and there should therefore be no interventions.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our time for reflection leader today is Father Andrew Clark, the Roman Catholic chaplain of HM Prison Perth and HM Prison Glenochil.

I find it difficult to respond to the member's point of order, because I need more details about the matter to which he refers. If he furnishes me with those details, I will return to the issue on another occasion.

I might be able to understand the member's frustration, but, at the end of the day, it is a matter for the Government as to how it makes such information available.

I do not believe that I promised to come back to the chamber on the matter. However, I am happy to do so. When we looked into the records, we found that similar language has been used on 16 occasions by—I think I can safely say—prominent members of all parties. As a result, although I do not like such language when it is used directly at another member, I must accept that it has been used in the past. However, I encourage all members to absolutely minimise its use.

There are four questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-457.2, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, which seeks to amend motion S3M-457, in the name of Hugh Henry, on education, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 48, Against 76, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-457.1, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, which seeks to amend motion S3M-457, in the name of Hugh Henry, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 75, Against 46, Abstentions 3.  Amendment agreed to.

The third question is, that motion S3M-457, in the name of Hugh Henry, on education, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 76, Against 46, Abstentions 2.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament regrets that education has not been given a higher priority by this administration; calls for an urgent explanation to be given on funding for higher education and further education; calls for the missing detail to be given on the manifesto commitment to write off student debt; calls for a statement on how the commitment to reduce class sizes for primary 1 to primary 3 which has not been fully explained or costed will be delivered by 2011; calls for more detail on how a teacher will be provided to every early years class by 2011; regrets that nothing has been said about tackling indiscipline in Scotland's schools, and calls for an early statement on how funding will be provided to improve the school estate in Scotland and further calls for an early announcement on when the SNP manifesto pledge for a 50% increase in free nursery education for 3 and 4-year-olds will be met and how much it will cost.

The fourth question is, that motion S3M-445, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on the draft Smoking, Health and Social Care (Scotland) Act 2005 (Variation of Age Limit for Sale of Tobacco etc and Consequential Modifications) Order 2007, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Smoking, Health and Social Care (Scotland) Act 2005 (Variation of Age Limit for Sale of Tobacco etc and Consequential Modifications) Order 2007 be approved.

That concludes decision time.

It was even less, and I am grateful to the member. The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

Christine Grahame, I can give you 45 seconds.

Could we have fewer conversations in the chamber, please.

As I intimated earlier, the Lord Advocate will take questions on issues that were raised in her statement. I intend to allow until around 15:55 for questions, after which we will move to the next item of business.

The next item of business is a statement by Elish Angiolini on the case of Angus Sinclair. The Lord Advocate will take questions at the end of her statement and there should therefore be no interventions.

That is not a matter for the Parliament, but Mr McArthur has made the point extremely well. Our congratulations are now in the Official Report .

Order.

Order.

Before we move to First Minister's question time, I am sure that the Parliament will wish to join me in welcoming the Portuguese ambassador, His Excellency António Carlos, and the High Commissioner of Malawi, Dr Francis Moto. [ Applause. ]

I thank the member for giving me notice of the point of order. As he said, the Parliament did not agree a resolution yesterday. The matter of how to proceed remains entirely one for the Government.

One minute.

Yes.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-457, in the name of Hugh Henry, on education.

I remind all members to speak through the chair—to speak in the third person.

Thank you for that point of order. Whether Mr Henry wishes to withdraw the remark is entirely a matter for him, but I have to say that such language sails very close to the wind.

I am sorry, Mr Henry, I cannot take that entirely lying down. I ask members to think carefully about the language that they use in the chamber.

Order. That is not a point of order and I do not believe that those terms were used in a personal reference. I ask members to move on.

I hear what Mr Welsh says and I will reflect on it. I have made my position clear at the moment. I think that we should move on.

I say with respect that that is not a point of order.

One minute.

I have done that.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-443.2, in the name of Iain Gray, which seeks to amend motion S3M-443, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the Scottish Government's skills strategy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 42, Against 77, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The second question is, that amendment S3M-443.1, in the name of Murdo Fraser, which seeks to amend motion S3M-443, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the Scottish Government's skills strategy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 16, Against 103, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The third question is, that amendment S3M-443.3, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, which seeks to amend motion S3M-443, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the Scottish Government's skills strategy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 15, Against 104, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-443, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the Scottish Government's skills strategy, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 47, Against 72, Abstentions 0.  Motion disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-453, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on rule 10.6.5, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that, for the purpose of allowing up to 10 minutes to debate motion S3M-445 on Thursday 13 September 2007, the second and third sentences of Rule 10.6.5 of Standing Orders be suspended.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, to move motion S3M-453, on rule 10.6.5.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that, for the purpose of allowing up to 10 minutes to debate motion S3M-445 on Thursday 13 September 2007, the second and third sentences of Rule 10.6.5 of Standing Orders be suspended.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-460, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 13 September 2007— delete 2.55 pm Ministerial Statement: Broadcasting and insert 2.55 pm Ministerial Statement: The Case of Angus Sinclair—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-454, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 19 September 2007 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: NHS Waiting Times followed by Scottish Government Debate: European Treaty followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 20 September 2007 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: Managing the Risks of Flooding in Scotland 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time— Health and Wellbeing; Rural Affairs and the Environment 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: Penal Policy followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time  followed by Members' Business Wednesday 26 September 2007 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 27 September 2007 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Liberal Democrats Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time Finance and Sustainable Growth; Justice and Law Officers 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-452, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a timetable for legislation.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that consideration of the Abolition of Bridge Tolls (Scotland) Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 16 November 2007.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

We have about eight minutes for questions, so I will call a member from each of the main parties and then see where time has taken us.

I apologise to the members I have been unable to call. Time is against us.

I do not need to do that, Mr Rumbles. How cabinet secretaries and ministers go about that procedure is entirely up to them.

The next item of business is an emergency ministerial statement by Richard Lochhead on foot-and-mouth disease. As the minister will take questions at the end of his statement, there should be no interventions. I will allow one question from each of the main parties and, depending on the time available, I might allow questions from other members.

The member is in his last minute.

Mr Fraser, you have one minute remaining.

You must wind up.

I would give Mr Fraser four out of 10 for timekeeping. Mr Purvis, you have seven minutes.

I call Murdo Fraser, who has seven minutes.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. I am pleased to welcome our time for reflection leader today, who is Dr Jagtar Singh Nijjar from the Scottish Inter Faith Council.

Before we turn to the next item of business, I inform members that I have accepted a request from the Government under rule 13.2.2 of standing orders for an urgent ministerial statement to be made today on the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease in Surrey. That statement will be delivered by the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment at 4.45 pm. I have revised the daily business list, and a copy of that revised list has been placed on members' desks.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-443, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on the Scottish Government's skills strategy.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that Shirley-Anne Somerville be appointed to replace Stefan Tymkewycz on the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Shirley-Anne Somerville be appointed to replace Stefan Tymkewycz as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The questions on those motions will be put at decision time.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-415.1, in the name of Margaret Smith, which seeks to amend motion S3M-415, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on tackling drugs misuse, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 55, Against 61, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The second question is, that motion S3M-415, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on tackling drugs misuse, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament recognises that tackling drugs misuse is one of the great social challenges of our time, requiring determined and sustained action; welcomes the Scottish Government's commitment to build consensus around a new strategy for tackling drugs misuse; welcomes the recent publication of reports, commissioned by the previous administration, on key aspects of drugs services; supports the Government's determination to improve services to promote recovery from drug addiction, to ensure that children are protected from the drug addictions of their parents, to improve drugs education, to offer young people more opportunities to do something positive and constructive with their lives, to strengthen enforcement and to provide courts with more effective ways of dealing with those whose crimes are driven by addiction, and recognises that there will be resource implications in meeting this challenge.

On the third question, Ken Macintosh said in his closing speech that the amendment in Hugh Henry's name would not be pressed. Does Hugh Henry seek to withdraw the amendment?

Do we agree that amendment S3M-416.1, in the name of Hugh Henry, be withdrawn?  Amendment, by agreement, withdrawn.

The fourth question is, that motion S3M-416, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on a sustainable future for the Crichton university campus, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament congratulates local campaigners, including MSPs from all parties, on effectively highlighting the issues surrounding the future of Crichton University Campus in Dumfries, leading to a successful outcome; commends the work of the local stakeholders, academic partners and the Scottish Funding Council in developing an academic strategy for the campus; welcomes the allocation of additional resources by the Scottish Government to protect existing provision, help deliver the strategy and widen the range of higher education opportunities delivered in the south west of Scotland on a long-term sustainable basis, and recognises the importance of the ability of students in rural and island communities to access higher and further education.

I propose to put a single question on motions S3M-422 and S3M-423, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on membership of and substitution on committees. If any member objects to a single question being put, they should say so now. The next question is, that motions S3M-422 and S3M-423, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on  behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on membership of and substitution on committees, be agreed to.  Motions agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that Shirley-Anne Somerville be appointed to replace Stefan Tymkewycz on the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee. That the Parliament agrees that Shirley-Anne Somerville be appointed to replace Stefan Tymkewycz as the Scottish National Party substitute on the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee.

I can so confirm.

I do not recall saying that it was not.

Order. The member should not cross the floor. I beg your pardon, minister.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-416, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, on a sustainable future for the Crichton university campus. I invite all members who wish to speak in the debate to press their request-to-speak buttons.

Question 3 has been withdrawn.

Please be brief.

What is the question, Ms Eadie?

This question has excited a lot of interest, so I cannot promise to call all members who want to ask a supplementary.

That brings us to the end of themed questions.

Order.

Order, please.

Order. I will take a supplementary from Margo MacDonald.

The rules clearly state that the choice of supplementaries lies with the Presiding Officer. As a result, I have the right to choose whoever it might be, which is what I have done. I also point out that Nicol Stephen's original question was on the issues that might "be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet".

Order.

I will take a supplementary question from Jim Hume.

In which case, I will take a supplementary question from Rhoda Grant.

I call Linda Fabiani.

We will move swiftly on.

I thank Miss Smith for her courtesy in informing me that she is unable to stay for the entire debate.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-415, in the name of Kenny MacAskill, on tackling drugs misuse. I call Fergus Ewing to speak to and move the motion.

Good morning. The first item of business is a statement by Richard Lochhead on the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease. As the minister will take questions at the end of his statement, there should be no interventions during it.

I intend to allow about 30 minutes for the minister to take questions on the issues raised in his statement. Rob Gibson will ask the first question, followed by Rhona Brankin.

I apologise to the chamber for not calling the Opposition spokesman to ask the first question, which, of course, I should have done. I can only put it down to ring rustiness after the summer recess.

Questions are supposed to be about the foot-and-mouth outbreak, but I leave it up to the cabinet secretary whether he wishes to reply to that.

I call Liam McArthur, to be followed by Andrew Allan.

I call Alasdair Allan and apologise for getting his name wrong the first time.

That brings us to the end of questions on the statement on foot-and-mouth disease. I will allow a brief suspension while members change their seats.

We come to open questions. A large number of members wish to ask questions and it is highly unlikely that we will get everyone in, so I ask members to keep their questions as brief as possible, and it would be helpful if the ministerial response follows suit.

I remind all members of the letter that I circulated earlier today on chamber etiquette.

First Minister, do you wish to respond to that?

I invite our new member, Shirley-Anne Somerville, to make the formal affirmation.  The following member made a solemn affirmation:  Shirley-Anne Somerville (Lothians) (SNP)

The next item of business is a statement by the First Minister on the Scottish Government's programme. The First Minister will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should therefore be no interventions.

The question is, that motion S3M-412, in the name of Bruce Crawford, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

We cannot have a point of order during a vote. If you are having a problem with your console, you have time to find another seat, Mr Don. I gather that a number of members are having problems. I ask that the system be cleared. We will vote again shortly. I point out to members that the system is thoroughly checked before the start of business. We will run the vote again.

The result of the division is: For 60, Against 54, Abstentions 1.  Motion agreed to.

I am not sure that that is a point of order, but the point is made. What is clear is that the longer we extend this debate, the less time we will have to debate the matters in front of us this afternoon.

The minister has indicated that he would like to respond. I am happy to let him do so.

Good afternoon. I welcome members back after the summer recess—it is nice to be back. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our leader for today is the Rev James McNaughtan from St Marnock's parish church in Kilmarnock.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-412, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 5 September 2007 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Business Motion followed by Member's Affirmation: Shirley-Anne Somerville followed by First Minister's Statement: The Scottish Government's Programme followed by Scottish Government Debate: The Scottish Government's Programme followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 6 September 2007 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Foot and Mouth Outbreak followed by Scottish Government Debate: Tackling Drugs Misuse 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time— Justice and Law Officers; Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Scottish Government Debate: A Sustainable Future for Crichton University Campus followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 12 September 2007 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Debate: The Government's Skills Strategy followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 13 September 2007  9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time— Europe, External Affairs and Culture; Education and Lifelong Learning 2.55 pm Ministerial Statement: Broadcasting 3.50 pm Ministerial Statement: National Developments in Planning followed by Debate on the draft Smoking, Health and Social Care (Scotland) Act 2005 (Variation of Age Limit for Sale of Tobacco etc. and Consequential Modifications) Order 2007 followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 19 September 2007 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 20 September 2007 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Government Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time— Health and Wellbeing; Rural Affairs and the Environment 2.55 pm Scottish Government Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

There are two questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-252.1, in the name of David McLetchie, which seeks to amend motion S3M-252, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the Conservation (Natural Habitats, &c) Amendment (No 2) (Scotland) Regulations 2007, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-252, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the Conservation (Natural Habitats, &c) Amendment (No 2) (Scotland) Regulations 2007, as amended, be agreed to.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament agrees that the draft Conservation (Natural Habitats, &c) Amendment (No 2) (Scotland) Regulations 2007 be approved and, in so doing, requests the Scottish Government to invite Her Majesty's Government to consider complementary legislative measures to protect environmentally sensitive sites such as the Firth of Forth.

Before we move to members' business, I wish everybody a happy recess.

If any other member feels like asking a question, I would be minded to take it.

Order. As members know, I have no say over the substance of answers. We have come to the end of questions. I have no choice other than to suspend the meeting until 5 o'clock.

Thank you for giving notice of the point of order. Despite what you say, points of order are, by definition, about the standing orders of the Scottish Parliament and not about the code of conduct for MSPs. If you want to raise the matter as a standards issue, you should write to me and I will consider the matter under paragraph 9.1.6(a) of the code of conduct.

That is exactly what I am suggesting.

The next item of business is a debate on subordinate legislation, on motion S3M-252, in the name of Richard Lochhead, on the Conservation (Natural Habitats, &c) Amendment (No 2) (Scotland) Regulations 2007.

Can we have a question, please?

Question 1 was to be asked by Jamie Stone, but he is not in the chamber. That is not a practice that I wish to encourage, as I consider it to be a discourtesy to Parliament.

Question 7 is from Jackie Baillie.

Question 6 has had to be withdrawn for a legitimate reason.

We move to question 10, just so it can be said that I once got to it.

We have an important constituency question from Dr Elaine Murray. Before she asks her question, I ask any member who is going to contribute to this part of question time to bear in mind the Parliament's rules on sub judice.

Question 1 was not lodged.

Stewart Stevenson will put the member out of his agony.

The member needs to get to the end of his question.

Good morning. The first item of business is a statement by John Swinney on the approach to the strategic spending review. The minister will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions. Mr Swinney, you have 10 minutes—I beg your pardon, you have 15 minutes.

The minister will now take questions on the issues that his statement has raised. I intend to allow around 30 minutes for questions.

Order.

All parties have fired their opening salvos. I ask that all questions be as brief as possible, because a lot of members have asked to speak and I want to get as many in as I can.

Question, please.

Order, please. This is an important point.

Order, please.

Order.

Members will be aware that I am obliged to take a point of order, no matter what its content is. I will reflect on what Cathy Jamieson has said.

I note that point and again I say to members that if a member stands up to make a point of order, I am obliged to take that point of order before determining whether it is a valid point of order.

The content of members' contributions is nothing to do with the person sitting in this chair.

I take your point, and I am sure that the cabinet secretary will be grateful for a full copy of that letter.

There are five questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-243.1, in the name of Wendy Alexander, which seeks to amend motion S3M-243, in the name of John Swinney, on transport, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 81, Against 47, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The second question is, that motion S3M-243, in the name of John Swinney, on transport, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

On motion S3M-233, in the name of Tom McCabe—sorry, I am keen to get to the recess too. The division was on motion S3M-243, in the name of John Swinney, on transport, as amended. The result of the division is: For 81, Against 47, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament notes that the Edinburgh Trams project and EARL were approved by the Parliament after detailed scrutiny; further notes the report of the Auditor General for Scotland on these projects and, in light thereof, (a) calls on the Scottish Government to proceed with the Edinburgh Trams project within the budget limit set by the previous administration, noting that it is the responsibility of Transport Initiatives Edinburgh and the City of Edinburgh Council to meet the balance of the funding costs and (b) further calls on the Scottish Government to continue to progress the EARL project by resolving the governance issues identified by the Auditor General before any binding financial commitment is made and to report back to the Parliament in September on the outcome of its discussions with the relevant parties.

The next question is, that motion S3M-233, in the name of Tom McCabe, on behalf of the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body, on the members' allowances scheme, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament— (a) amends with immediate effect the Resolution of the Parliament of 21 June 2001 agreeing to motion S1M-2034 by substituting "is employed by a member or members" for "remains employed by a single member" in paragraph 1.(7)(a) of Part B of the Members' Allowances Scheme referred to in that Resolution; and (b) confers functions upon the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body to pay allowances in each financial year in accordance with the amended Members' Allowances Scheme.

I propose to ask a single question on motions S3M-249 and S3M-254, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on the establishment of a committee and on committee membership and substitution on committees. If any member objects to a single question being put, please say so now. There being no objections, the next question is, that motions S3M-249 and S3M-254, in the name  of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on the establishment of a committee and on committee membership and substitution on committees, be agreed to.  Motions agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees— (a) to establish a committee of the Parliament as follows: Name of Committee: Scottish Parliamentary Pensions Scheme Committee; Remit: To inquire into and report with recommendations for a Committee Bill on a replacement for the Scottish Parliamentary Pensions Scheme rules; Duration: Until the Parliament has completed its consideration of the committee's report; Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Labour Party; Membership: Alasdair Morgan, Peter Peacock, David McLetchie and Hugh O'Donnell; and (b) as an alternative to Rule 6.3.2 of Standing Orders, that this committee shall have four members. That the Parliament agrees— (a) that Helen Eadie be appointed as a member and that John Park and Dr Richard Simpson be appointed to replace George Foulkes and Elaine Smith as members of the Subordinate Legislation Committee; and (b) the following nominated committee substitutes, as permitted under Rule 6.3A— Labour Party  Audit Committee James Kelly Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee Irene Oldfather Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee George Foulkes Equal Opportunities Committee Claire Baker European and External Relations Committee Karen Gillon Finance Committee Peter Peacock Health and Sport Committee Helen Eadie Justice Committee Mary Mulligan Local Government and Communities Committee Rhoda Grant Public Petitions Committee Marilyn Livingstone Rural Affairs and Environment Committee David Stewart Standards and Public Appointments Committee David Whitton Subordinate Legislation Committee Richard Baker Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee Malcolm Chisholm.  Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party  Audit Committee Derek Brownlee Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee Alex Johnstone Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee Ted Brocklebank Equal Opportunities Committee Mary Scanlon European and External Relations Committee Jackson Carlaw Finance Committee Murdo Fraser Health and Sport Committee Jamie McGrigor Justice Committee John Lamont Local Government and Communities Committee Margaret Mitchell Procedures Committee Elizabeth Smith Public Petitions Committee John Scott Rural Affairs and Environment Committee Nanette Milne Subordinate Legislation Committee Bill Aitken Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee Gavin Brown.

The next question is, that motion—no, it is not; that is it. [ Laughter. ]

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-233, in the name of Tom McCabe, on behalf of the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body, on the members' allowances scheme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament— (a) amends with immediate effect the Resolution of the Parliament of 21 June 2001 agreeing to motion S1M-2034 by substituting "is employed by a member or members" for "remains employed by a single member" in paragraph 1.(7)(a) of Part B of the Members' Allowances Scheme referred to in that Resolution; and (b) confers functions upon the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body to pay allowances in each financial year in accordance with the amended Members' Allowances Scheme.—[ Tom McCabe .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

The next item of business is consideration of Parliamentary Bureau motions S3M-249 and S3M-254, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the establishment of a committee and on committee membership and substitution on committees.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees— (a) to establish a committee of the Parliament as follows: Name of Committee: Scottish Parliamentary Pensions Scheme Committee; Remit: To inquire into and report with recommendations for a Committee Bill on a replacement for the Scottish Parliamentary Pensions Scheme rules; Duration: Until the Parliament has completed its consideration of the committee's report; Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Labour Party; Membership: Alasdair Morgan, Peter Peacock, David McLetchie and Hugh O'Donnell; and (b) as an alternative to Rule 6.3.2 of Standing Orders, that this committee shall have four members. That the Parliament agrees— (a) that Helen Eadie be appointed as a member and that John Park and Dr Richard Simpson be appointed to replace George Foulkes and Elaine Smith as members of the Subordinate Legislation Committee; and (b) the following nominated committee substitutes, as permitted under Rule 6.3A— Labour Party  Audit Committee James Kelly Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee Irene Oldfather Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee George Foulkes Equal Opportunities Committee Claire Baker European and External Relations Committee Karen Gillon Finance Committee Peter Peacock Health and Sport Committee Helen Eadie Justice Committee Mary Mulligan Local Government and Communities Committee Rhoda Grant Public Petitions Committee Marilyn Livingstone Rural Affairs and Environment Committee David Stewart Standards and Public Appointments Committee David Whitton Subordinate Legislation Committee Richard Baker Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee Malcolm Chisholm.  Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party  Audit Committee Derek Brownlee Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee Alex Johnstone Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee Ted Brocklebank Equal Opportunities Committee Mary Scanlon European and External Relations Committee Jackson Carlaw Finance Committee Murdo Fraser Health and Sport Committee Jamie McGrigor Justice Committee John Lamont Local Government and Communities Committee Margaret Mitchell Procedures Committee Elizabeth Smith Public Petitions Committee John Scott Rural Affairs and Environment Committee Nanette Milne Subordinate Legislation Committee Bill Aitken Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee Gavin Brown.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

Questions on the motions will be put at decision time, to which we are about to come.

I am sure that we are all grateful to the member for the point of order, which is not a point of order—it may be a point of revenge.

I take the member's point, but I am not entirely sure that it is a point of order. However, we will look into the matter.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-248, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 5 September 2007 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Executive Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 6 September 2007 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Executive Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time— Justice and Law Officers; Finance and Sustainable Growth 2.55 pm Executive Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

You have about a minute left, Mr Swinney.

Order.

Order. Best of order, please.

The minister will now take questions. I will close this question-and-answer session at 5 minutes past 3. I remind members that their questions should be ones of clarification only.

Order.

Order.

Can we have a question, please?

I am sorry to the many members who wanted to ask a question but whom I have been unable to call.

The next item of business is a debate on motion S3M-243, in the name of John Swinney, on transport. I call Mr Swinney to move the motion.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament endorses the Government's transport priorities and notes that the Government party proposed during the election campaign not to proceed with the Edinburgh Trams and current EARL projects, but planned an additional crossing for the River Forth.—[ John Swinney .]

I call Wendy Alexander to speak to and move amendment S3M-243.1.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-247, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revision to the business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Wednesday 27 June 2007— after followed by Business Motion insert followed by SPCB Motion on Members' Allowances Scheme—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is a statement by Stewart Stevenson on transport. As the minister will take questions at the end of his statement, there should be no interventions. Given the fact that a debate on transport follows on from the statement, I make it clear that, as I have intimated to business managers, questions should be for clarification only.

I thank the member for giving notice of his point of order. I gave careful consideration when selecting the motion for debate, and I am satisfied that it is competent for these purposes. While I am sorry to say that the issues raised by the member are matters for debate rather than a point of order for the chair, I have no doubt that other members may wish to air similar concerns during proceedings this afternoon.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection, and our leader today is the Rev George Whyte of Colinton parish church in Edinburgh.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-220, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees— (a) the following programme of business— Wednesday 27 June 2007 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Transport followed by Executive Debate: Transport followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 28 June 2007 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Ministerial Statement: Approach to the Strategic Spending Review followed by Executive Debate: Health and Wellbeing of the People of Scotland 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time— Rural Affairs and the Environment; Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Debate on the Conservation (Natural Habitats, &c.) Amendment (No. 2) (Scotland) Regulations 2007 followed by First Minister Statement: The Council of Economic Advisers followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business and (b) that the period for Members to submit their names for General and Themed Question Times on 6 September 2007 should end at 12 noon on Wednesday 27 June.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-215, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, on substitution on committees.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following nominated committee substitutes, as permitted under Rule 6.3A— Scottish Liberal Democrat Party  Audit Committee Iain Smith Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee Liam McArthur Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee Hugh O'Donnell Equal Opportunities Committee Jim Tolson European and External Relations Committee Jeremy Purvis Finance Committee Ross Finnie Health and Sport Committee Mr Jamie Stone Justice Committee Mike Pringle Local Government and Communities Committee Robert Brown Procedures Committee Alison McInnes Public Petitions Committee Jim Hume Rural Affairs and John Farquhar Environment Committee Munro Standards and Public Appointments Committee Mike Rumbles Subordinate Legislation Committee Margaret Smith Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee Tavish Scott.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

There are 10 questions to be put as a result of today's business. In relation to this morning's debate on the Olympic games, if the amendment in the name of Stewart Maxwell is agreed to, the amendments in the names of Johann Lamont and Nicol Stephen will fall. If the amendment in the name of Johann Lamont is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Nicol Stephen will fall. The first question is, that amendment S3M-204.3, in the name of Stewart Maxwell, which seeks to amend motion S3M-204, in the name of Murdo Fraser, on the Olympic games, be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 49, Against 78, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-204.1, in the name of Johann Lamont, which seeks to amend motion S3M-204, in the name of Murdo Fraser, be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 62, Against 62, Abstentions 3. I am therefore required to use my casting vote. The business manager has been informed that I will vote against the amendment, which therefore falls.  Amendment disagreed to.

The third question is, that amendment S3M-204.2, in the name of Nicol Stephen, which seeks to amend motion S3M-204, in the name of Murdo Fraser, on the Olympic games, be agreed to. Are we all agreed.

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 65, Against 62, Abstentions 1.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-204, in the name of Murdo Fraser, on the Olympic games, as amended, be agreed to.

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 45, Against 79, Abstentions 2.  Motion disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-201.4, in the name of Des McNulty, which seeks to amend motion S3M-201, in the name of Derek Brownlee, on council tax, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 62, Against 65, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The sixth question is, that amendment S3M-201.2, in the name of Tavish Scott, which seeks to amend motion S3M-201, in the name of Derek Brownlee, on council tax, be agreed to. Are we agreed? We are? [ Laughter. ]

I did not think so. I thought that I had a nice surprise there for a minute. There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 64, Against 62, Abstentions 2.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-201.3, in the name of Robin  Harper, which seeks to amend motion S3M-201, in the name of Derek Brownlee, on council tax, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 49, Against 78, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-201, in the name of Derek Brownlee, on council tax, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

It has gone very quiet all of a sudden. The result of the division is: For 64, Against 62, Abstentions 2.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament believes that local income tax, which is based on ability to pay, is a fairer system of local taxation than the discredited and unfair council tax and notes the position of the Green Party in regard to land value taxation.

The next question is, that motion S3M-212, in the name of Tom McCabe, on the Scottish Commission for Public Audit, be agreed to—if anybody is listening.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees to the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body's proposal to appoint Robert Brown, Derek Brownlee, Angela Constance and George Foulkes to be members of the Scottish Commission for Public Audit.

The final question is, that motion S3M-215, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on substitution on committees, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees the following nominated committee substitutes, as permitted under Rule 6.3A— Scottish Liberal Democrat Party  Audit Committee Iain Smith Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee Liam McArthur Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee Hugh O'Donnell Equal Opportunities Committee Jim Tolson European and External Relations Committee Jeremy Purvis Finance Committee Ross Finnie Health and Sport Committee Mr Jamie Stone Justice Committee Mike Pringle Local Government and Communities Committee Robert Brown Procedures Committee Alison McInnes Public Petitions Committee Jim Hume Rural Affairs and John Farquhar Environment Committee Munro Standards and Public Appointments Committee Mike Rumbles Subordinate Legislation Committee Margaret Smith Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee Tavish Scott

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-212, in the name of Tom McCabe, on behalf of the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body, on the Scottish Commission for Public Audit.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees to the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body's proposal to appoint Robert Brown, Derek Brownlee, Angela Constance and George Foulkes to be members of the Scottish Commission for Public Audit.—[ Tom McCabe .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

Before I move on to the next item of business, I wish to respond to a point of order that Johann Lamont raised earlier this afternoon and to which I said that I would respond later. I have now had the opportunity to investigate the issues that she raised and I am grateful for members' forbearance. As I hope members know by now, I take seriously the provision of information to the Parliament and I will always try to ensure that the Parliament is treated with the respect that it deserves. I believe that it is good practice for material that is relevant to debates to be issued in good time by those who sponsor debates. Doing so, however, remains a matter for those who release the information and is not governed by any formal rules or guidance. On the specific points that Johann Lamont raised, I can find no evidence that relevant information was released to journalists or lobbying organisations before being given to the Parliament, or that any rules or guidance were breached by today's events. However, I repeat my strictures of yesterday. I suggest that the Executive reviews its practices in this regard and reflects on what I said yesterday.

Given that no rules have been broken, I do not think that that is a point of order for the chair. However, I have made it clear  that there are substantive issues. I hope that we can now move on. No rules have been broken—I am clear about that.

I am sorry to interrupt, minister. I remind members that there is a coffee lounge at the back of the chamber. If that is where they would like to have conversations, they would be very welcome.

You should be closing now, minister.

I assure the member that I take the matter extremely seriously and I thank her for her point of order. Substantive issues are involved, so I hope that she will forgive me if I do not respond instantly. I would like a little time to think about the matter, and I will come back to the chamber with my thoughts on it before decision time this evening.

I have said that I will reflect on the points that Johann Lamont raised.

Question 1 has been withdrawn.

Question 5 has been withdrawn.

I have divided between the two themes for questions the time that we lost to points of order earlier, so we move now to questions on Europe, external affairs and culture.

Briefly, please.

You could still make it a brief question, Mr Smith.

Question 5 is withdrawn.

As we started late, I will allow one more question.

Despite the barracking that is taking place, the member has a perfectly reasonable point of order. I thank her for giving me advance notice of it. In this case, the rules have clearly been complied with, as answers—albeit holding answers—were provided within the deadlines. However, if possible, substantive answers should always be provided by the due date. I ask the Executive to reflect on that point. Before I suspend the meeting, I ask members who are staying for the awards ceremony that will  follow to remain in their seats. Other members should leave as rapidly as possible.

Order.

Settle down.

Excuse me, First Minister. Such sedentary exclamations may be suitable for another place, but they are not suitable in this chamber. [ Applause. ]

Order.

Order.

We now move to the open debate. Speeches should be kept to a tight four minutes, please.

Order.

The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-204, in the name of Murdo Fraser, on the Olympic games.

There are no questions to be put as a result of today's business.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-203, in the name of Bruce Crawford, setting out a revised business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 21 June 2007— after followed by Executive Debate: Housing insert followed by SPCB motion on membership of the Scottish Commission for Public Audit—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

Order.

Order. The member is making serious points.

I point out that members who wish to make a point of order have three minutes in which to do so—that is their inalienable right. I thank Murdo Fraser and Karen Whitefield for giving notice of their points of order. This is the third occasion in recent weeks on which points of order have been raised regarding an announcement in the Parliament. As I did on those previous occasions, I refer members to the  good practice guidance on Executive announcements, which I understand has been reissued to all business managers. The purpose of that guidance is to ensure that the Parliament is treated with respect and is properly the place in which major spending and policy announcements are first made. I understand that, as Karen Whitefield pointed out, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning somewhat belatedly attempted to forewarn the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee before details of today's announcement appeared in the press. However, I stress to the Executive the importance of adhering to the guidance and ensuring that its terms are followed. I believe that the Executive is sailing slightly close to the wind on the issue and I exhort it to err on the side of caution in future.

I thank the member for giving me notice of his point of order. However, the First Minister is entirely at liberty to sign agreements with other institutions as he feels fit. Whether he intends to make a statement to the  Parliament is a matter for him in the first instance. There will be opportunities during this and next week's parliamentary debate to put questions to the First Minister.

You may have a point, Ms MacDonald, but I do not think that it is a point of order for me.

You do not have to take three minutes, by the way.

Again, you may have a point, but it is not a point of order.

The next item of business is, I hope, a debate on the Government's objective for a smarter Scotland.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. I am pleased to welcome as our time for reflection leader Pastor Norman Hill from the Riverside Church in Banff.

There are potentially 10 questions to be put as a result of today's business. In relation to this morning's debate on Trident, I point out that if the amendment in the name of Michael McMahon is agreed to, amendments in the name of Murdo Fraser and Mike Rumbles will fall. If the amendment in the name of Murdo Fraser is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Mike Rumbles will fall. In relation to this morning's debate on carbon offsetting, if the amendment in the name of Sarah Boyack is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Alex Johnstone will fall. The first question is, that amendment S3M-169.3, in the name of Michael McMahon, which seeks to amend motion S3M-169, in the name of Patrick Harvie, on Trident, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 60, Against 66, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-169.1, in the name of Murdo Fraser, which seeks to amend motion S3M-169, in the name of Patrick Harvie, on Trident, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 16, Against 68, Abstentions 42.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-169.4, in the name of Mike Rumbles, which seeks to amend motion S3M-169, in the name of Patrick Harvie, on Trident, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 65, Against 18, Abstentions 43.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-169, in the name of Patrick Harvie, on Trident, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 71, Against 16, Abstentions 39.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament congratulates the majority of Scottish MPs for voting on 14 March 2007 to reject the replacement of Trident, recognises that decisions on matters of defence are matters within the responsibility of the UK Government and Parliament and calls on the UK Government not to go ahead at this time with the proposal in the White Paper, The Future of the United Kingdom's Nuclear Deterrent .

The next question is, that amendment S3M-173.4, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, which seeks to amend motion S3M-173, in the name of Robin Harper, on carbon offsetting, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 65, Against 60, Abstentions 1.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-173.1, in the name of Sarah Boyack, which seeks to amend motion S3M-173, in the name of Robin Harper, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 44, Against 81, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-173.2, in the name of Alex Johnstone, which seeks to amend motion S3M-173, in the name of Robin Harper, as amended,  be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 65, Against 60, Abstentions 1.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-173.3, in the name of Alison McInnes, which seeks to amend motion S3M-173, in the name of Robin Harper, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 16, Against 109, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-173, in the name of Robin Harper, on carbon offsetting, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 66, Against 60, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament notes the growing popularity of carbon offsetting among individuals and private companies; believes that actions by polluters to reduce carbon emissions elsewhere, or to mitigate the effects of climate change, can play a useful role in supplementing sound environmental policy by government; considers however that carbon offsetting cannot substitute for policies that reduce carbon emissions directly and that any role for offsetting should only be transitional; notes the widely held concerns about many commercial offsetting schemes and the difficulty in verifying the true value of most offsetting schemes; notes the Scottish Government's intention to introduce carbon offsetting in respect of transport infrastructure projects, and calls on the Scottish Government, before introducing such proposals, to consider issues such as the need for rigorous independent assessments of the full direct and indirect carbon impact of each project and its associated offset and the related cost to the taxpayer of such schemes, continuous updating of data for the lifetime of the infrastructure to establish any changes required to the annual offset funding, compliance with the internationally-recognised Gold Standard and the need to ensure that overall policy, including transport policy, leads to direct emissions reductions.

The final question is, that motion S3M-179, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on substitution on committees, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees the following nominated committee substitutes, as permitted under Rule 6.3A— Scottish National Party  Audit Committee Sandra White Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee Nigel Don Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee Stefan Tymkewycz Equal Opportunities Committee Jamie Hepburn European and External Relations Committee Keith Brown Finance Committee Roseanna Cunningham Health and Sport Committee Joe FitzPatrick Justice Committee Aileen Campbell Local Government and Communities Committee Tricia Marwick Procedures Committee Alasdair Morgan Public Petitions Committee John Wilson Rural Affairs and Environment Committee Bill Kidd Standards and Public   Appointments Committee Bob Doris Subordinate Legislation Committee Christopher Harvie Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee Alasdair Allan

The next item of business is consideration of one Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-179, on substitution on committees.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following nominated committee substitutes, as permitted under Rule 6.3A— Scottish National Party  Audit Committee Sandra White Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee Nigel Don Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee Stefan Tymkewycz Equal Opportunities Committee Jamie Hepburn European and External Relations Committee Keith Brown Finance Committee Roseanna Cunningham Health and Sport Committee Joe FitzPatrick Justice Committee Aileen Campbell Local Government and Communities Committee Tricia Marwick Procedures Committee Alasdair Morgan Public Petitions Committee John Wilson Rural Affairs and Environment Committee Bill Kidd Standards and Public Appointments Committee Bob Doris Subordinate Legislation Committee Christopher Harvie Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee Alasdair Allan —[Bruce Crawford.]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time. I am afraid that I now have no choice other than to suspend the meeting.

Well done, Mr Fraser.

I thank the member for reading out his point of order very slowly. I hope that he does not mind if I give an equally slow and deliberate response. Seriously, I am grateful to him for giving notice of his point of order. Like him, I have checked the Official Report and I simply say to him that his correction is now a matter of record, as it will be in the Official Report . I still have to suspend the meeting until five o'clock.

Order. An awful lot of chatter is going on.

Question 1 was withdrawn by Michael Matheson. He and his wife have just had a baby and, on behalf of the chamber, I congratulate him.

As Kerelaw school has been mentioned, I call the constituency member involved, Irene Oldfather.

We have a constituency question from Duncan McNeil.

We have a further constituency question from Roseanna Cunningham.

We move on to question 6, which is from Bob Doris. [ Interruption. ] I apologise. The next question is Bill Butler's question 5; I was getting a little ahead of myself.

I call Bill Kidd, to be followed by Jim Tolson. Mr Tolson, I must ask you to keep your remarks to about two and a half minutes, if you could.

Yes, if the terms of the intervention have been breached. Ms Baillie made quite clear the basis on which she was taking the intervention, and Mr Hepburn made it equally clear that he was not prepared to accept it, so she was quite entitled to get back on her feet.

The minister is in his last minute.

No. I am sorry but the member has finished his speech.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-169, in the name of Patrick Harvie, on Trident.

It would be in order to do as Elaine Smith suggests, but it is only fair to point out that motions without notice can be accepted only at my discretion. She will be aware that I had to make very careful considerations last night. I should point out that I would not be minded to accept such a motion this morning.

One moment, Lord Foulkes. I also point out that there will obviously be opportunities for Elaine Smith to raise the issues that she wishes to raise in the normal course of debate.

George Foulkes will be aware that the Parliament has on many occasions debated matters that are reserved to Westminster. I am not sure that his point is a point of order—it is an issue that he should take up with his business manager, who is on the Parliamentary Bureau, which agrees the Parliament's business. We now move to the debate. Mr Harvie, you have seven minutes and time is tight.

There is just one question to be put as a result of today's business. The question is, that motion S3M-166, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on committee membership, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 112, Against 1, Abstentions 0.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees the membership of committees of the Parliament as follows:  Audit Committee Membership: Willie Coffey, Murdo Fraser, Charlie Gordon, Jim Hume, Stuart McMillan, Mary Mulligan, Dr Richard Simpson, Andrew Welsh Equal Opportunities Committee Membership: Helen Eadie, Marlyn Glen, Bill Kidd, Margaret Mitchell, Hugh O'Donnell, Elaine Smith, Sandra White, Bill Wilson European and External Relations Committee Membership: Jackie Baillie, Ted Brocklebank, Alasdair Morgan, Alex Neil, Irene Oldfather, John Park, Gil Paterson, Iain Smith Finance Committee Membership; Derek Brownlee, Joe FitzPatrick, James Kelly, Liam McArthur, Tom McCabe, Elaine Murray, Alex Neil, Andrew Welsh Public Petitions Committee Membership: Bashir Ahmad, Claire Baker, Angela Constance, Rhoda Grant, Robin Harper, Mr Frank McAveety, Tricia Marwick, Nanette Milne, John Farquhar Munro Procedures Committee Membership: Keith Brown, Cathie Craigie, Marlyn Glen, Jamie McGrigor, Christina McKelvie, Hugh O'Donnell, Dave Thompson Standards and Public Appointments Committee Membership: Keith Brown, Cathie Craigie, Marlyn Glen, Jamie McGrigor, Christina McKelvie, Hugh O'Donnell, Dave Thompson Subordinate Legislation Committee Membership: Jackson Carlaw, Helen Eadie, George Foulkes, Ian McKee, Gil Paterson, Elaine Smith, Mr Jamie Stone Justice Committee Membership: Bill Aitken, Bill Butler, Cathie Craigie, Nigel Don, Stuart McMillan, Paul Martin, Margaret Smith, John Wilson Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee Membership: Brian Adam, Gavin Brown, Iain Gray, Christopher Harvie, Marilyn Livingstone, Tavish Scott, Dave Thompson, David Whitton Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee Membership: Rob Gibson, Patrick Harvie, Alex Johnstone, Alison McInnes, Des McNulty, Cathy Peattie, David Stewart, Stefan Tymkewycz Health and Sport Committee Membership: Malcolm Chisholm, Ross Finnie, Karen Gillon, Christine Grahame, Lewis Macdonald, Ian McKee, Michael Matheson, Mary Scanlon Local Government and Communities Committee Membership: Alasdair Allan, Bob Doris, Kenneth Gibson, Johann Lamont, David McLetchie, Michael McMahon, Duncan McNeil, Jim Tolson Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee Membership: Aileen Campbell, Rob Gibson, Ken Macintosh, Christina McKelvie, Pauline McNeill, Jeremy Purvis, Elizabeth Smith, Karen Whitefield Rural Affairs and Environment Committee Membership: Richard Baker, Sarah Boyack, Roseanna Cunningham, Jamie Hepburn, Peter Peacock, Mike Rumbles, John Scott, Bill Wilson.

You must wind up now Mrs Eadie.

That is not a point of order. Mrs Eadie made it quite plain that she was not making a personal attack on the Conservative party. Minister, would you like to respond?

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-165, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 20 June 2007 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Executive Debate: Government's Objective for a Smarter Scotland followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 21 June 2007 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time— Education and Lifelong Learning; Europe, External Affairs and Culture 2.55 pm Ministerial Statement: Climate Change followed by Executive Debate: Housing followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 27 June 2007 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Executive Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 28 June 2007 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Executive Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time— Rural Affairs and the Environment;  Health and Wellbeing 2.55 pm Executive Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business.—[ Bruce Crawford ].  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of one Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-166, on committee membership.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the membership of committees of the Parliament as follows: Audit Committee Membership: Willie Coffey, Murdo Fraser, Charlie Gordon, Jim Hume, Stuart McMillan, Mary Mulligan, Dr Richard Simpson, Andrew Welsh Equal Opportunities Committee Membership: Helen Eadie, Marlyn Glen, Bill Kidd, Margaret Mitchell, Hugh O'Donnell, Elaine Smith, Sandra White, Bill Wilson European and External Relations Committee Membership: Jackie Baillie, Ted Brocklebank, Alasdair Morgan, Alex Neil, Irene Oldfather, John Park, Gil Paterson, Iain Smith Finance Committee Membership; Derek Brownlee, Joe FitzPatrick, James Kelly, Liam McArthur, Tom McCabe, Elaine Murray, Alex Neil, Andrew Welsh Public Petitions Committee Membership: Bashir Ahmad, Claire Baker, Angela Constance, Rhoda Grant, Robin Harper, Mr Frank McAveety, Tricia Marwick, Nanette Milne, John Farquhar Munro Procedures Committee Membership: Keith Brown, Cathie Craigie, Marlyn Glen, Jamie McGrigor, Christina McKelvie, Hugh O'Donnell, Dave Thompson Standards and Public Appointments Committee Membership: Keith Brown, Cathie Craigie, Marlyn Glen, Jamie McGrigor, Christina McKelvie, Hugh O'Donnell, Dave Thompson Subordinate Legislation Committee Membership: Jackson Carlaw, Helen Eadie, George Foulkes, Ian McKee, Gil Paterson, Elaine Smith, Mr Jamie Stone Justice Committee Membership: Bill Aitken, Bill Butler, Cathie Craigie, Nigel Don, Stuart McMillan, Paul Martin, Margaret Smith, John Wilson Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee Membership: Brian Adam, Gavin Brown, Iain Gray, Christopher Harvie, Marilyn Livingstone, Tavish Scott, Dave Thompson, David Whitton Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee Membership: Rob Gibson, Patrick Harvie, Alex Johnstone,  Alison McInnes, Des McNulty, Cathy Peattie, David Stewart, Stefan Tymkewycz Health and Sport Committee Membership: Malcolm Chisholm, Ross Finnie, Karen Gillon, Christine Grahame, Lewis Macdonald, Ian McKee, Michael Matheson, Mary Scanlon Local Government and Communities Committee Membership: Alasdair Allan, Bob Doris, Kenneth Gibson, Johann Lamont, David McLetchie, Michael McMahon, Duncan McNeil, Jim Tolson Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee Membership: Aileen Campbell, Rob Gibson, Ken Macintosh, Christina McKelvie, Pauline McNeill, Jeremy Purvis, Elizabeth Smith, Karen Whitefield Rural Affairs and Environment Committee Membership: Richard Baker, Sarah Boyack, Roseanna Cunningham, Jamie Hepburn, Peter Peacock, Mike Rumbles, John Scott, Bill Wilson.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]

Order.

No. The minister is in his last minute, I am afraid.

I am not sure that I was here for the part of the debate to which you refer, Ms Brankin, but that is a matter entirely for the minister.

The minister will take questions on the issues raised in her statement. I will allow about 30 minutes for questions, after which we will move to the next item of business. I intend to fit in more questions than were asked the last time that we had a statement and questions, so I ask members to keep their questions as brief as possible and the opening questions to within the time limits that I have intimated, if that is at all possible.

Order.

Order. Excuse me one moment, Mr Henry. The minister's statement was received with courtesy; I ask that questions be accorded the same courtesy.

That was about six general questions and two specific questions.

We come to open questions, which—I repeat—should be brief and to the point.

Please be brief.

I apologise to the number of members who pressed their buttons but whom I was unable to call because of time pressures.

I thank the member for notice of his point of order. In response, I refer, once again, to the good practice guidance on announcements by the Scottish Executive and repeat that major policy announcements should in the first instance always be made to the Parliament. However, in this specific case, I have reviewed the press coverage in some detail since the weekend, and can find no evidence that the Executive has breached the terms of the guidance. Moreover, I have not come across any knowledge of any press briefings that have been given. That said, I urge all members to have  regard to the guidance and to note that I expect it to be adhered to at all times.

Again, I thank the member for notice of his point of order, which is now a matter of record. However, as I am sure that he is aware, the Scottish ministerial code to which he refers is a matter for the First Minister, not for me. Accordingly, I advise the member to take the matter up directly with the First Minister.

The next item of business is a statement by Fiona Hyslop on higher education. As the minister will take questions at the end of her statement, there should be no interventions.

Good afternoon. The first item of business this afternoon is time for reflection. I am pleased to welcome as our time for reflection leader Colin Symes of the Community Church, Edinburgh.

There are nine questions to be put as a result of today's business. In relation to this morning's debate on sustainable public transport systems, I should point out that if the amendment in the name of Stewart Stevenson is agreed to, the amendment in the name of Tavish Scott will fall. The first question is, that amendment S3M-127.3.1, in the name of Alex Johnstone, which seeks to amend amendment S3M-127.3, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, on sustainable public transport systems, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 65, Against 60, Abstentions 1.  Amendment agreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-127.3, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, as amended, which seeks to amend motion S3M-127, in the name of Des McNulty, on a sustainable public transport system, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 65, Against 62, Abstentions 0.  Amendment agreed to.

The amendment in the name of Tavish Scott falls. The next question is, that motion S3M-127, in the name of Des McNulty, on sustainable public transport systems, as amended, be agreed to. Are we all agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 66, Against 59, Abstentions 0.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament recognises the different policy positions of various political parties; notes that the Scottish Government has invited the Auditor General to consider the approach to financial and risk management taken in the preparation of the Edinburgh Tram and Edinburgh Airport Rail Link proposals, and welcomes the fact that ministers will report to the Parliament on this matter before the summer recess and calls on the Scottish Executive to bring forward a motion for parliamentary debate within its own time on these issues.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-126.3, in the name of Fiona Hyslop, which seeks to amend motion S3M-126, in the name of Hugh Henry, on skills and vocational education, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 49, Against 78, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-126.1, in the name of Murdo Fraser, which seeks to amend motion S3M-126, in the name of Hugh Henry, on skills and vocational education, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 62, Against 64, Abstentions 1.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that amendment S3M-126.2, in the name of Jeremy Purvis, which seeks to amend motion S2M-126, in the name of Hugh Henry, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 16, Against 110, Abstentions 0.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-126, in the name of Hugh Henry, on skills and vocational education, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 63, Against 64, Abstentions 0.  Motion disagreed to.

The final question is, that motion S3M-137, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the establishment of committees, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament shall establish committees of the Parliament as follows:  Name of Committee: Audit Remit: Set out in Rule 6.7 Number of members: 8 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Labour Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party. Name of Committee: Equal Opportunities Remit: Set out in Rule 6.9 Number of members: 8 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Labour Party. Name of Committee: European and External Relations Remit: Set out in Rule 6.8 Number of members: 8 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Labour Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party. Name of Committee: Finance Remit: Set out in Rule 6.6 Number of members: 8 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Labour Party. Name of Committee: Public Petitions Remit: Set out in Rule 6.10 Number of members: 9 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Labour Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish Liberal Democrat Party. Name of Committee: Procedures Remit: Set out in Rule 6.4 Number of members: 7 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Labour Party. Name of Committee: Standards and Public Appointments Remit: Set out in Rule 6.5 Number of members: 7 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Labour Party. Name of Committee: Subordinate Legislation Remit: Set out in Rule 6.11 Number of members: 7 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish Liberal Democrat Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party.  Name of Committee: Justice Remit: To consider and report on (a) the administration of criminal and civil justice, community safety, and other matters falling within the responsibility of the Cabinet Secretary for Justice and (b) the functions of the Lord Advocate, other than as head of the systems of criminal prosecution and investigation of deaths in Scotland. Number of members: 8 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Labour Party. Duration: For the whole session of the Parliament Name of Committee: Economy, Energy and Tourism Remit: To consider and report on the Scottish economy, enterprise, energy, tourism and all other matters falling within the responsibility of the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth apart from those covered by the remits of the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change and the Local Government and Communities Committees. Number of members: 8 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish Liberal Democrat Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party. Duration: For the whole session of the Parliament Name of Committee: Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Remit: To consider and report on matters relating to transport, infrastructure and climate change falling within the remit of the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth. Number of members: 8 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish Green Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Labour Party. Duration: For the whole session of the Parliament Name of Committee: Health and Sport Remit: To consider and report on (a) health policy and the NHS in Scotland and other matters falling within the responsibility of the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing and (b) matters relating to sport falling within the responsibility of the Minister for Communities and Sport. Number of members: 8 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish Liberal Democrat Party. Duration: For the whole session of the Parliament Name of Committee: Local Government and Communities Remit: To consider and report on (a) the financing and delivery of local government and local services and planning; and (b) housing, regeneration, anti-poverty measures and other matters (apart from sport) falling within the responsibility of the Minister for Communities and Sport. Number of members: 8 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Labour Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party. Duration: For the whole session of the Parliament Name of Committee: Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Remit: To consider and report on (a) further and higher education, lifelong learning, schools, pre-school care, skills and other matters falling within the responsibility of the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning; and (b) matters relating to culture and the arts falling within the responsibility of the Minister for Europe, External Affairs and Culture. Number of members: 8 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Labour Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party. Duration: For the whole session of the Parliament Name of Committee: Rural Affairs and Environment Remit: To consider and report on agriculture, fisheries and rural development and other matters falling within the responsibility of the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment. Number of members: 8 Convenership: The Convener will be a member of the Scottish National Party and the Deputy Convener will be a member of the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party. Duration: For the whole session of the Parliament

That concludes decision time. I thank members for making the Presiding Officer a very happy man.

The First Minister will now take questions on the issues raised in his statement. I intend to allow one question from each of the main parties, after which we will see what time allows.

Order.

I said that I would take one question from each of the main parties, so there will be a final question from Alex Neil.

I will deal with Margo MacDonald's point of order first, if I may. The matter is one that is entirely for me, and I am not minded to accept such a motion. You could lodge such a motion in your own time, Ms MacDonald. George Foulkes has a point of order.

I am glad to be a step ahead of you, sir.

The next item of business is a statement by the First Minister on international judicial co-operation. The First Minister will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions during it.

Before we proceed to themed question time, I advise members that I have received a request from the First Minister to make an urgent statement later today. As I am satisfied that the matter is sufficiently urgent, I have agreed under rule 13.2.2 to allow the statement to be made at approximately 4.45 pm. That will allow time for a short statement from the First Minister and contributions and questions from the four main parties.

To overcome, perhaps, some of the imbalance that arose during yesterday's questions on the minister's statement, I call Elaine Smith.

We move to questions on rural affairs and the environment.

With respect to the member, the breadth of a ministerial remit is not my affair, although the selection of questions is. I am afraid that I often have difficult decisions to make, and I have made them.

The allocation of questions is due to be reviewed in about six months' time, but I am willing to take that suggestion away and consider what you have said.

Before the minister replies, I remind all members to speak through the chair.

Ask a question, please.

Please be brief, Mr Hepburn.

We now warmly move to Murdo Fraser.

Order.

Order.

Order, please.

Ask a question, please.

I wish Mr McKee good luck when he gets home tonight.

Order.

That brings us to the end of First Minister's question time.

I am well aware of the dissatisfaction of several members who wished to ask questions on yesterday's statement. I share their concern. I am actively considering the matter with a view to the future. It was unsatisfactory, and I accept entirely that back benchers were hard done by. We will look at that with a view to future procedure.

So far, I have followed the practice of previous sessions, which seems to have met with members' acceptance.

Well, that is what I have been doing. There is no rule to say that First Minister's question time has to go on until half past 12.

Give me a minute, Mr Neil. You will understand that, at an early stage in First Minister's question time, one has no idea who will want to ask a supplementary question later on.

I think that there is a degree of exaggeration in Mr Neil's point. I understand that the situation is not as he describes it, but I will reflect on that.

I call Margo MacDonald.

Feel free not to ask it.

The member has made it quite clear that he is not giving way.

The minister has made it quite clear that he will take no more interventions.

Too many comments are being made from a sedentary position. I would like fewer, please.

Good morning. The first item of business is a debate on motion S3M-127, in the name of Des McNulty, on sustainable public transport systems. I intend to keep all speakers strictly to time.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-125, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 13 June 2007 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Ministerial Statement: Higher Education followed by Executive Debate: Greener followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 14 June 2007 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Green Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time— Finance and Sustainable Growth Justice and Law Officers 2.55 pm Executive Debate: Health followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 20 June 2007 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Executive Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 21 June 2007 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time— Education and Lifelong Learning Europe, External Affairs and Culture  2.55 pm Executive Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

There are no questions to be put as a result of today's business.

That request is perfectly reasonable and we will look into it. I cannot answer at the moment, but we will let you know the results of our investigations.

Order. Members and those in the gallery must not applaud or interject in any other way, please, although I know that doing so is tempting.

The minister will take questions on the issues raised in her statement. I intend to allow around 30 minutes for questions, after which we will take the next item of business.

Mr Kerr—please.

We move to open questions, which I hope will be kept concise. If the answers are also concise, we will fit in as many members as we can.

Would you be brief, please, Miss Campbell?

I apologise profusely, particularly to Margaret Mitchell but also to all other members who wished to ask questions, as we have run out of time. The truth of the matter is that the longer members take to ask their questions, the fewer questions we can fit in. There will now be a brief interlude to allow members to change seats.

I thank the member for the notice of his point of order, and am pleased that he accepts my right not to select the question that he lodged earlier today. As the member is no doubt aware, it has been the practice of my predecessors not to get into discussions on the reasons for the selection or non-selection of questions, and I do not intend to alter that practice in any way. As for receiving answers to his questions, he might like to take the opportunity that is presented by tomorrow's debate to seek responses from the Executive.

The next item of business is a statement by Nicola Sturgeon on the future of accident and emergency units at Ayr hospital and Monklands hospital. The minister will take questions at the end of the statement, so there should be no interventions.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our leader today is Mark Greene from the London Institute for Contemporary Christianity.

There are two questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that amendment S3M-93.2, in the name of Des McNulty, which seeks to amend motion S3M-93, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, on the abolition of bridge tolls, be agreed to.  Amendment agreed to.

The second question is, that motion S3M-93, in the name of Stewart Stevenson, on the abolition of bridge tolls, as amended, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 120, Against 0, Abstentions 2.  Motion, as amended, agreed to.  Resolved,  That the Parliament, in accepting that the people of Fife and Tayside should not be disadvantaged by the retention of tolls on the Forth and Tay road bridges, requires that consultation aimed at bringing forward proposals leading to the removal of the tolls as soon as practicable also ensures that traffic management and safety issues on the Forth road bridge are dealt with and that any employees affected are treated with dignity and respect; further requires that the government's proposals set out clearly what the financial consequences of the removal of tolls on the transport budget are and outline funding options for the vital replacement Forth crossing, and requires that, as any additional vehicle traffic increases congestion problems in Edinburgh and the wider region, existing commitments to trams and Edinburgh Airport Rail which have already been scrutinised and received parliamentary approval should not be arbitrarily delayed or cancelled and that all future major transport project proposals be properly costed, evaluated and prioritised.

That concludes decision time.  Meeting closed at 17:05.

With the greatest respect, I do not think that that is a point of order. I am sure that, in the consensual spirit with which the Government has approached the matter, it would be open to any approach that you make. On the subject of points of order, I undertook to respond to the point of order that Margo MacDonald raised at the end of First Minister's question time. I have to say that the Executive is bound by acts of the Scottish Parliament which, under section 28(1) of the Scotland Act 1998, are laws. The 1998 act also provides that certain resolutions of the Scottish Parliament—for example, a tax-varying resolution made under section 73(2) and a resolution based on a motion of no confidence made under section 47(3)—shall have special effect. In other circumstances, a resolution of the Parliament cannot place a legal obligation on the Scottish Executive. Normally, such resolutions do not have the force of law and therefore cannot bind the Executive to any course of action.

I return that respect, Ms MacDonald. I think that I have laid out quite clearly what has been said. We are now entering the realms of the hypothetical, and we will deal with the issue if it comes before me again. For the time being, I have made the chair's position quite clear.

Before Mr Swinney responds, I remind members to address their remarks through the chair. If we get it right now, I will not need to say this every day.

Good afternoon. The next item of business is a statement by Jim Mather on the United Kingdom energy white paper and Scotland. The minister will take questions at the end of his statement, so there should be no interventions during it.

We come now to questions from back-bench members. More people have pressed their request-to-speak buttons than we can probably accommodate in the time available. Therefore, the more concise the questions and, indeed, the answers, the more people we will fit in.

Order.

Ask a question, please.

Jack McConnell can have one more question, if he is as brief as possible.

There are two constituency questions.

I thank Margo MacDonald for that point of order. Given the issue involved, I hope that she will forgive me if on this occasion I do not give an immediate reply. I will think about it and come back to you later in the day if I may. That brings us to the end of First Minister's questions. Before I suspend the meeting, I remind all members—although I am sure that I do not have to—that there is a camera in the room and that we are about to meet for a complete Parliament photograph. If members remain in the chamber, it will all be over as fast as possible.

Ask a question, please.

If we can have a brief answer, we have just got time for question 7.

Before we begin First Minister's question time, I am sure the whole Parliament will join me in expressing our sadness at the death of the first lady of Malawi, Mrs Ethel Mutharika, who died last Monday. With the Parliament's permission, I intend to write to President Mutharika to offer our condolences.

Good morning. The first item of business today is a debate on the rural development programme.

Before the minister answers, I remind members to address all remarks through the chair.

The next item of business is consideration of two Parliamentary Bureau motions. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-89, on the office of the clerk, and motion S3M-90, on rule 2.3.1.  Motions moved,  That the Parliament agrees that between 1 June 2007 and 31 August 2008, the Office of the Clerk will be open on all days except: Saturdays and Sundays, 30 November 2007, 24 December (pm), 25 and 26 December 2007, 1 and 2 January 2008, 21 and 24 March 2008, 5 May, 23 and 26 May 2008. That the Parliament agrees the following dates under Rule 2.3.1: 30 June - 2 September 2007 (inclusive), 6 - 21 October 2007 (inclusive), 22 December 2007 - 4 January 2008 (inclusive), 9 - 17 February 2008 (inclusive), 29 March - 13 April 2008 (inclusive) and 28 June - 31 August 2008 (inclusive).—[ Bruce Crawford .]

There are two questions to be put as a result of today's business. The first question is, that motion S3M-89, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on the office of the clerk, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that between 1 June 2007 and 31 August 2008, the Office of the Clerk will be open on all days except: Saturdays and Sundays, 30 November 2007, 24 December (pm), 25 and 26 December 2007, 1 and 2 January 2008, 21 and 24 March 2008, 5 May, 23 and 26 May 2008.

The second question is, that motion S3M-90, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on rule 2.3.1, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees the following dates under Rule 2.3.1: 30 June - 2 September 2007 (inclusive), 6 - 21 October 2007 (inclusive), 22 December 2007 - 4 January 2008 (inclusive), 9 - 17 February 2008 (inclusive), 29 March - 13 April 2008 (inclusive) and 28 June - 31 August 2008 (inclusive).  Meeting closed at 17:02.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-87, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a revised business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following revision to the programme of business for Thursday 31 May 2007— after, 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions replace, followed by Executive Business with, followed by Executive Debate: Rural Development Programme—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

The next item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-88, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 6 June 2007 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Ministerial Statement: Future of Accident and Emergency Units at Ayr and Monklands Hospitals followed by Executive Debate: Safer and Stronger followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 7 June 2007 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Labour Party Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time— Health and Wellbeing; Rural Affairs and the Environment followed by Establishment of Committees followed by Executive Debate: Sex Offenders  followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Wednesday 13 June 2007 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Executive Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 14 June 2007 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Executive Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time— Finance and Sustainable Growth; Justice and Law Officers followed by Executive Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

Not quite, in fact—but it will be soon.

Just before the member answers, I advise members to address their remarks to each other through the chair.

The member is in her last minute.

You should be winding up now.

You should finish now, Ms Alexander.

You must finish now.

I say to opening speakers that if they consistently overrun their time they will eliminate a back bencher from speaking.

Mr Neil makes a fair point. However, at the end of the day, it is up to me to determine the order of debate.

One minute.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is time for reflection. Our leader today is Pastor Paul Coventry of Stranraer Baptist church. I am delighted to invite him to lead our first time for reflection in the Parliament's third session.

The next item of business is a debate on a wealthier and fairer Scotland.

Good afternoon. The first item of business is a debate on the approach to government.

I am sorry, Mr Swinney, but I must ask you to stop. There are too many conversations taking place around the chamber. I do not appreciate it if I cannot hear the speaker and I would appreciate it if those conversations would cease.

No. I am sorry, but the minister is winding up.

The question is, that motion S3M-67, in the name of the First Minister, on the appointment of law officers, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament notes that Elish Angiolini QC holds the office of the Lord Advocate on the recommendation of the Parliament agreed to on 5 October 2006 (S2M-4924) and agrees that it be recommended to Her Majesty that  Frank Mulholland QC be appointed as Solicitor General for Scotland.

I add my personal congratulations to Elish Angiolini and Frank Mulholland on their appointments and wish them every success. Before we move to the next item of business, I advise members that an error has been made in section A of the Business Bulletin , which should specify, in line with the agreed business motion, that the Executive debate on the approach to government will commence at 2.15. Section A is being reprinted. Business this morning will be suspended on conclusion of the ministerial statement and questions on ship-to-ship oil transfer.

Good morning. The first item of business is the selection of four members for appointment to the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body. Copies of guidance explaining the voting procedure to be followed have been placed on each member's desk. I have received four valid nominations for appointment to the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body. I ask all candidates, as their names are announced, to make themselves known to the chamber. In alphabetical order, the nominees are: Alex Johnstone, Tom McCabe, Tricia Marwick, and Mike Pringle. As the number of candidates is equal to the number of vacant positions on the SPCB, I invite members to agree that there be a single vote to elect all the candidates. If any member objects to a single question being put, please say so now. There being no objection, the question is, that the following members be selected for appointment to the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body: Alex Johnstone, Tom McCabe, Tricia Marwick, and Mike Pringle.  Members voted.

The result of the vote is: For 103, Against 0, Abstentions 0. As a majority of members has voted in favour, Alex Johnstone, Tom McCabe, Tricia Marwick and Mike Pringle are duly selected for appointment to the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body. I congratulate the members on their appointment. [ Applause. ]

The next item of business is consideration of motion S3M-67, in the name of the First Minister, on the appointment of law officers.

The next item of business is consideration of a Parliamentary Bureau motion. I ask Bruce Crawford to move motion S3M-62, on a suspension of standing orders.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees that Rule 5.6.1(c) of Standing Orders be suspended for the purposes of Members' Business on Wednesday 23, Thursday 24, Wednesday 30 and Thursday 31 May 2007.—[ Bruce Crawford .]

The question on the motion will be put at decision time.

There is one question to be put as a result of today's business. The question is, that motion S3M-62, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on a suspension of standing orders, be agreed to.  Motion agreed to,  That the Parliament agrees that Rule 5.6.1(c) of Standing Orders be suspended for the purposes of Members' Business on Wednesday 23, Thursday 24, Wednesday 30 and Thursday 31 May 2007.

That concludes decision time.  Meeting closed at 16:32.

That brings us to the end of questions on the future of the Post Office. I apologise to members whom we did not have time to call.

Now that the party leaders have asked their questions, we will move to open questions. More members than can be called have pressed their buttons, so I ask members to keep their questions as brief as possible and perhaps the answers might reflect the nature of the questions.

I thank you both for setting a perfect example.

I apologise for the lack of notice given in calling Patrick Harvie, who will be followed by Tricia Marwick.

The First Minister will now take questions on the issues raised by his statement. I intend to allow approximately 45 minutes for questions, after which we will move on to the next item of business. It would be extremely helpful if members who wish to ask questions pressed their request-to-speak buttons now.

I welcome Dr Simpson back to the chamber and say that I hope that his name will be in the caption when he appears on television rather than mine, as used to happen all those years ago. I thank Dr Simpson for prior notice of his point of order. I refer members to the good practice guidance on announcements by the Scottish Executive that the Presiding Officer issued in the first session. As has long been the case, under that guidance major policy announcements by the Executive should be made to the Parliament in the first instance and should not be made through the media. I take that principle seriously. However, while I have no knowledge of what the First Minister is about to say, I have considered this morning's press coverage and I am satisfied that it appears to contain nothing that was not previously in the public domain in relation to this matter. I also understand that the Executive provided parties with the text of today's statement in advance. I am, therefore, satisfied that, on this occasion, no breach of the guidance has occurred.

The next item of business is a statement by the First Minister on the Government's priorities. The First Minister will take questions at the end of his statement, therefore there should be no interventions.

The first item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-61, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees the following programme of business— Wednesday 23 May 2007 2.30 pm Business Motion followed by First Minister's Statement: the Government's Priorities followed by Ministerial Statement: Future of the Post Office followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 4.30 pm Decision Time Thursday 24 May 2007 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Election of Members of the Parliamentary Corporation followed by Motion of the First Minister: Law Officers followed by Ministerial Statement: Ship-to-Ship Oil Transfer 2.15 pm Executive Debate: the Approach to Government followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Wednesday 30 May 2007 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Executive Debate: Wealthier and Fairer followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Thursday 31 May 2007 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Executive Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Ministerial Statement: UK Energy White Paper and Scotland  followed by Executive Debate: Transport followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time Wednesday 6 June 2007 2.30 pm Time for Reflection followed by Executive Business followed by Business Motion followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed by Members' Business Thursday 7 June 2007 9.15 am Parliamentary Bureau Motions followed by Executive Business 11.40 am General Question Time 12.00 noon First Minister's Question Time 2.15 pm Themed Question Time followed by Executive Business followed by Parliamentary Bureau Motions 5.00 pm Decision Time followed b y Members' Business.—[ Bruce Crawford .]  Motion agreed to.

You do not have to take the opportunity that I am affording you. However, I felt that you might want to respond to the debate.

I understand that the Conservative and Liberal Democrat parties wish to withdraw their amendments. Is that the case?

Does any member object to those amendments being withdrawn?

Which amendment do you wish to support?

The question is, that amendment S3M-26.1, in the name of Tavish Scott, which seeks to amend motion S3M-26, in the name of the First Minister, on the appointment of Scottish ministers, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 1, Against 49, Abstentions 73.  Amendment disagreed to.

The next question is, that motion S3M-26, in the name of the First Minister, on the appointment of Scottish ministers, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 49, Against 0, Abstentions 75.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that Nicola Sturgeon, John Swinney, Kenny MacAskill, Fiona Hyslop and Richard Lochhead be appointed as Ministers.

The next question is, that motion S3M-27, in the name of the First Minister, on the appointment of junior Scottish ministers, be agreed to. Are we agreed?

There will be a division.

The result of the division is: For 49, Against 0, Abstentions 75.  Motion agreed to.  That the Parliament agrees that Bruce Crawford, Linda Fabiani, Jim Mather, Stewart Stevenson, Maureen Watt, Adam Ingram, Shona Robison, Stewart Maxwell, Fergus Ewing and Michael Russell be appointed as junior Scottish Ministers.

As the Parliament has agreed to the First Minister's recommendations, he may now invite Her Majesty to approve the appointment of Bruce Crawford, Linda Fabiani, Jim Mather, Stewart Stevenson, Maureen Watt, Adam Ingram, Shona Robison, Stewart Maxwell, Fergus Ewing and Michael Russell as junior ministers.  Meeting closed at 11:52.

It would be right to offer the First Minister an opportunity to respond to the debate before we consider the amendments.

Good morning. The first item of business is consideration of motions S3M-26 and S3M-27, in the name of the First Minister, on the appointment of Scottish ministers and junior Scottish ministers. When I invite the First Minister to move motion S3M-26, on the appointment of Scottish ministers, I will also ask him to speak to both the motions. I then intend to invite members to speak to and move the amendments that I have selected to motion S3M-26, on the appointment of Scottish ministers. Thereafter, I will invite the First Minister formally to move motion S3M-27, on the appointment of junior Scottish ministers, to which there are no amendments.

I thank everyone for making this a successful selection process.  Meeting closed at 11:23.

I thank all the candidates for their speeches. We move on to voting. Members should ensure that their card is inserted correctly in their console. I remind members that they must vote once only and must use only their yes button. If any member casts more than one vote, their votes will be treated as spoiled. Members who wish to record an abstention will have an opportunity to do so at the end of voting for candidates. As usual, members will have 30 seconds in which to cast their vote. The first vote is for Annabel Goldie. Members who wish to cast their vote for Annabel Goldie should vote yes now.  Members voted.

Voting time has ended. There will be a slight delay between each vote. The second vote is for Jack McConnell. Members who wish to cast their vote for Jack McConnell should vote yes now.  Members voted.

The third vote is for Alex Salmond. Members who wish to cast their vote for Alex Salmond should vote yes now.  Members voted.

The fourth vote is for Nicol Stephen. Members who wish to cast their vote for Nicol Stephen should vote yes now.  Members voted.

That concludes the votes for all candidates. The next vote is for any members who have not yet voted and who wish to record an abstention. Members who wish to abstain should vote yes now.  Members voted.

That concludes this round of voting. There will be a break of up to five minutes while the votes are verified. In the first round of voting in the selection of Parliament's nominee for First Minister, the number of votes cast for each candidate was: Annabel Goldie 16, Jack McConnell 46, Alex Salmond 49, Nicol Stephen 16, Abstentions 1. There were no spoiled votes.

Accordingly, as no candidate has received an overall majority of the votes cast, and as Annabel Goldie and Nicol Stephen have received the fewest votes, Annabel Goldie and Nicol Stephen are eliminated from the election and a further round of voting will take place with the following candidates, in alphabetical order: Jack McConnell and Alex Salmond. The first vote in the second round of voting is for Jack McConnell. Members who wish to cast their vote for Jack McConnell should vote yes now.  Members voted.

The next vote is for Alex Salmond. Members who wish to cast their vote for Alex Salmond should vote yes now.  Members voted.

That concludes the vote for all candidates. The next vote is for any members who have not yet voted and who wish to record an abstention. Members wishing to abstain should press their yes button now.  Members voted.

That concludes this round of voting. Again, there will be a short break of up to five minutes while the votes are verified. In the second round of voting in the selection of Parliament's nominee for First Minister, the number of votes cast for each candidate was as follows: Jack McConnell 46, Alex Salmond 49, Abstentions 33.

As the result is valid, and as Alex Salmond has received more votes than the total number of votes for all the other candidates, I declare that Alex Salmond is selected as the Parliament's nominee for appointment as First Minister. [ Applause. ] As required by the Scotland Act 1998, I shall now recommend to Her Majesty that she appoint Alex Salmond as the First Minister. I take this opportunity to record formally my congratulations to Alex Salmond on his appointment.

The next item of business is the selection of the Parliament's nominee for First Minister. I have received four valid nominations for appointment as First Minister. In alphabetical order, the nominations are: Annabel Goldie, Jack McConnell, Alex Salmond and Nicol Stephen. I ask all candidates to make themselves known to the chamber. Copies of the announcement that was published in today's Business Bulletin , explaining the procedures to be followed this morning, have been placed on each member's desk. I will ask each nominee in turn to speak in support of their candidacy for up to five minutes. After all nominees have spoken, members will be asked to cast their vote for their preferred candidate. A separate vote will be called for each candidate. Once all the voting has been completed, there will be a short break of a few minutes while the result is verified. I will then announce the result of the voting. A candidate will be elected if an overall majority is obtained. If no majority is obtained, the candidate or candidates with the smallest number of votes will be eliminated and we will proceed to a further round of voting. I ask members to note that, if we have a vote between only two candidates, all that is required for success is a simple majority for one of those candidates. Members may wish to record an abstention. Under rule 11.11.2, no account of those votes will be taken in establishing whether a simple majority has been achieved. We now enter the selection process.

The first item of business is consideration of business motion S3M-14, in the name of Bruce Crawford, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, setting out a business programme. I ask any member who wishes to speak against the motion to press their request-to-speak button now.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament agrees— (a) the following programme of business— Wednesday 16 May 2007 10.00 am Business Motion followed by Selection of the Parliament's nominee for First Minister Thursday 17 May 2007 11.15 am First Minister's Motion to appoint Scottish Ministers followed by First Minister's Motion to appoint Junior Scottish Ministers (b) that the period for lodging First Minister's Questions for First Minister's Question Time on 31 May 2007 should end at 4.00 pm on Thursday 24 May; (c) that the period for Members to submit their names for selection for General Question Time on 31 May 2007 should end at 4.00 pm on Thursday 17 May; and (d) that the period for Members to submit their names for selection for General and Themed Question Times on 7 June 2007 should end at 4.00 pm on Thursday 24 May.—[ Bruce Crawford. ]  Motion agreed to.

Under rule 4.1.3 of standing orders, a period of 30 minutes must elapse between the closure of nominations for First Minister and the start of the voting period for selection of a nominee. The nomination period is now closed, so I suspend the meeting until 10.30, when the voting period will commence.

Voting will now begin. You know the procedure by now.  Members voted by secret ballot.

In the first round of voting in the election of the second Deputy Presiding Officer, the total number of votes cast was 126. The number of votes cast for each  candidate was: Trish Godman 69, Margaret Smith 48, Jamie Stone 8. Accordingly, as Trish Godman has received more votes than the total number of votes received by the other candidates and as more than 25 per cent of members voted, Trish Godman is elected as the second Deputy Presiding Officer. [ Applause. ] Before I close the meeting, I congratulate the successful members, Alasdair Morgan and Trish Godman, on their election. I thank everybody who has taken part in the elections, in particular Margo MacDonald, whom I should have thanked earlier. I am grateful to her for making an election for the post of Presiding Officer and giving the Parliament the choice that it deserves. [ Applause. ] I now close the first meeting of the third session of the Scottish Parliament.  Meeting closed at 17:22.

The third voting period is now open.  Members voted by secret ballot.

In the third round of voting in the election of the first Deputy Presiding Officer, the total number of votes cast was 126. The number of votes cast for each candidate was: Trish Godman 49, Alasdair Morgan 77. There were no spoiled papers or abstentions. Accordingly, as Alasdair Morgan received more votes than the other candidate and as more than 25 per cent of members voted, Alasdair Morgan is elected as a Deputy Presiding Officer of the Scottish Parliament. [ Applause. ] Voting rounds will now begin for the election of the second Deputy Presiding Officer, involving all three candidates who were unsuccessful in the election of the first Deputy Presiding Officer. As you may suspect, there will now be a short break while ballot papers are printed.

Just before I invite members to vote again, I should have said that we had four spoiled papers in the first round of voting. Believe it or not, they were caused by people voting more than once. I am quite aware that we have heard that before, but I suggest to members  that they should vote for only one candidate on the paper. The next voting period is now open.  Members voted by secret ballot.

In the second round of voting in the election of the first Deputy Presiding Officer, the total number of votes cast was 127. The number of votes cast for each candidate was: Trish Godman 49, Alasdair Morgan 61, Margaret Smith 16. As no candidate has received an overall majority, Margaret Smith is now eliminated and we go forward to a further round of voting, with Trish Godman and Alasdair Morgan as the candidates. I suspend the meeting for five minutes while ballot papers are printed.

The next item of business is the election of two Deputy Presiding Officers. I have received four valid nominations for the position of Deputy Presiding Officer. I will now announce the nominations and ask the candidates, as their names are announced, to make themselves known to the chamber. In alphabetical order, the nominations are Trish Godman, Alasdair Morgan, Margaret Smith and Jamie Stone. The election will again proceed in accordance with rule 11.9 of standing orders, with the same voting procedures as those used in the election of the Presiding Officer. If no member receives an absolute majority in the first round of voting, there will be subsequent rounds. That procedure will also be followed for the election of the second Deputy Presiding Officer. When the first Deputy Presiding Officer is elected, voting rounds will begin for the election of the second Deputy Presiding Officer, involving all candidates who were unsuccessful in the election of the first Deputy Presiding Officer. I declare the election of the first Deputy Presiding Officer open.  Members voted by secret ballot.

In the first round of voting in the election of the first Deputy Presiding Officer, the number of votes cast for each candidate was: Trish Godman 47, Alasdair Morgan 55, Margaret Smith 12, Jamie Stone 8. As no candidate has achieved a clear majority, we will rerun the election with three candidates. Having received the lowest number of votes, Jamie Stone is eliminated. There will be a short break while new ballot papers are printed—I am afraid that that is inevitable.

Please believe me when I say that a very large part of me would give a lot to be walking out of there now instead of George. George's exit—as dignified as ever—seems a particularly harsh way for him to leave both the chamber and the office of Presiding Officer. He has served that office with great dignity, but also with honesty, compassion, wit, intelligence, patience and statesmanship. He has been a great servant of Scotland. I do not see his act as one to try to follow blindly, but he has set an impeccably high standard and he has been a shining example for all who follow in his footsteps. Some of you will have read that I was initially very reluctant to do that—and I was. I did not pursue this position before or during the election and it has come as something of a shock to the electorate of Galloway and Upper Nithsdale, who returned me less than two weeks ago with such a resounding majority. My initial reluctance to put my name forward for this post was born out of the concern that I would not be able to fulfil my commitment to that electorate as their constituency MSP. It was only at the end of last week that I fully persuaded myself that I would and, indeed, could undertake this vital role and simultaneously support and promote my constituents and my constituency. I know that I can and I will. It has not been an easy decision and sleep was a stranger to me for most of last week and this. I am told that I will probably have to get used to that. However, I was hugely bolstered and affected  by the large number of MSPs who contacted me last week and this to offer me their support. As I begin to take on this great responsibility—and the enormous honour that goes with it—of representing our Parliament, I thank you for that support whole-heartedly. Everyone I ask agrees that we are in for an interesting time. To make it slightly less interesting—for which I sometimes read contentious—at this stage, I will, like my predecessors, reluctantly suspend my party allegiance for as long as I serve in this office. Let us all remember that our electorate—the people of Scotland—want this new politics to work for them and that we have a duty to deliver what the electorate expect. I thank you for putting your faith in me and I look forward to working with each and every one of you as we seek to take this third session of the Scottish Parliament forward for the benefit of all our people. [ Applause. ]

I will do my utmost to live up to the generous and kind words that have been spoken. On Mr Stephen's comment about whether I will have an easy job, that is in members' hands, not mine. We move to the business of the positions of Deputy Presiding Officer. Nominations will open at 3.45. Members may collect nomination forms from the business team in room T1.03, which is located within the office of the chamber desk. Completed nomination forms should be returned to the business team no later than 4 o'clock, so members will have 15 minutes to fill them in and return them. When submitting nomination papers, candidates or their representatives may wish to provide the name of any member who will act as scrutineer on behalf of the candidate. I suspend this meeting until quarter past 4.

I will be as brief as I possibly can be. I congratulate Mark Ruskell on securing the debate. I have every intention of being as parochial as Roseanna Cunningham was—and indeed some other members—not in relation to Perthshire, but in relation to my constituency of Galloway and Upper Nithsdale. I will expand on a point that Chris Ballance rightly made about Stena Line moving from Stranraer up Loch Ryan to Cairnryan, as the minister is aware. That will leave a gap in the direct rail link, between Stranraer and Cairnryan. That might not seem like much of a gap—it is only 4 or 5 miles—but it is a big gap in terms of passenger comfort and convenience. People will have to get off the train or ferry and take a bus, which will be highly inconvenient. Talks have already taken place locally with bus companies about providing a service from Girvan down to Cairnryan. To me, that spells the possible end of a rail link south of Girvan. That would have bad consequences. My concern about what is known as the old military line from Stranraer to Cairnryan—the base still exists, so I do not think that it would be that huge a job—is not so much about what happens if we reopen it, but more about the possible consequences of not doing so. There is also the possibility of moving freight from road to rail. On that point, I would be happy  to stop incurring the wrath of Green party members, which is invoked every time that I stand up to call for improvements to the A75. I unashamedly do so every time that I can, and I look forward to continuing to do so from May. I will happily stop incurring that wrath if and when a future Scottish Executive starts to examine the possibility of reopening a freight line from Cairnryan or Stranraer to Dumfries. That project would take all the pressure off the A75. The pressure on that road is enormous. The Scottish Executive's own figures will show the very high percentage of heavy goods vehicles using that road. As other members have done, I emphasise the need to consider reopening stations such as Dunragit, which Chris Ballance mentioned, and Thornhill, which is on the existing Dumfries to Glasgow line. I believe that the travelling public are ready and willing to increase their use of rail transport. However, they rightly demand an infrastructure, and indeed a quality of service and convenience, that will allow and encourage them to do so.

I hear what the minister is saying, but can he confirm for the sake of clarity that he believes that the quality of educational provision, to which he referred, on the Crichton campus can be provided without the presence of the University of Glasgow?

I would have been perfectly happy if Murray Tosh had spoken next, but I am happy to step in. I congratulate Alasdair Morgan on securing the debate. Although the issue was debated only five weeks ago, that does not mean that the Crichton campus is further down the list of priorities in the region, half of which I represent. It would be very tempting and easy just to repeat the arguments that were made when Elaine Murray's motion was debated five weeks ago, but I will resist that temptation. Too many people have been hinting that the new university of the west of Scotland, which will be brought about by the merger of the University of Paisley and Bell College, will fill the gap that will be left by the University of Glasgow. However, although I applaud that merger and the new institution's commitment to the Crichton campus,  the fact remains that the Crichton needs the University of Glasgow if it is to remain a truly credible project. That is because the University of Glasgow provides the education that is necessary to allow local people to be educated and trained in the region to fulfil local needs. To put the matter simply, if our young have to go away for their education and training, they are far more likely to stay away. I can put the issue no better than by quoting a letter dated 9 March 2007 that was sent to the First Minister on behalf of Dumfries and Galloway's children's panel advisory committee. The letter states: "The Dumfries and Galloway Council is required to meet its statutory duties and to maintain appropriate service delivery to support the care and welfare of Children in this region. A range of national and local initiatives has been developed to address the shortage of qualified social work staff. The retention, recruitment and motivation of social work and social care staff is essential not only to sustain current child care arrangements but also to support the changes Scottish Ministers are driving forward and set out in the provisions of the Draft Children's Services (Scotland) Bill. A partnership agreement with the University of Glasgow Crichton Campus to facilitate the delivery of a Master of Arts (Social Sciences) with honours in Social Work was agreed in 2004. Integral to this partnership was that Dumfries and Galloway Council would provide funding for a full time University Teacher position." After continuing at considerable length on the importance of that aspect of the project, the letter finishes by stating: "The Children's Hearing System in Dumfries and Galloway and the Children of this region require the Scottish Executive and Scottish Ministers to demonstrate the cross cutting, innovative and flexible approach to ensuring that the University of Glasgow is supported to continue its important presence on the Crichton Campus as it is looking for all those involved with the care and welfare of Children to embrace the changes set out in 'Getting it Right for Every Child'. ...the Children of this region deserve our best efforts and I would request that collectively Scottish Ministers cut across departmental boundaries and seek to work in partnership with Glasgow University to secure the future of the Crichton Campus." As members will know, Dumfries and Galloway Council's social work department has had a pretty hard time recently following a damning report from the Social Work Inspection Agency. A major shake-up is taking place and some tough decisions are being taken. How much harder will those decisions and restructuring be if we cannot even train our local people locally? Things are happening at the Crichton. Only this morning, I was made aware of a new type of institution—a cross between a business school and a research centre—which will specialise in renewable energy, energy efficiency and sustainable products. That is an exciting, innovative and relevant development that wants to  be on the Crichton and that would—like the courses that are currently provided by the Crichton—be in touch with the region's needs. As Alasdair Morgan's motion suggests, it is imperative that we reverse the decision that has been made about student intake this September. Thus far, frankly, I think that ministers have promised much but delivered little despite having more than a year's warning of the crisis. The Parliament may be about to go into dissolution, but the Executive is not. Ministers can still act during April to keep the matter on the table. I am afraid that, locally, the Lib-Lab Administration is being seen to have let Dumfries and Galloway down. That may not be easily forgiven.

As the convener of the Rural Development Committee in those days, I put it on record that although the committee was in a huge dilemma, as Mike Rumbles said, the committee's unanimous recommendation was that the Executive should adopt SNH's proposals.

You will be relieved to hear that I will not require four minutes, because Brian Adam made clear the Standards and Public Appointments Committee's views and how we went about the exercise. Alasdair Morgan also clearly laid to rest some of the accusations against the committee. In his response to Mr Winetrobe's e-mail, which I am sorry that I did not receive, because for some reason Mr Winetrobe chose not to allow committee members sight of his e-mail, Mr Adam said: "The Committee also considered that although a similar provision still exists in Section 8 'Relationships Between MSPs' they felt that it was right in this context that members have a duty to be accessible to the people of the areas for which they have been elected and to represent their interests conscientiously ... and did not wish to recommend any change." As the committee's convener said, we held four consultation exercises and everything that we considered was in the open and a matter of public record. The whole exercise was in accordance with the two key principles of accessibility and accountability. In his e-mail to all members except members of the Standards and Public Appointments Committee, Mr Winetrobe said: "I hope that you will then vote to reject the motion, on the basis that the Committee's review of the existing Code has been fundamentally flawed ... and contrary to the Parliament's founding principles and normal working practices". I take great exception to that accusation. Like almost every other MSP who has the honour to serve in the Parliament, I hold our founding principles close and dear to my heart. I treat them with great respect and I try to refer to them as I go about my daily work, as I am sure that every member does. I would never vote for any measure that I thought would undermine or water down those principles and I take great exception to being accused of doing so.  I am disappointed that the SCVO and the churches appear to have been duped into blindly following Mr Winetrobe's accusations. I hope that they will be reassured by this short debate and I hope that members accept that every member of the committee acted out of a desire not to undermine but to strengthen and simplify the Parliament's founding principles, thus making it easier for all members to adhere to them.

The minister mentioned the academic strategy. Does he agree that, unless the University of Glasgow can be persuaded, cajoled or influenced to reverse its decision not to have an intake of students from the Crichton campus in September, such a strategy will barely be worth the paper that it is written on?

To ask the Scottish Executive what weight will be given to local objections when determining the location of Scotland's first marine national park. (S2O-12165)

The minister will be aware that the Scottish National Party—whose acronym, in this instance, appears to stand for "Stop the National Park"—has frequently drawn attention to  the significant levels of local objections in most candidate areas along the west coast. In view of that opposition, which the minister has just mentioned, will the minister care to save himself a lot of time and trouble by simply announcing that the park will be located in Dumfries and Galloway, where there have been few significant objections and where those of us who have the real interests of the region at heart would thoroughly welcome it?

It was not until late yesterday afternoon, or last night, that I discovered that I was to speak in this debate. Although I was not exactly thrilled at the amount of notice given to me by my esteemed friend and colleague, Bill Aitken, I was pleased to be asked to take part in a debate on the environment. I believe that we should take every opportunity to debate the environment—at that stage, I was very pleased that the Scottish National Party had lodged a motion on the issue. Members will understand that, at that stage, I had not seen the motion, which seems to be more about energy than about the environment. While I fully admit that the two are linked, they are not entirely the same. The SNP has been somewhat duplicitous and opportunistic in the way it has brought this motion to the chamber. I was looking forward to debating whether we are going the right way about developing renewable energy. I was looking forward to debating whether Chancellor Gordon Brown's recently implemented £10 surcharge on flights is really a beneficial environmental measure or just another stealth tax—I think it is the latter. I was looking forward to debating the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report and some of its conclusions, such as the terrifying prospect of summer sea ice in the Arctic ocean disappearing by the end of this century, which is only 93 years away. I was looking forward to a positive motion and debate, in which I would begin by declaring my entry in the register of members' interests that shows that I receive an income from a wind farm development, part of which is situated on land that I am fortunate enough to own. However, I do not think that I need to do so, because, in the context of a debate on the environment, the terms of the  SNP motion that is before us today are something of a disappointment. There are positives, but in my opinion they lie exclusively in the first two amendments that are printed in the Business Bulletin . I disagree with Bruce Crawford. I expected the Executive amendment to be a bit over the top on self-congratulatory rhetoric—I was not disappointed—but at least it is positive in tone. I am sorry that the Green amendment fell into the SNP nuclear trap, but I suppose that separatists should always stick together. I commend Alex Johnstone for the positive nature of his amendment. I hope, but doubt, that it will get the support it deserves. I ask Chris Ballance to note that the Conservative amendment mentions energy-saving technologies and, therefore, energy efficiency. I support it because it reinforces the Scottish and national Conservatives' absolute commitment to addressing the problems of climate change as a major priority. Alex Johnstone made our position on nuclear power clear. I reiterate my view that it would be irresponsible to close the door on nuclear for ever. It must remain an option for the balanced production of energy that we all agree is needed, even if we have differences on how that balance should be achieved. I say to Jim Wallace that if that is nailing my colours to the mast, I am happy to bang in another nail.

I am sorry, but I do not have time to take an intervention. This is a desperately short debate. I am delighted that Conservative members are being positive on this issue. I am delighted that David Cameron is calling for a climate change bill and that George Osborne has outlined a future Conservative policy that includes a shift towards taxation on behaviour and practices that damage the environment. He has stated: "Not only can environmental protection go hand in hand with economic progress, but it must. To persuade the whole world that we should act against this threat, we must show them that they need not put their quality of life at risk." I commend that type of positive political leadership, as I commend the amendment in Alex Johnstone's name. It is in marked contrast to the whingeing negativity of the SNP, which is encapsulated in its motion.

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the member agree that nuclear waste already exists and that we are unlikely to make it safer by, in effect, mothballing the industry?

Will the minister give way?

I congratulate Elaine Murray on lodging the motion and I echo her warm welcome to those who have made the journey up from the south-west for the debate. Let us be in no doubt that yesterday's decision by the court of the University of Glasgow not to admit an undergraduate intake in September has confirmed our growing fear that the credibility of the Crichton university campus project is now at crisis point. The decision represents a major step towards the University of Glasgow's compete withdrawal from the campus, taking with it not just the various high-quality courses and research that it provides but, almost more important, the gravitas, recognition and acceptability that that university brings with it. It is said by some—regrettably the funding council appears to be among them—that it does not matter because the other partners will expand to take up the slack, so we do not need Glasgow. However, few who say that live in south-west Scotland. They feel betrayed, humiliated and patronised by what is happening and some of what is being said. Why is the University of Glasgow's presence so important to the project? It is because of Professor Sir Graeme Davis's vision for a new type of higher education on the Crichton campus that would reflect the changing world of business today. Did he succeed? Let me read from an e-mail that I received at the end of January: "I am a product of this very campus. If I can be so bold as to say so, I am an exemplar product of which this university campus aims to produce. By this I mean I am a young student who moved to Dumfries, from a big city, specifically to study at this chosen campus due to its unique variety of degree paths and course options. I have subsequently found employment in Dumfries and Galloway and have been able to put areas of my degree to good use. Is this not what is wanted from such a campus? Am I not living proof that this campus produces employable young graduates?" Surely that says all that needs to be said about the campus's relevance for students. What about the relevance to the local economy and the region's social needs of the research and courses that the University of Glasgow provides? That is something else on which the funding council appears to pour scorn. A well-known and respected constituent of mine stated in an e-mail that I received: "Since returning to Galloway seven years ago I have been involved in four areas of activity: children's panel, community development, art heritage research and political activity. In each of these areas Glasgow University at the Crichton is relevant to my work. We are desperately in need of social workers in Dumfries & Galloway. The University is training social workers at the Crichton. As a Communities Scotland mentor I am working with several  communities in D and G. In my current and previous project we involved research staff from the Crichton in our work. In my art research I work closely with Glasgow University staff concerned with the cultural identity of South West Scotland. At a time when a lot is being done to enhance Highland identity and sense of well being, the role of Ted Cowan and others in enhancing our identity cannot be underestimated." The University of Glasgow's continued presence on the Crichton campus is critical to fulfilling the fantastic potential of the whole project. Last year, Nicol Stephen said in reply to a question from Elaine Murray: "The Crichton campus has been a great success story for all of Dumfries and Galloway and I want to do what I can to encourage its future development." In response to a supplementary question that I asked, Nicol Stephen said: "The success of the Crichton campus has brought provision to an area that traditionally has been underrepresented in higher education. We need to do more rather than less."— [ Official Report , 19 January 2006; c 22574-75.]  I whole-heartedly agree with that. Only two weeks ago, in response to a question that I asked at First Minister's question time, the First Minister said: "the Deputy First Minister and I both whole-heartedly support not just the maintenance of the campus but its improvement and development."— [ Official Report , 1 February 2007; c 31731.]  The First Minister reiterated that to Dr Murray today. If what is happening at the Crichton were happening at the UHI Millennium Institute, there would be a traffic jam of ministerial cars heading up the A9 to sort it out. That institute provides liberal arts courses, but we are being asked to accept that there is no place for such courses in the lives of citizens of the south of Scotland, who I presume are seen as second-class citizens. I believe that the University of Glasgow wants to stay at the Crichton in the long term but that the funding council does not want it to stay there. I firmly believe that only direct ministerial intervention can sort out the problem. In the light of the robust quotations that I have read out, ministers must act now. It is time for the Government to put up or shut up. There is a time to be a hands-on Government, and that time has surely come.

I am enormously grateful to Margo MacDonald for securing the debate. I am also grateful to her for organising this morning's breakfast briefing—although, perhaps, for a slightly different reason from those of other members. Gordon Banks MP, who made a good contribution to the briefing, was modest about his role in putting together the all-party parliamentary group on coeliac disease in the House of Commons, but he was slightly less modest about his feats as England's former goalkeeper. I could not resist the opportunity of ensuring that the Scottish Parliament witnessed the first meeting of those two footballing greats, Gordon Banks and Alex Fergusson. As many members have said, Yvonne Murray's contribution this morning was incredibly emotive and extremely effective. I commend her whole-heartedly on the work that she is now doing on behalf of Coeliac UK. I hear exactly what Sylvia Jackson said about a screening programme but it seems to me that huge strides could be made easily in that field simply by raising GPs' awareness of the condition and of the simple test that is needed to identify it. That came home to me personally recently, as my wife has been undergoing tests for one of the many unexplained conditions that seem to abound nowadays. When I asked our good, young and on-the-ball GP whether he had tested for coeliac disease, he looked puzzled and said that he had not thought of doing that. That must be an incredibly simple thing to correct. The Executive should ensure that all GPs test for coeliac disease when the right symptoms are placed in front of them. The rewards to the NHS would surely be enormous and the benefit to thousands of sufferers would be absolutely incalculable.

To ask the First Minister how withdrawal of the University of Glasgow from the Crichton campus would affect the Scottish Executive's policies on access to lifelong learning. (S2F-2690)

I assure the First Minister that members of all parties will be encouraged by those words. However, is he aware that, during questions on enterprise, lifelong learning and transport on 19 January 2006, I asked the Deputy First Minister whether he accepted that, unless the Crichton campus received the capital funding that it required at that time, the partners might be forced to abandon the project? The Deputy First Minister replied: "Let me make it clear that I would strongly resist any hint of the abandonment that Alex Fergusson described and would do whatever I could to prevent that."— [ Official Report , 19 January 2006; c 22575.]  In the current, urgent circumstances, does the First Minister think it is acceptable that the invitation to enter urgent discussions that Dumfries and Galloway Council issued on 23 January has not received a substantive response? Will he undertake today to ensure that he or his deputy—or preferably both—come to Dumfries to meet all the parties involved and ensure that the University of Glasgow's presence continues in the way that the First Minister's predecessor, Donald Dewar, so robustly supported?

I am not sure whether I need to speak in the debate, because it is clear that an animated debate is taking place among Scottish National Party members. I am sorry that Mr Morgan did not have more faith in his party's two very capable members of the Standards and Public Appointments Committee—I am sure that he does really. I remember with slight horror the first time that determinations were mentioned when the committee met in committee room 2. The mention of determinations triggered a wave of indignation, which I partly egged on. All sorts of accusations were made—we heard that Parliament was to be bypassed and all sorts of other suggestions that turned out to be scare stories. If nothing else, what has emerged from the process is clarification of the procedures that are encompassed in determinations and—I hope—the acceptance that they are a perfectly normal and respectable way forward. Alasdair Morgan made several good points. I am deeply impressed that he has read the reports. I suspect that he is not unique in the Parliament in that regard, but it sets him apart from all ordinary mortals. The convener answered well the question why four reports were issued—that is because it is easier to make changes later without following undue processes. If nothing else, that has doubled the number of reports that the committee has issued this session. Why each report replicates some information is a good question. That is hard to defend. Sometimes we just have to accept that laid-down procedures are hard to follow. I will say a few words about the eighth report of 2006, which covers the determination on income from property. I argued strongly that banding rather than giving the exact figure that was received was imperative—I argued strongly about that to protect people such as farm tenants, house tenants and others from having exact financial  details of their businesses and perhaps of their personal income and expenditure made public knowledge. I have no doubt that some people will argue strongly that we have introduced the banding in order to protect members. I simply do not accept that that is the case, if for no other reason than the fact that, if a member declares income from property of between £15,000 and £20,000, every one of our friends in the press will determine that income to be £19,999 and not a penny less. There is no doubt about that. Alasdair Morgan was correct to say that we have perhaps gone against the way in which the debate in the Parliament went in introducing a banding from zero to £5,000. I think that that is absolutely justified for simplicity and ease of understanding, as the same is required for the registration of remuneration and I would defend it on those grounds. We have tried hard, all the way through the tortuous debate on the issue, to bring simplicity and ease of understanding across the board. Those were our biggest priorities. I accept the points that Alasdair Morgan made, and other members may feel the same. However, I hope that the Parliament will accept the reports. A lot of work has gone into them and they are a good outcome of a fairly tedious but, nonetheless, important process.

To ask the Scottish Executive when the improvements to the A76 announced to date by its Transport Department will be completed. (S2O-11723)

I am grateful to the minister for that detailed response. He may know of a letter that I received from Transport Scotland assuring me that the works identified following the minister's acceptance of a petition from Dr Elaine Murray and me, which had been instigated by the Dumfries & Galloway Standard , would be completed by the end of last year. Indeed, there has been a members' business debate in my name on the dangers of the road, and the minister's department has announced a series of 18 low-cost improvements. I can only assume that the frenetic activity on the A76 since I lodged this question is entirely coincidental. Does the minister believe that the works will increase driver awareness? Given the accident record and—sadly—the death record on the road, will he agree to consider further low-cost measures that are aimed at increasing driver awareness?

When I drive up and down the A702 every week from my constituency to Holyrood, I cannot fail to notice the considerable number of speed warning signs that have been installed, in particular over the past year, in almost every town and village that I pass through. The signs are bright and effective, and I believe that they have had a positive impact on reducing speed. In direct contrast, in Dumfries and Galloway all I see are two rather outdated "slow down" signs, which more often than not have run out of battery power. What more can the minister do to encourage the use of signs in Dumfries and Galloway, so that we can catch up with other local authority areas in installing modern and effective speed reduction signs?

I thank the minister for meeting me on several occasions to discuss this truly worrying matter. Following Alasdair Morgan's members' business debate on Wanlockhead Museum Trust and Museum of Lead Mining in the summer, the minister hinted strongly to him and me that the significance scheme would be the most likely provider of the certainty and sustainability that the museum needs. Does she agree that achieving recognition under the scheme is likely to take a worryingly lengthy time? Will she assure us that she will not oversee the museum's closure because of a short-term funding gap between now and its hoped-for acceptance to the scheme? Will she advise us on how an application to the scheme can be furthered if the museum is faced with closure, given that it will lose the staff who would make the application?

Is Mrs Radcliffe aware that, given that I am a constituency member, my staff cannot travel to Dumfries, which is only a mile outside my constituency—and indeed contains the main offices of the local authority and all other agencies—unless the expense of the journey is taken off my MSA? If I were a regional member, my staff could travel from Stranraer to North Berwick and claim the expenses from the staff travel allowance. Disregarding Tommy Sheridan's remarks, surely that anomaly justifies our having a serious, in-depth and urgent review of all allowances in time for the next Parliament to adopt its findings, rather than waiting for the next Parliament to initiate and determine such a review.

Will the minister give way?

In the lead-up to the 2003 elections, I pledged that, if successfully elected, I would campaign for Scotland's third national park to be the Galloway national park. I was successfully elected and I campaigned for a national park but, rather disappointingly, I found considerable coolness toward the proposal among local agencies, which should have been much more alive to the possibilities of a national park. I hold firmly to my belief that a strong case can be made for such a park. I was delighted when the  recently launched strategy for the Galloway forest park was described as a work in progress. I remain convinced, and I suggested at that launch, that the progress that was mentioned should have one aim in mind and one alone: to make progress toward a Galloway national park. The area fulfils the criteria for a national park and I have no doubt that the creation of such a park would provide the much sought-after incentive for northbound travellers on the M74 to turn left at Gretna and discover and enjoy the mystical beauty of Dumfries and Galloway. I am grateful for the debate if for no other reason than that it allows me to correct the statement that I made a few months ago in the Parliament that travellers should turn left at Carlisle to visit the south-west of Scotland. That was a slight slip of the tongue, but at least travellers who do so are led to a national park, albeit one in Cumbria. I hold firmly to my ambition that turning left at Gretna will lead to a similarly recognised designated area: a Galloway national park. What could be better than the eventual linking of Scotland's third national park in Galloway to its first marine national park? Dr Elaine Murray and I have many political differences, but I am sure that we would agree that the Solway firth, which forms the southern boundary of our two constituencies, would be a completely worthy choice and thoroughly deserves to be the front-runner in what is in effect a competition to become Scotland's first marine national park. We would also agree that no other area is more deserving of the potential benefits to which the minister referred in his opening speech. I welcomed the Executive's plans to consult those concerned and to take on board local people's views in assessing the suitability of the proposals. However, I am sorry to say that the most public part of the exercise got off to a singularly inauspicious start, at least in Dumfries and Galloway. Is it really acceptable that only three days' notice was given publicly that the marine parks consultation bus was to spend one day in Kirkcudbright? Dumfries and Galloway is more than 100 miles from east to west, but the bus spent only one day in Kirkcudbright, at disappointingly short notice. Is it really acceptable that the Drummore Harbour Trust, which is surely a statutory consultee in such exercises, was sent the relevant papers a week after the bus's appearance in Kirkcudbright, and only after the trust had inquired why it had not been included? Is it really acceptable that the Executive has given the impression that the consultation exercise, at least in relation to the Solway firth, was pretty much an afterthought and that minimal appearance would suffice in consulting those who are most immediately involved?  I cannot and do not believe that the minister wanted that to be the case for one minute, but that is the distinct impression that has been created locally. I hope that the minister, or the deputy minister, will address that matter in summing up the debate. In particular, I hope that ministers will outline what further steps the Executive will take to ensure that all interested parties, not just those who happened to be free and in Kirkcudbright on a recent Saturday, are engaged meaningfully in the exercise to determine which area receives the historic designation. Unlike the Scottish National Party, which will no doubt spend much of the coming six months telling my constituents that their salvation lies in voting SNP, I want my constituents to benefit from the designation of a marine national park. Most of all, I want to ensure that my constituents' views get a fair hearing in the process. I regret to say that the impression that has been created thus far is that that may not be the case. I look forward to the minister, or the deputy minister, convincing me that I am wrong. I support my colleague Ted Brocklebank's amendment.

Does the First Minister agree that clients of companies such as Farepak are, in effect, taking part in a money-saving scheme throughout the year? Does he agree that there is a strong case to be made for such companies to come under the same regulatory regime as banks and building societies?

Will the minister give way?

This has been a good debate on a good report. I know that several of my  constituents in Galloway and Upper Nithsdale, some of whom gave evidence to the committee, will welcome the debate. I confess that it makes me rather sad that I am no longer a member of the Environment and Rural Development Committee, although I also accept that that view might not be shared by its current membership. It has been a good debate because the report is important. It has engendered a gratifying level of public debate since its publication, although it has almost inevitably ended up highlighting the helplessness of the primary producer in a chain that is effectively controlled by four retailers. As we heard from several members—if not all—that helplessness is best portrayed by the current plight of milk producers; the dairy farmer is currently being screwed to the wall by whatever combination of factors it is that determines the farm-gate price that they receive for their product.

If that was the will of Parliament, I would have no choice but to do so. Two weeks ago, I accepted the minister's answer to my question on this subject, when he said: "There are clear instances of prices in Scotland being set in a way that suggests a rather curious similarity between each round of negotiations involving each of our supermarkets and processors. Although 1p or 2p may keep disappearing from the chain, the negotiations are between the processor and the supermarket and the farmer is never engaged in that process."— [ Official Report , 21 September 2006; c 27797.]  In reality, that means that where the supermarkets have raised the price on their shelves, and no doubt the processors have had an increase as well, the farmer has received less than he or she was getting before. I accept that the minister has made recommendations on those curious similarities to the Competition Commission, but I have to ask whether there is not some more direct action that could be taken to loosen the stranglehold in which those primary producers find themselves. Stewart Stevenson intervened on my colleague to ask whether the Conservatives apologise for dismantling the milk marketing boards. I am sorry that he is not here so that I can remind him that the price of milk rose for three years following the dismantling of the MMBs and continued to do so until producers stopped following what had been Government advice and took a higher price that was offered by a new retailer. If I may say so, the phrase "United we stand; divided we fall" has never been more vividly validated.  Perhaps the most chilling phrase in the whole report is in the sentence in paragraph 47, which states "the Committee was struck by the deep reluctance of farmers and producers to comment on the record, due at least in part to a fear of losing business." Surely that is worse than a stranglehold; it is tantamount to holding a loaded gun to the head of the producer through the terms of a commercial contract. I do not believe that anyone in Parliament finds that acceptable. Just because other producers are lining up to sign up if a producer drops out, that is not a sufficient reason to hold the sword of Damocles over those producers. If people are frightened to speak on the record in their own Parliament, as Richard Lochhead said, then we have arrived at a sorry state indeed. I find it hard to believe that the only action that can be taken to influence that state of affairs is to make representations to the Competition Commission. However, in the minister's defence, I do not expect him to go as far as Andrew Arbuckle, who has clearly joined the UK Independence Party in his efforts to do something about it. Among the many good recommendations in the report is one on which, I fear, the committee is probably mistaken. The fifth bullet point of paragraph 61 asks the Executive to ensure that "regulation is not disproportionate to the need to secure consumer confidence." I fear that there is little point in its asking that. Reluctantly, I agree with Stewart Stevenson. After all, the Executive set up a special committee to reduce red tape and bureaucracy, but it has presided over growth such that red tape and bureaucracy are at a level that has never before been witnessed. We need only consider the situation that faces a number of farmers who are being threatened with highly disproportionate financial penalties for making a minute error in complying with a one-off 5 per cent heifer rule, on which the Scottish Executive Environment and Rural Affairs Department guidance notes left a lot of room for doubt. The farmers, who actually had the required stock numbers, are supposed to have committed the crime of failing to provide SEERAD with information which—this is the irony and injustice of the situation—SEERAD already possesses. Far from reducing red tape and bureaucracy, this Executive has turned it into a new art form. We can all agree on the committee's report. I would have liked it to go further in some respects, but I acknowledge that issues are split between devolved and reserved responsibilities, which does not make the committee's task easier. I have no doubt that the report will be fully endorsed by Parliament, but I doubt that we have an Executive  that is prepared to act on the report's recommendations. If we do not, perhaps it is time to look forward to a new Executive.

I am sure that Maureen Macmillan accepts that there is vegetarian input to much of the demand for organic produce. Where in Scotland would she grow organic cashew nuts?

Next year when we are in the Executive, that is.

I hear exactly what the minister is saying; indeed, he said some of it in response to a parliamentary question that I asked a couple of weeks ago. Nonetheless, recent negotiations in this country have led to an increase in the shelf price of milk of 1p or even 2p per litre but to a reduction to the primary producer of a half or even three-quarters of a pence per litre. Clearly  there is something wrong there, and it must be fairly obvious where the money has gone in such cases.

rose—

I entirely agree with the final part of the minister's answer. However, to illustrate Elaine Murray's point I am holding up a 250ml carton of milk that I just purchased in the Parliament's canteen for 20p—some might say that is a major investment for me. That 20p for a quarter of a litre is probably 2p more than any dairy farmer is paid for producing a full litre. The enormous disparity between the farm-gate price and the shelf price is the essence of the problem. What representations has the Executive made to the various inquiries that have taken place and are taking place on the issue? What measures has the Executive taken to bring about a more equitable distribution of the funding that is available through the chain at present?

I have often raised that issue locally—it is of considerable concern to me. Does the Health Committee agree that local authorities' different approaches to implementing the guidance have created a postcode lottery in delivery of a welcome and valuable service?

I thank the minister for that comprehensive statement. In my hand is a copy of a letter dated 24 September 2004 from the Health Department's directorate of service policy and planning to all local authority and national health service chief executives and other senior officials. It says explicitly that "assistance with the preparation of food should be not be charged for"  under schedule 1 to the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002. Given what that letter says and the minister's assurance in his reply, will the Executive make funding available to local authorities to allow them to refund fully all those who have been illegally charged for that service as part of a care package?

To ask the First Minister what steps the Scottish Executive will take to ensure that the performance inspection report by the Social Work Inspection Agency into the social work services provided by Dumfries and Galloway  Council is acted upon as a matter of urgency. (S2F-2429)

I am grateful to the First Minister for his recognition that the report requires some serious attention. Is he aware that the SWIA report states: "We are of the opinion that the capacity for improvement is weak. ... We had concerns about the limited capacity to deliver necessary change within the present structure and staffing"? How can my constituents have any faith that the report's 24 major recommendations will be implemented efficiently, effectively and urgently when the people who are tasked with overseeing those improvements are the very same people who allowed this catastrophic situation to develop in the first place? Will the First Minister commit the Executive to intervene directly, if it proves necessary to do so, to ensure a timeous resolution to this very serious matter?

It will come as no surprise to members that I will focus on the impact that the bill will have locally in my part of Scotland. I am not going to pretend that all was well with the old area tourist board system, although I acknowledge the contribution that many tourist board staff made, which other members have mentioned. All was not well, but if we are going to change something, we ought to change it for the better. I remember months of frustration as we eagerly awaited the pronouncement of Lord Watson, who was then the minister, on the outcome of the Executive's lengthy deliberations on its consultation on the future of area tourist boards. At the end of that lengthy period, there was a sense of dismay at the announcement of the new structure that Parliament will, no doubt, legitimise today. However, it will not do so with the help of Conservative members, as we do not believe that this will be a change for the better locally. Nor do we believe that it will benefit local tourist businesses or, indeed, tourists in remote rural constituencies such as mine.

I would have more sympathy with that if I had experienced it working in my part of Scotland. I am delighted that the structure is working well in the Borders; I am not convinced that it is working on my patch. I will come back to that point. In areas such as Galloway, tourism-related businesses need to have a tangible sense of ownership of and involvement in the structure of their industry. One of the problems with the area tourist boards was that they were perceived to be too autocratic and to be dictating to local businesses rather than working in partnership with them. The situation was improving towards the end of their lives but, with the benefit of a year's experience of the hubs, we see that any sense of ownership and involvement seems to have disappeared off the radar screen. The principle reason for that seems to be that the local forums or partnerships—or whatever they are called—lack any real teeth, as Jamie McGrigor said. They have no decision-making power, therefore they are reduced largely to the role of a talking shop that gives the Executive the opportunity to tick the necessary boxes and say that local involvement is the watchword of the new structure, when that does not seem to be the case. As far as I can ascertain, the forums have no agreed structure, laid-down remit, term of office or constitution. Saddest of all, they seem to have little accountability.

I will come back to that as well. My effort to provide such leadership, through the initiative that I tried to put forward, was rather thwarted. In previous debates on the subject, I recall warning that the changes would encourage the formation of breakaway bodies of dissatisfied tourism operators, which is exactly what has happened in many areas. In my part of Scotland—Chris Ballance referred to this—the Association of Dumfries and Galloway Accommodation Providers was formed and now represents a substantial percentage of accommodation providers in the region. I am afraid that I do not recognise the  picture that Chris Ballance painted. The association certainly did not make life easy for the area tourist board, nor is it making life particularly easy for its replacement. However, it wants to engage constructively with the forum as it has the best interests of local tourism at heart. When the bed and breakfast representative on the forum resigned, ADGAP requested a place on the forum as the representative of a substantial local interest. I played an active role in trying to promote that engagement. It presented a golden opportunity to bring together the critic and the criticised under one roof, so that differences of opinion could be aired around the table rather than largely through the columns of local newspapers. However, ADGAP's request was rejected unanimously, which was a great pity, because it simply reinforced the perception that the new local structure is a puppet of the centre, that local ownership is a myth and that there is even less accountability with this structure than there was with the one that it replaced. Tourism is desperately important to the economy of my part of Scotland, which has to fight its own corner in the tourist world, given that tourists tend to come up the M6 and carry on up the M74 to the central belt and onwards to the Highlands and Islands. I am happy that the decision to keep Dumfries and Galloway as a hub on its own acknowledges the struggle that we face. We fight a constant battle to get some of the tourist traffic to turn left at Carlisle and savour the real beauty of the south-west of Scotland in general and Galloway in particular. To achieve that, we need local leadership, under local control, that is capable of disseminating local knowledge to those who come to the area. Under the bill, it seems that we will have an ever more centralised structure, operating through a somewhat anonymous call centre, which often displays such a lack of local knowledge that it is almost insulting to the inquirer. That is the exact opposite of the direction in which we should be going. I am afraid that, in all conscience, I cannot support the bill.

The developments that the minister points out are all highly worthy of applause, but does he agree that the researchers and scientists of tomorrow will be more inspired if they are fully aware of the deeds of some of their predecessors? To get back to the point of the debate, does the minister agree that we are not doing that process any favours if we continue to undervalue the incredible work of James Clerk Maxwell? Does he agree that it would be hugely beneficial in the process of inspiring tomorrow's researchers if we were actively to educate them through the education system about the work of that great man?

Sarah Boyack represents a part of Edinburgh and I wonder whether she supports, as I do, the efforts of the president of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in championing the erection of a statue to James Clerk Maxwell in the city.

To get this subject into the short time available is a task that would probably be beyond James Clerk Maxwell himself, but I am honoured to have the opportunity to try to do so. Some 8 miles south of my home in the stewartry of Kirkcudbrightshire lies the small, but very beautiful village of Parton, which is well-known to many of us locally as the site of the most unlikely 30mph restriction in Scotland. Some years ago, in an effort to slow down in recognition of that speed restriction, I first noticed the tourist board sign at the edge of the village that marks it as the burial place of James Clerk Maxwell. I suspect that my initial reaction would be mirrored by most Scots if they were asked what they knew of James Clerk Maxwell—"James Clerk who?" There is no real shame in that because even in the world of physics and engineering, there is a glaring and widespread ignorance of anything other than his name among those who could speak at length on the life, works and theories of Newton, Einstein and Faraday. Clerk Maxwell's most recent biographer, Basil Mahon, described how, as an engineering student, he found that James was often introduced during lectures as "the great James Clerk Maxwell". Through those lectures, it gradually became apparent that his influence on the physical sciences was all-pervasive, but he was scarcely known in the wider world, even to Basil Mahon's friends and colleagues who knew all about Einstein, Newton and Faraday.  So who is this great James Clerk Maxwell and why is he the subject of the motion before us this evening that calls for greater recognition of him throughout Scotland? He was born at 14 India Street, Edinburgh, 175 years ago, on 13 June 1831. Although the family moved very shortly afterwards to their home and small estate at Glenlair near Corsock in Galloway, James returned to Edinburgh at the age of 10 to attend Edinburgh academy, just two years after the death of his mother. There, while staying with two different aunts, he became a gifted scholar, showing a particular aptitude for science, especially physics and mathematics. At the tender age of 14, he wrote a paper on oval curves that was read to the Royal Society of Edinburgh by no less a figure than James Forbes, the professor of natural philosophy at the University of Edinburgh, at which James enrolled in due course, studying courses in philosophy, physics and mathematics. In that, he was hugely encouraged by Professor Forbes, who seems to have spent a great deal of his own time reading Clerk Maxwell's papers to the Royal Society when the author was too young to do so himself. In 1850, when he was still only 19, James went up to Cambridge where he was reunited with his old friend, P G Tait. He carried on where he had left off in Edinburgh and continued his studies of light and colour, which culminated in him reading at last his own paper to the Royal Society, on the detection and combination of colour. It was during that time that his interest in electromagnetism developed and, in 1855, he produced a paper that mathematically described Michael Faraday's observations on electric and magnetic fields. In so doing, James Clerk Maxwell showed how electricity, magnetism and light could be unified into a single theory of electromagnetism. The fact that it was not until eight years after his death in 1879 that the theory was emphatically verified by Heinrich Hertz proves just how far ahead of his time Clerk Maxwell was. I do not have enough time to catalogue the incredible achievements of the man, so suffice it to point out that in 1856 he was appointed professor of natural philosophy at Marischal college in Aberdeen, where he both won the Adams prize for his work on Saturn's rings and married the principal's daughter. That was a good move, one might well think, but it did not save him when the amalgamation of Marischal college and King's college meant that only one professor of natural philosophy was required. It was not to be James Clerk Maxwell. He applied for a similar position in Edinburgh but was pipped at that post by his old friend, James Tait. However, fate must surely have intervened when, in 1860, he succeeded his former mentor, James Forbes, and was appointed  professor of natural philosophy at King's college, London. For the next five years there, his interest and work expanded beyond electromagnetism to take in, amongst others, kinetic theory, thermodynamics and the elastic properties of solids. Remarkably, in 1861, he demonstrated the first projected colour image—a colour photograph, as it were—at the Royal Institution. Although I understand that an element of luck was associated with that piece of work, several decades passed before colour photography was any more fully understood. In 1865, he retired to his beloved Glenlair in Galloway, where he wrote extensively and continued his research before being tempted back to the world of academia. He returned to Cambridge as professor of physics and, importantly, as the first director of the Cavendish laboratory, which he both designed and supervised. It was entirely his doing that the Cavendish rapidly rose to the position of pre-eminence that it still enjoys today. During those years, he spent as much time as he could at Glenlair before he contracted the same form of cancer as his mother. He died after quite a swift illness in 1879, at the age of 48. The 125 th anniversary of his death was noted in a parliamentary motion by our colleague Dr Elaine Murray. That brief sketch of James Clerk Maxwell's life might suggest that he was the archetypal nutty professor, hiding himself away in a world of papers, theories and experiments. Nothing could be further from the truth. He was a witty, loving and outgoing individual who always ensured that his family enjoyed the warm, close relationships that had characterised his own childhood. He also took his duties as laird of Glenlair very seriously. He introduced policies of best practice to the farm and he did his utmost to improve the estate wherever possible. He designed and supervised the alterations to the house before his family moved into it. Even as he was dying, he campaigned against the closure of the local school—some things do not change in Dumfries and Galloway—and he offered at no charge some of his own land on which to build a new one. However, he died before that came to fruition. His humour always shone through. Among other talents, he had a great bent towards poetry. At the age of 26, he wrote a ditty that he sent to his friend William Thomson, who was a consultant with the Atlantic Telegraph Company, which had run into difficulties with an undersea cable-laying operation. Maxwell Clerk wrote: Under the sea, under the sea, No little signals are coming to me. Under the sea, under the sea, Something has surely gone wrong, And it's broke, broke, broke;   What is the cause of it does not transpire But something has broken the telegraph wire With a stroke, stroke, stroke, Or else they've been pulling too strong. That shows his nice, gentle sense of humour. James Clerk Maxwell was quite a remarkable man in many respects. He is the father of—to name but four—radar, colour television, computers and the mobile phone. He was years ahead of his time and he died when he was just getting going. Perhaps that is why he is almost forgotten. He did not live long enough to witness his theories being proved and verified by others. I must pay tribute to some who have absolutely refused to let him be forgotten and who have done so much to raise his profile, especially over the past few years. In particular, I mention Basil Mahon, who has recently published a wonderful biography—called "The Man who Changed Everything"—and who has given a series of lectures this year, one of which I was lucky enough to attend, in Rockcliffe in my constituency, on the date of James Clerk Maxwell's birthday. I should also mention the James Clerk Maxwell Foundation, which acquired his birthplace in India Street in 1993. The house, which now has an increasing amount of material on display, is dedicated both to raising public awareness and to encouraging Scottish students to study the sciences. That is surely an incredibly worthwhile effort, given today's announcement that the numbers of such students are falling dramatically. In addition, the Royal Society of Edinburgh is working with a number of organisations to celebrate the anniversary. I should also mention Captain Duncan Ferguson, who is the current owner of Glenlair, who formed the Maxwell at Glenlair Trust to preserve the Glenlair house, which was ravaged by fire in 1929. Last, but by no means least, I cannot talk about James Clerk Maxwell without mentioning the remarkable Sam Callendar of Parton village. He has become a walking encyclopaedia on James Clerk Maxwell and provides a wealth of knowledge to visitors who come to see the man's grave. He is a true and utterly devoted individual, and I am delighted that he has been able to join us this evening, along with representatives of the charities that I have mentioned. We cannot continue to ignore this incredible son of Scotland. We must ensure that his work and its impact is taught in our schools, so that today's pupils do not grow up in the ignorance that has led to the requirement for tonight's debate. Einstein said: "One scientific epoch ended and another began with James Clerk Maxwell". I hope that we can say that an era of ignorance  has ended tonight and that a new dawn of recognition begins tomorrow.

Any debate on the subject of racial equality is worth while because the absence of racial equality leads to racial inequality and abuse. Like every member present, I utterly abhor racism in any shape or form and I warmly applaud each and every action that is taken to address it successfully. It is a tragedy that racism remains a problem in the so-called civilised society in which we live. After all, we pride ourselves on being an all-embracing multicultural society. Nevertheless, we are debating an on-going problem that should have no place whatever in our society. Clearly, something is still wrong. As one or two members have said, it is the tiny minority who tarnish the mostly justified reputation that we Scots have as a welcoming, open people. However, that minority can have an alarmingly high impact and can surface in unexpected places.  Racism is by no means confined to our urban areas or limited to a simple white-versus-coloured formula, as recent experiences in my quiet rural constituency have shown. I want to draw attention to two issues about which we must not be complacent, lest they get out of hand. The first, which other members have touched on, will not be a popular topic. It is the growing anti-English feelings that have been much in the news recently, although they are by no means a recent phenomenon, nor just football related. I recall making a speech as a candidate for the Parliament back in 1998 in which I posed the question: what sort of Scotland do we want to live in post devolution? The speech was prompted by the death of a teenager here in Edinburgh. He was attacked by three others for one reason only—he had a very obvious English accent. The fact that he was born and bred in Scotland was of no consequence at all. He was killed because of his accent, and not by some ignorant louts; indeed, one of the perpetrators was the son of a very high-ranking police officer. On another occasion, I attended a public meeting in a small community in what later became my constituency. The meeting had been called to discuss the problem of timber being loaded on to boats in the small harbour at all hours of the day and night. At night, heavy goods vehicles were disturbing an otherwise peaceful village community. Halfway through the meeting, someone suggested that if it was not for all the so-and-so white settlers, there would not be a problem. I took the Presiding Officer's guidance on whether I could expand on that "so-and-so" and was told that it would be unparliamentary language. Indeed it was. The meeting was quite heated, but at that comment half the audience got up and walked out and the other half were worryingly supportive of the sentiment that had been expressed. I hoped that devolution would give us the confidence—I was interested that the minister used that exact word—to become more tolerant and welcoming, particularly towards our nearest neighbours. We cannot and should not blame them for coming to live here when we constantly tell them what a wonderful country it is. However, I fear that devolution is sometimes having the opposite effect. In many of our more attractive areas, property prices have been lifted way beyond the means of local people by buyers from other constituent parts of the UK. That is often deemed to be their fault, but it is not. The answer is to build more houses, not to abuse, verbally and physically, those who may have bought existing ones. My final point on this aspect of racism concerns the son of a close friend of mine. He is studying  engineering at the University of Edinburgh and a requirement of his course is to do some practical work. This summer, he took a job with a building firm. Such is the racist treatment that has been meted out to him because of his English accent that he has been forced to quit the job. Blatant racism is alive and well in Scotland today and is as disgusting as it is abhorrent. The second phenomenon that I want to draw to members' attention is perhaps more recent. In a scenario that will be familiar to many members, my constituency is witnessing a massive increase year on year in the number of European workers—often eastern European—who are taking a variety of jobs, especially during the summer months. Almost without exception, they are absolutely charming people and extremely hard workers. Not only are they contributing massively to our local economies, but they are able to support their families at home in ways they could only dream about if they did not undertake such work in Scotland. However, in many rural communities, resentment is growing about the impact of this seasonal immigration on housing, local employment and more generally. I hear worrying anecdotal evidence of increasing friction between different groups in normally peaceful rural communities. That is highly perplexing and, if we are not vigilant, I fear that the friction could spill over into something altogether more serious. If the unspeakable were to happen in a very rural area, the police cover, and the resources required to deal with the situation quickly and effectively, simply would not be in place. I do not want to be overdramatic, but I believe that a growing problem is bubbling just below the surface. I am not convinced that we are satisfactorily equipped to cope if it ever boils over. This is a worthwhile debate because the subject is worrying. I have no doubt that all members need to and will work together to rid our country of all types of racism.

Well-recognised, Presiding Officer. To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to encourage the export of Scottish beef. (S20-10094)

I am sure that all members will agree that the efforts that are being made could not be better directed. Does the minister agree that an important component of the trade, especially for the dairy sector, is the resumption of live exports? Now that the rest of Europe is on the verge of adopting new rules on veal production, can he assure the Parliament that the Executive will not attempt to hinder that trade as long as all relevant welfare concerns are addressed and legislation is properly adhered to? Will he assure us that a tough line will be taken with any individual or organisation that attempts to hinder the trade?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I welcome the fact that my question elicited a record number of supplementaries, but I modestly suggest that it would have been more in order to fill in the time available as a result of questions not being lodged, a member not being in the chamber in time to ask her question and questions being withdrawn. The situation highlights the point of order that Stewart Stevenson made this morning, when he drew attention to the problem of questions that are not lodged. I understand that the matter must be referred to the Procedures Committee, but could the name of the person who failed to lodge a question be published in the Business Bulletin  before the phrase, "Not Lodged"? That might reduce the number of questions that are not lodged.

Does the minister accept that the unusually high percentage of heavy goods vehicles that use the A75—as borne out by the Executive's own figures—the effect of which will be greatly exacerbated following the construction of the joint port facility at Cairnryan, more than justifies giving a different weighting to any modelling exercise on the A75, as seemed to be acknowledged by the Minister for Transport and Telecommunications when he visited Galloway and Upper Nithsdale? Does the minister accept that we urgently require not just a start date for those six agreed projects—I welcome the minister's reply on that issue—but several more projects, including bypasses for the two villages that will be left without one, Springholm and Crocketford?

As many members have said, the bill has been a long time coming. It has taken seven years and the input of two committees to get where we are today. The bill is hugely important. The process has been a little messy on one or two occasions, but it has brought out what I believe to be the very best in the Parliament. Individual members have been forthright in questioning the advisability of an ever more intrusive requirement to register not only our own interests—it is reasonable that we should do so—but the interests of spouses and partners. I have often stressed the need for simplicity and clarity and, indeed, a level playing field. Previous contributions from Susan Deacon, Donald Gorrie, Ken Macintosh, John Home Robertson, Mike Rumbles—for whose Damascene change of heart on some issues I applaud him—and others have shown that a level playing field, vital in a members' interests regime, simply cannot be achieved. I greatly applaud the stand that those MSPs and others took. Members had the courage to back the removal of some stage 2 amendments that would have required a level of transparency and intrusion—Alasdair Morgan used the word "intrude"—that would simply not have been fair to all members and would not have achieved the desired outcome. As I have said at every possible opportunity, every attempt that we have made in this Parliament to be open and transparent has simply given those who would do us down an increased amount of ammunition—and they have used it. If passed this afternoon, as it surely will be, the bill will make it far less likely that people are put off becoming members of this Parliament. That is another issue that I have referred to in the past. Furthermore, the bill is considerably clearer, simpler and easier to understand than it might have been had members not taken, on 26 April, what Margaret Jamieson described today as "bold" decisions. I have very much enjoyed being a member of the Standards and Public Appointments  Committee while we have been considering the subject. In answer to Mike Rumbles, I say that I have no regrets that some amendments proposed by the Standards and Public Appointments Committee were rejected. However, as I said on 26 April, my agreement to amendments in committee did not always signal my approval of them. It was important that the committee supported amendments unanimously, even if some members voiced reservations, so that the Parliament as a whole would have the opportunity to come to a determination. This has been a completely unwhipped debate.

Had decisions been forced on the committee, amendments would have been backed only by a majority of the committee. I do not think that that would have been helpful. The fact that amendments were lodged by the convener on behalf of the committee—after notice had been given that, in the debate, individual members would voice their reservations—has not done either the procedure or the Parliament any harm. It was absolutely right that the whole Parliament should take those decisions. In doing so, it has in many ways shown a maturity and some sheer common sense of which many would have previously suggested we were incapable. I whole-heartedly commend the bill to the chamber.

I agreed to the committee lodging certain amendments at stage 3. As I tried to point out in the debate on 26 April, we lodged those amendments to ensure that the whole Parliament and not only members of the committee could determine the outcomes. I hope that Mike Rumbles understands that. That was the right approach.

I start by commending staff of the directorate of clerking and reporting for the drafting of the note that was circulated to all members. A number of members who were particularly exercised about the issue when we last debated it on 26 April have obviously been  completely satisfied by that note, because they ain't here this morning. That is also commendable. There has been a positive outcome, considering the almost shambolic way in which the previous stage 3 proceedings drew to a close on 26 April. That situation arose because of considerable confusion and consequent uncertainty among members of all parties as to the procedural niceties of what was meant by a "determination". It is, of course, vital that any legislation that we pass, particularly on a matter of this nature, is clearly understood by all members. The positive outcome is that when that threatened not to be the case, we identified a procedure that would allow us to revisit the matter after due consideration, without having to abandon the proposed amendment or drop the bill altogether. I take great comfort from the fact that our procedures allowed that to happen. I hope that members are now absolutely clear about what is being proposed. It is right that Parliament will be able to alter the bill, when enacted, with the benefit of hindsight, without recourse to primary legislation. I endorse whole-heartedly amendment 35. I applaud the convener of the Standards and Public Appointments Committee for the way in which he handled the fairly bruising experience that he went through on 26 April. He did so with his customary good humour, for which I commend him. His clarification, along with the note that was circulated, means that amendment 35 is completely worthy of members' support. I urge members to support the amendment, because, by doing so, they will strengthen the bill.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is satisfied with the performance of the official VisitScotland website, visitscotland.com. (S2O-10009)

I take it that that is the same answer that the minister has lined up for question 9 as well. Does the minister know about staff numbers in the VisitScotland call centre being cut? Such a cut is the only explanation that I can come up with to explain the current delay—often of between five and 10 minutes—before calls are answered. Does she agree that visitscotland.com's claim that 65 per cent of online bookings are for the bed and breakfast sector signals a major problem? Hotel beds in Scotland outnumber bed and breakfast beds by about five to one, and bed and breakfast bookings offer visitscotland.com a very low profit margin. Does that not signal—when taken together with what I suspect is the cut in staff numbers—that all is far from well with the company?

This has been a very good debate on the most important of all the subjects that fall within the remit of this devolved Scottish Parliament. Education is the future of this country, and it is the inalienable duty of every Parliament and Government to endeavour to raise the standards of the educational programme that they deliver. I utterly reject any insinuations—some have been made this morning—that the Scottish Conservative party does not hold that principle dear.  Much has been said about how to raise standards, so I make no apologies at this stage in the debate for focusing my contribution on one issue and concern that has been brought to my attention very vividly in my constituency—the mainstreaming of education for children who have additional and special support needs. Like most policies, this one has as its background nothing but the best of intentions but, as has been highlighted all too vividly to me in Castle Douglas primary school recently, unless it is backed up with adequate resources, the results can be close to catastrophic, as some members have mentioned this morning. I make it plain that Castle Douglas primary school has just received one of the finest HMIE reports that I have ever read. It is an excellent school, whose head teacher and staff match that description. Several special needs children have already been successfully assimilated into the school and, on the whole, the policy works reasonably well. However, one pupil has needs that are so specific that a specialised facility has had to be provided for that child alone. Until very recently, the child was taught in a converted cupboard, and it was not much of a conversion. Now, after months of wrangling with the local authority, in which many departments appeared to be incapable of communicating with one another, a portakabin has been brought in and adapted for the child's use. That will at least prevent the complete trashing of several rooms in the main school, which this poor individual has brought about on more than one occasion. The onset of the child's violent behaviour is often put down to the fact that the school simply does not possess either the human or the physical resources to provide the full-time specialist teacher input that is required, in the appropriate facilities. The result is that the child must be excluded from time to time. I dread to think what would happen if his mother was working and was unable to take him on those occasions. On other occasions, he is sent home at lunch time because teacher resources are urgently required elsewhere. Regardless of how we look at the matter and whatever the circumstances, that child is being failed, rather than supported, by the system. That is no fault of the school which, as the headmaster told me, would be bitterly disappointed if it were unable to handle such situations. However, he also emphasised the desperate need for the resources that will make that possible without its disrupting the workings of the rest of the school. The nub of the problem is the disruption that can be caused to the education of the rest of the school. The problem was underlined last week when, as I said earlier, Robert Brown, Maureen Watt and I met in Parliament a delegation of  primary schoolteachers from across Scotland. For some reason, no representative of the Labour Party was present.

Contrary to one or two suggestions that were made earlier, that policy and our policy would deliver more money to education, which would improve the provision of classroom facilities. Robert Brown, Maureen Watt and I met a delegation of primary school teachers from across Scotland. It was abundantly clear that disruption was a big issue with them—it was the first thing they asked about. I am in complete agreement with Steve Sinnott of the National Union of Teachers, who said that there has to be "a halt to the closure of special schools". I go further: I suggest that a special unit in a mainstream school is not always the right answer, however well intentioned the idea might be. One of the most enjoyable parts of my job is visits to schools across my constituency—at least, it is once the pupils have got over that fact that I am not the manager of a well known football club in Manchester. Most of those schools are doing well under the watchful eye of dedicated and enthusiastic staff. However, we must be careful because there is a danger that we could undermine that dedication and enthusiasm by asking too much of them through this mainstreaming policy.

The minister will recall the meeting that he, Maureen Watt and I had with a group of primary schoolteachers who came to the Parliament last week. Was he deaf to what they said when they highlighted some of the real problems that the policy is causing?

I do not disagree with much of what the member says. However, will she make other members aware of the fact that there is a huge difference between the sort of collar that the member has in her hand, which a dog wears all the time and which can, in some instances, be set off by the barking of another dog, and a training collar that is operated manually by a trainer? Is the member aware that, if the use of such collars is forbidden by legislation, other sorts of training could be opened up, such as running loops around a dog's neck to train it to stop on command and other methods that could be far more injurious to animal welfare than the proper, judicious use of a single-shock collar?

I have received a number of letters from rural vets who consider that tail docking should be continued for humanitarian purposes. Is the minister suggesting that those who own and keep working dogs and who currently have their tails shortened to save them from injury do so in order to increase poor animal welfare practice and not to guarantee animal welfare? My experience is that they undertake the procedure to guarantee the future welfare of the animals in their ownership.

Does the minister agree that there is a clear distinction in the SCHRI between individuals who benefit from the scheme and community projects, such as the Glenkens Community and Arts Trust project in my constituency and the Dunscore community initiative? Such community initiatives often require countless hours of voluntary input, even before an application is made. Will the minister use his no doubt considerable influence with his ministerial colleague, Allan Wilson, to assure us that the SCHRI will continue to receive a level of funding that will ensure that the many community initiatives that have come about as a direct result of the SCHRI and which are currently being considered at all levels will not be rejected because of a lack of funding?

I sincerely thank Alasdair Morgan for bringing the subject forward for debate. Not many people believe that Wanlockhead is in the constituency of Galloway and Upper Nithsdale, but it is and the constituency is all the better for its presence. Anybody who has been to the Wanlockhead Museum of Lead Mining would agree that it is unique. One only has to visit to appreciate that uniqueness, and I repeat the invitation that I first issued to the minister following her announcement on the national cultural strategy to visit the place when she can possibly find room in her diary to do so. As well as having a fascinating visit to an unforgettable monument to the incredibly hardy souls who carved their living from the hillsides, she will see some superbly tended moorland and, as Alasdair Morgan rightly pointed out, the waters whence came the gold that is inset into the head of our mace in the Parliament. I completely endorse the content of Alasdair Morgan's speech and there is no need for me to repeat it, however worthy it is to repeat wise words. The amount of money that the trustees need to maintain the viability of the unique attraction at Wanlockhead is peanuts compared with expenditure on other museums and other measures that are taken in the cultural world. For once, I do not accuse Dumfries and Galloway Council of doing anything other than its utmost to support an attraction that is within its boundaries. However, it cannot be right that, in 2001—the year of foot-and-mouth disease—the museum was dependent on a well-wisher's donation of £25,000 to keep it going. Neither can it be right that, this year, the staff volunteered to work for nothing—which says an enormous amount about their commitment to the museum and how the trustees run it—nor that yet again, before Dumfries and Galloway Council was able to make a grant available, a benefactor had to lend the trustees £20,000 to allow wages to be paid and the museum to open. It is surely more than ironic that this debate follows this afternoon's debate on our historic environment, but that simply highlights the tragedy this year when the museum's book and exhibition funds, which the trustees had painstakingly built up, were wiped out by the necessity to prevent the  historic environment of Wanlockhead from falling into disrepair through damp and environmental damage. That is the level of the tightrope on which the trustees walk, and it is a national disgrace that that is the case, as the unique nature of Wanlockhead allows the visitor to experience the reality of lead mining and the horrendous conditions with which most of the miners put up in the exact location and context within which the mining took place. It is not only important for tourists but a vital component of our children's education about Scotland's cultural and social past. My colleague Murray Tosh will expand on that education experience. Rather than repeat the many good points that Alasdair Morgan made, I will quote a letter from a Dr James Begg to The Herald last autumn. He said: "I was disturbed by a Herald article several weeks ago on the threat to the Wanlockhead Lead Mine Museum, and deeply dismayed by today's news of its imminent closure if the paltry sum of £20,000 cannot be found to keep it running through the winter—and of the failure of the Scottish Executive to offer any assistance. This museum is not just 'an old building stuffed full of dusty exhibits'. It is a living museum with eighteenth and nineteenth-century miners' cottages, unique machinery, and an opportunity for visitors to don hard hats and penetrate deep into the hillside through the narrow workings of an old lead mine, giving a wonderful insight into the appalling conditions in which men, women and children had to toil 200 ago, high in the Leadhills. I write this with feeling, as someone whose great-great-great grandfather worked in these mines in the early 1800s—and someone who has brought enthralled overseas visitors to this magical spot high in the heart of the Lowther Hills. I find it inconceivable that ... there is not a spare £20,000 lying around which could be donated without pain to save the Scottish Museum of Lead Mining—and the local community. And perhaps there might even be a wee bit extra, to promote and publicise more widely what has unfortunately ... been one of Scotland's best-kept secrets!" Following the minister's statement on the cultural strategy, I wrote to her and she advised that the museum may apply under the museums recognition scheme, which will be rolled out later this year. I hope that, tonight, she does not simply hide behind that possibility but will take the opportunity of the debate to make a significant first step in changing Wanlockhead from one of Scotland's best-kept secrets—as revealed in that letter—to one of the jewels in Scotland's crown, which it undoubtedly deserves to be.

Can the minister give us an assurance that any further increase in the rate of  modulation will be match funded by the Treasury? I raised that point in my speech.

I am grateful that I am following Rob Gibson, but I am not so grateful to him for pinching the final line of my speech about the happy SEERAD family all coming together in an efficient grant management process—I hope I live to see the day. I draw members' attention to my entry in the register of members' interests, if it still exists this morning.

Indeed, subject to determination. In the register, members will see that I am a sleeping partner in a farming partnership in Ayrshire. The Executive's consultation is indeed important. I do not disagree with NFU Scotland's view that it is perhaps one of the most important consultations in many years. I hope that the many and varied stakeholders involved have not grown so tired of Executive consultation exercises, which have been equally many and varied, that they do not treat this one with the seriousness that it deserves. All stakeholders need to make their views known and I will encourage them to do so at every opportunity. The consultation document is large and many individuals and organisations, including me, are just beginning to get their heads round it. I want to focus my speech on three or four areas that I believe to be of particular concern—most of which have already been mentioned, so I cannot be far off the mark—on which eventual decisions could have serious implications for rural development. The first concern revolves around axis 2 funding under the rural development regulation, which states that 25 per cent of the European agricultural  fund for rural development funding should go towards "Improving the environment and countryside through land management". That is a perfectly laudable and agreeable aim, but my concern is that it perhaps allows us to take our eye off the importance of retaining profitability within the agricultural sector. I think that the minister acknowledged some of that importance in his opening speech. As I see it, the problem is that funding that is delivered for environmental schemes through axis 2 tends simply to reimburse all or most of the money spent by the land manager on an environmentally suitable scheme; it does little or nothing for the profitability of the business concerned. The very fact that we have a rural environment in Scotland that so many people are so keen to protect and preserve is due to the fact that, with a profitable agricultural sector, come the environmental benefits that we all seek, even if those benefits occasionally need to be prompted and incentivised from the centre. It is because we have fostered and encouraged a reasonably profitable agricultural sector over the years that we now have a countryside that is so well worth preserving. If we lose the link between support and profitability, I believe that we will lose long-term sustainable environmental benefit. Since the introduction of the single farm payment and the consequent breaking of another link between subsidy and production, the only remaining incentive to maintain stock numbers on hill and marginal farms has been the LFASS, which still pays out on the headage number of sheep and cattle and which falls within axis 2 of the rural development regulation. The RSPB, which is not a body with which I often agree 100 per cent, but which I commend for its speed in pointing out the danger in this instance, acknowledges that incentive, among the many benefits of the scheme, and I whole-heartedly agree with its view that the proposals in the current consultation for the LFASS would be a backward step for the environment. One of the acknowledged impacts of the single farm payment was that suckled calf production would most likely move down the hill, which has been the case to a degree. The LFASS is the only incentive to keep them on the hills, with the recognised environmental benefit that that brings—although I hear what the minister says about the beef envelope—yet there is no substitute for the LFASS incentive in the proposals. The Executive's desire in effect to freeze LFASS payments on an historical basis will not just keep things as they are until 2010, the year in which the European Commission requires a full review of less favoured areas; some £20 million per annum  that is currently payable to keep cattle in those areas will still be paid out without any requirement for the recipient to justify or earn that support. As I understand it, there is no need to bring in the proposed change until 2010. The less favoured area scheme does what it says on the tin; it supports less favoured areas. It works well, so why do we not just leave it alone until it has to be changed? The proposals in the consultation document would almost bring in change for change's sake and I believe that they should be resisted. One change to the LFASS that I would welcome would be the inclusion of dairy producers. Such a change is long overdue, would take only £3 million to £4 million out of a total of some £135 million and would bring much-needed relief to that beleaguered sector. As Jim Wallace pointed out, there is a proposal to redistribute the available LFASS funding by giving a heavier weighting to very fragile areas at the expense of standard areas. I agree with Alasdair Morgan that that would be completely unacceptable and believe that it falls into the trap of losing the link between support and economic activity. Any further support for the very fragile areas, which might well be justified, should not come at the expense of funding for fragile and standard areas. Modulation is always a contentious issue. I am somewhat alarmed at a sentence in the minister's foreword in the consultation document, where he acknowledges that the budget will not be enough to achieve all the outputs that stakeholders seek. He goes on to say that that could be overcome by additional voluntary modulation from the single farm payment. In his language, additional voluntary modulation really means compulsory reduction in the single farm payment. I seek an absolute assurance from the minister that no such increase in modulation will be contemplated without an absolute guarantee of matched funding from the Treasury. It seems to me that the Executive tends to assess how much funding it has available through modulation before deciding how to spend it. Perhaps the consultation might improve the delivery mechanism by agreeing the objectives first, which would then determine the amount of modulated funding required. I will say a brief word on forestry, although its current state, in the private sector at least, demands more than a brief word, frankly. The decision to bring forward the closure of the Scottish forestry grant scheme and the subsequent torrent of applications, which should surely not have come as a surprise given that there has been no word of a successor, have left the private sector in nothing less than a chaotic shambles—and a very angry shambles at that.  The handling of the scheme has been an unmitigated disaster. Many applicants now have unsubmitted, partially prepared schemes—prepared at considerable cost to themselves—and there has been no assurance that submitted schemes will be accepted. If this were a private business, heads would roll; but no doubt the only losers in this instance will be the highly efficient private sector, which is bearing the full brunt of public sector dithering. I trust that the outcome of the consultation will be a better system but, in the meantime, chaos reigns. The Executive should address that. Many challenges are made in the consultation paper and many issues are raised. Some are eminently sensible; others less so. However, the overriding message to all who care about rural Scotland is that this is people's chance to shape the future. I trust that they will do so in their thousands.

I think I am about to become one of a growing list of members—I am not so much changing my mind, but I am guilty of not picking up the consequences of the proposal when  it went through the Standards and Public Appointments Committee. I have to say that I have grave reservations about the opening sentence on this subject in the Scottish Parliament information centre's briefing on the bill as amended at stage 2, which states: "A determination is a legally binding form of subordinate legislation that is not subject to the usual types of Parliamentary procedure". Parliament's time has been extraordinarily well used in this afternoon's debate on standards. It has been a mature and grown-up debate, from which the bill is emerging much stronger. If we go down the route of bringing in a determination—thereby bringing in change if not by the back door then by a short cut—we will do away with the opportunity for mature and extended debate on matters that have proved to be of great importance to all members. I have grave reservations about the determination procedure.

Does the member accept that that process would not allow for the level of consultation and debate that we have been able to have during today's proceedings?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Are you able to read out to us what those options are?

I congratulate Susan Deacon on lodging the amendments in the group and on the eloquence with which she presented them to the chamber. Experience and hindsight are great things. As I think Tricia Marwick said in her contribution to the debate on an earlier grouping, most members arrived at the Parliament in 1999 with the intention of creating a Parliament that had the highest possible standards. We want to be seen as being open and accountable, above question and of high integrity. As I said, experience is a great thing. It gives me no pleasure to say that, in this case, it tells me that each time that we have attempted to make ourselves more open, accessible and honest, we have simply handed more ammunition to those who seek to do us down. Those people will seek  to do that whatever the shape of the bill that emerges this afternoon. I am fascinated at how the debate has moved on since the stage 1 debate, during which two or three members suggested rather tentatively that the time might be right to reconsider the issue. Susan Deacon is to be hugely commended for what she has done. Donald Gorrie made a very good point in the debate, which was that his wife does not apprise him of her financial circumstances. Being the very sensible partner—or spouse or whatever else we want to call it—that he is, he does not press the issue. Why should he? However, if the amendments in the group are not agreed to today, Donald Gorrie might be put in a very difficult position. On a previous occasion, I drew attention to the fact that, if my wife was to inherit some property, her response to my saying, "That is very nice, my dear. I am now off to see the Standards and Public Appointments Committee to register that," would be to say, "Over my dead body." On a bad day, that might be quite tempting, but I am delighted to say that we have more good days than bad days. I would be put in a very difficult position if I had to register that. As elected members, we have to take the heat. Who are we to say to our spouses or partners, "You must divulge information to us because we have to register it." It is time that we took the brave step—one that no member nor the Parliament would be any the worse for taking—of agreeing to the amendments in Susan Deacon's name.

I cannot support amendment 11. It is not that I do not understand where Margaret Jamieson is coming from or that I misconstrue her intentions, which I think are to try to provide more clarity in what is a slightly cloudy area. It is just that the bill should be as minimalist as possible in its approach. On that score, the amendment is not entirely necessary, for the simple reason that, as the Scottish Parliament information centre briefing explains so well, the amendment seeks "to widen the registration requirement to cover activities in which a Member has a financial interest (which may result in remuneration should that interest be wound up)".  When that financial interest is realised, it will be registrable. The amendment is unnecessary and I shall not support it.

I entirely agree with what Alasdair Morgan has said. We have sometimes fallen into the trap of believing that, because we are different from Westminster—and rightly so—we should always be seen to be more rigorous, open and accessible than our Westminster colleagues, and that we should always give more attention to detail than they do. As Alasdair Morgan says, the figure is bound to be arbitrary. Under amendment 2, I think that it would come to £510, rounded down to the nearest £10. Nonetheless, I think that a figure of 1 per cent is not unreasonable. It allows us to be perfectly open about these things, while hiding—or rather, not having to register—a lot of the minute details to which Alasdair has referred.  I seek your guidance, Presiding Officer. In speaking to the previous group of amendments, I think that I should have referred members to my entry in the register of interests of members, as I am a sleeping partner in a farming partnership.

I hope that Mr Adam will acknowledge—I am sure that he will—that members of the Standards and Public Appointments Committee agreed that the amendments be lodged so that the whole Parliament could determine an outcome. Doing so did not necessarily signal individual approval of the amendments.

Given that the proposal affects people outwith NHS Ayrshire and Arran's immediate area, will the minister inform me whether it is competent for a health board to consult outwith its area and into another health board's area?

As other members have done, I congratulate my colleague John Scott on securing the debate. As the one member present who does not have a relevant connection to Ayrshire—other than that I used to live there—I am grateful for being allowed to speak. I commend the motion, but although we are discussing the provision of emergency and unscheduled care in Ayrshire, I do not entirely agree that the only views to which we should listen are those of "the public and health professionals in Ayrshire". One could argue that I should have taken that up with my colleague when he lodged his motion. I take issue with that position because the proposal  will affect the western half of my constituency of Galloway and Upper Nithsdale. Many constituents from Wigtownshire are privileged to be able to use the facilities that are provided by Ayrshire and Arran NHS Board, especially those that are available at Ayr hospital. From my perspective the issue is, as John Scott said, entirely one of geography. From Stranraer and Newton Stewart, it is exactly 50 miles to Ayr. From Stranraer, it is more than 72 miles to Dumfries and Galloway royal infirmary, which represents an almost 50 per cent increase in the length of journey along what is, as members will have heard me say on several occasions, a thoroughly unsatisfactory road. Drummore, which is the most southerly point on the Rhinns of Galloway, is a further 17 miles from Stranraer, so we are talking about an extensive journey of 67 miles to Ayr or 82 miles to Dumfries. If the facility at Ayr was to move to Crosshouse, that would add another 18 miles. With a journey of such a distance, the golden hour would begin to look more like a silver two hours. Similarly, the Isle of Whithorn at the very south of the Machars is 20 miles from Newton Stewart, which is 50 miles from Ayr. That represents a journey of 70 miles; it is the same distance to Dumfries. If a patient had to get to Crosshouse instead of Ayr, that would add on at least another 25 minutes. A number of my constituents face a big problem and I believe that it will be hugely disadvantageous to them if the proposal is carried through. I commend Adam Ingram's speech, in which he made some excellent points, one of which concerned interpretation of what the Kerr report means by a community hospital. It seems to me that individual health boards are quite free to choose an interpretation that most benefits them. However, that is an issue for a different debate. I believe that health service delivery should be maintained as close as possible to the patients who are likely to benefit from it. I am afraid that the board's proposal would do the opposite; services will be centralised yet further, which would be to the considerable disadvantage of some of my constituents. On that basis, I thoroughly commend the motion to the chamber.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it agrees with the advice from Commissioner Mariann Fischer Boel that article 45 of European Community regulation 1782/2003 could be used in order to ensure that farmers in Scotland who were deer farming prior to 2002 can receive a single farm payment under new European Union support mechanisms. (S2O-9537)

I could accuse the minister of hiding behind technicalities, but I would not do that. I appreciate that he is concerned that by opening up the question, he might be pursued by requests for support from previously unsupported sectors, such as the pig and poultry sectors. Is the minister aware that pig and poultry units tend to be parts of larger enterprises that almost certainly receive support through arable aid and other such mechanisms? Given that the number of venison producers in Scotland has halved in the past two years, will the minister give an undertaking to at least investigate  what I think is an unfair loophole and to identify exactly what the cost implications would be to provide support for an extensive and environmentally friendly agricultural sector that thoroughly deserves support to allow it to compete fairly with more recent converts to venison production?

Does the minister share my concern that the inquiry might not touch on the relationship between primary producers and supermarkets? It seems to me that the announcement of the inquiry focused on the impact of the mini-supermarkets that are proliferating in our towns and cities on our traditional corner shops and independent retailers. Is he in a position to confirm that the relationship between primary producers and supermarkets will come under the Competition Commission's consideration? If he shares my concern, can he assure us that the Scottish Executive will take whatever steps are necessary to ensure that the investigation addresses that relationship?

Will the member take a small intervention?

The member will enjoy it.

Does Alasdair Morrison not see that there is a case for single farm payments being made to some farmers who are of an age and need to retire? Such payments would allow them to remain on holdings where they may have lived all their lives and enable young entrepreneurs to take over the tenancy of their farms at a low rent, thus expanding their businesses.

It is interesting to follow what sounded like a winding-up speech, even though we are not yet at that stage of the debate. As a former farmer—I draw members' attention to my entry in the register of members' interests in that regard—I welcome every opportunity to discuss agriculture in Parliament. It is more of a pleasure to do so following yesterday's joyous news that the beef export ban has at last been lifted and today's news that the OFT is to reopen its investigation into supermarket activity. Those are two rare pieces of good news for an industry that is desperately in need of more—it has been agonisingly short of good news in recent years. As our amendment states, the aspirations that are set out in the updated forward strategy document are hard to disagree with. However, we also highlight the reality in the farming world that there is despondency and uncertainty about the present and future prospects for agriculture, which are at a level such as I have never witnessed. The situation has been brought about by a lack of profitability in almost every sector. On that subject, the document is mischievously devious. It trumpets the fact that, since 2000, net farm income has risen by 202 per cent, but the truth is that a 202 per cent rise from practicality nothing equates to net farm income in 2004-05 of just £13,122. According to the strategy, net farm income "measures the level of return to the farmer and spouse for their manual and managerial labour". A return of £13,122 is pretty scant reward for that input and, although it may be 202 per cent up on the 2000 figure, it is down 11 per cent on the previous year. That points to the real damage to the rural economy, which continues to deteriorate under the Scottish Executive.

I do not think so. Mr Arbuckle has just spoken, and very well. As I have said before and will no doubt say again, when a farmer stops spending, he is the  last to suffer, because all the suppliers, tradesmen and contractors who depend on him suffer first. When they do not get work, the economic chill enters the village shop, pub, post office and local microbusinesses, which contribute greatly to the rural economy. That is why I agree totally with the second bullet point of the vision on page 1 of the strategy document, which is that the farming industry should be "a major driver in sustaining rural development" and in "helping rural communities prosper". That is exactly right, but the problem is that practitioners in the industry are not being made to feel that they are major drivers of anything; they are too busy trying to ensure that they do not make mistakes when they fill in the massive array of forms to which members have referred. I note in passing that, although the Executive established a committee to cut red tape and bureaucracy, it has in fact presided over a massive increase in it. Farmers must concentrate on filling in forms, because if they make the tiniest mistake in doing so, they are penalised ferociously. The imposition of massive penalties, the levels of which grossly outweigh the supposed crime that has been committed, has done more to undermine farming morale than any strategy can ever correct. The Environment and Rural Affairs Department has stooped pretty low lately in withholding, until the farmers have paid the penalties, single farm payments from farmers who are appealing such penalties. None of that leaves any farmer feeling that their political masters believe that he or she has a major role in driving the rural economy. Farmers are too concerned with surviving to be driving. In an effort to be positive, which I always try to be, I will in my remaining time focus on one little ray of sunshine in the strategy. Action point 12 refers to the planning to succeed initiative, which was one of the few positive things to emerge from the foot-and-mouth disease disaster of 2001. It should be a matter of great concern to all members that the average age of farm managers is 58 in Dumfries and Galloway and 56 in Scotland. The planning to succeed initiative was developed by Scottish Enterprise Dumfries and Galloway along with the original farm business steering group in order to encourage more young people to take effective management roles in the industry and to drive it forward. The initiative has been successful and I welcome the plan to expand it, but I ask the minister whether its remit could be expanded to include rural business leadership courses. Last Tuesday, I hosted a visit to Holyrood by representatives of a south of Scotland rural leadership pilot project, which is aimed at developing leadership skills in the rural  community. It aims to equip future leaders with a set of leadership tools that are designed to help rural businesses to lead the way to success and to enable them to continue to contribute to the local economy. It is based on an American model that has enjoyed considerable success. Although it is not wholly agriculture related, I believe that it would sit well within the planning to succeed programme. I hope that the minister will consider that possibility. I take this opportunity to put on record my thanks to the cross-party group of MSPs who spoke to the group of people who came to Parliament and gave of their time to make the day valuable. The aspirations of the strategy are fine—no one is arguing with them—but will they deliver to the agriculture industry the clear and decisive pointer that it desperately needs? I rather doubt it. The document is subtitled "Next Steps". Let us hope that those steps are in a forward direction for the sake of our agriculture industry, which remains the single most important driver of our rural economy.

Given that veal crates are on the verge of being made illegal throughout Europe, and given the much-improved conditions of transport, does the member agree that it is equally important that we try to reopen the live export market, which would bring huge financial benefits to the dairy sector, just as the beef sector has benefited from yesterday's announcement?

I hear what Rob Gibson says, but he has to accept that different breeds of dogs work in different ways and have different thicknesses of tails, as was mentioned earlier. They simply have different working practices.

As we have heard, the bill's key aims are to enhance the ability to respond to exotic disease outbreaks; minimise the risk of disease spread; introduce a duty of care for those who keep animals; and allow animals that are either suffering or in danger of suffering to be seized. No member has argued or will argue against those aims but, as is so often the case, the acceptable title, front cover and opening chapters of the book mask a few less acceptable elements in the plot. I will focus on two of those—other members have mentioned them, but I make no apology for repeating them. The first is covered in paragraphs 90 to 94 of the Environment and Rural Development Committee's report, which are on section 10 of the bill, on livestock genotypes. The section deals specifically with TSEs—transmissible spongiform encephalopathies—which are sometimes known as prion diseases, of which the most prominent in this country has been bovine spongiform encephalopathy, which is supposedly linked with Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and new variant CJD. In dealing with BSE and, in more recent times, foot-and-mouth disease, ministers of different political persuasions depended heavily on scientific advice in their decision-making process. They were right to do so, even if many of the scientific claims surrounding BSE, especially those involving its ability to jump species and to transmit to humans, have never been conclusively proved. Increasingly, many scientists and others question the prion theory and believe that it is just that—a theory on the cause of CJD that became accepted by the establishment but which has yet to be conclusively proved. I do not question ministers' right to lean heavily on the available science when confronting the difficult decisions that must be made when dealing with a TSE outbreak; indeed, they have a duty to do so. If that duty is generally accepted, what possible reason can there be not to include in the bill a provision to require ministers to consult veterinary and scientific advisers before they use the extended powers to slaughter livestock that will be available if the bill is passed? Over the years, I have had many differences with Advocates for Animals, so I am pleased that representatives of the group are in the public  gallery to witness me agreeing with the group that ministers will be able to slaughter animals "if they think fit" in much broader circumstances than they can currently and without having to provide justification. Paragraph 7 of proposed new schedule 3A to the Animal Health Act 1981, which will be inserted by section 1 of the bill, will allow ministers to order animals to be slaughtered whether or not they are infected by disease, have been in contact with infected animals or have been exposed to the disease. In anybody's language, those are fairly draconian powers. I agree with the committee's desire and that of other members to have reassurances in the bill with regard to those new powers.

I accept what the minister says 100 per cent, but that simply underlines my point. I cannot understand his reluctance to include in the bill a provision requiring scientific advice to be taken. I have absolute faith, more or less, in the present minister—

I was close to getting carried away. I just about have absolute faith in his decision-making powers, which were proven during the foot-and-mouth outbreak. However, with the greatest of respect, he is unlikely to remain the minister for ever, which is why we need reassurances for the sake of future parliamentarians and ministers. My second concern is over the issue of tail docking, which, as has been proved this morning, is highly emotive. My concern is based on a lifetime's experience with dogs working in the countryside. I have no problems whatever with a ban on cosmetic docking and the removal of the whole tail. However, there is a huge difference between that and a ban on tail shortening for working dogs, which will result in far more distress and welfare problems than arise at present. Members are being seriously misled in that regard. Unlike cosmetic docking, which, I repeat, involves the removal of the whole tail, the shortening of working dogs' tails involves the removal of only about a third or a half of the tail. I point out for Christine Grahame, although she is not here, that the tail can still be wagged. The purpose of the procedure is not to be fashionable but to be  practical; the aim is not to be cruel but to prevent future harm and distress. Ministers rightly place great importance on individuals' responsibility towards their animals' future welfare. Owners of working dogs shorten their tails to secure that welfare, not to harm it. The procedure is both painless and bloodless, using modern techniques. Frankly, anyone who has witnessed the very sad whimpering of a spaniel with a broken tail or the blood loss that is caused by a damaged tail would never countenance the removal of the proposal to exempt working dogs, with a right of veto in the hands of the veterinary profession.

I am afraid that I do not have time. I cannot believe that the minister can dismiss so off-handedly the figures from Sweden following its outright ban on tail docking in 1989, which show that 35 per cent of working gun dogs suffer tail injuries by the time that they are two and a half years old. In the UK, a Kennel Club survey of undocked working gundogs showed that 75 per cent of Clumber spaniels, 20 per cent of English springer spaniels and 25 per cent of wirehaired Vizslas suffered tail damage. If the minister persists with the removal of the proposed exemption, I am sorry to say that he will be responsible for an increase in cruelty when he is rightly trying to bring about the opposite. If he is being driven by advice, it is not based on experience; if he is being driven by Westminster, as some have suggested, he is not half as sensible as I believe he is. I urge him to be driven by experience and leave well alone a system that currently works perfectly well and maximises animal welfare, which is otherwise well addressed in the bulk of the bill.

Owners of working dogs who shorten the dogs' tails do so to secure the animals' future welfare. How does the member square that with the minister's publicly declared intention to remove the exemption for working dogs?

Volunteering is something that we Scots are very good at. It comes naturally to us; it is instinctive within the Scottish character, which embraces an understanding that we have a mutual responsibility and an obligation to help those who are less fortunate than ourselves. That view is borne out by the statistics. There are 50,000 voluntary organisations in Scotland, supported by more than 1 million volunteers who put in 9 million hours of unpaid effort each month. That means that, at the average wage level, more than £1 billion-worth of wages do not have to be paid by the state because volunteers successfully provide services and support that, in effect, the state has failed to provide. The first thing that we politicians need to do is give a resounding thank you to Scotland's volunteers. Their contribution to  Scotland's economy is massive and their service to the people whom they support is even greater. One of my favourite times of the year is volunteers week, when, like other members, I am asked to volunteer by a number of local projects. Thus far I have, among other things, helped to deliver meals on wheels in Kirkcudbright and—believe it or not—helped to create new flower beds at Threave gardens near Castle Douglas, which I thoroughly recommend to anyone who is in the area. I have also helped to build a bird hide from which the pupils at Belmont primary school in Stranraer can study the bird life in their gardens. It is probably the only structure I have built that has remained standing four years later. However, pride of place goes to the occasion when I called the bingo numbers at the Millennium centre in Stranraer. I think that I can modestly say that I have a natural flair for that activity and the experience gave me some comfort that there is a career that I might successfully pursue should the electorate ever decide that I need a new one. Volunteers week serves to highlight the vast range of activities that volunteers undertake. Some 90 per cent of those who are involved in citizens advice bureaux and 53 per cent of museum staff are volunteers. People do not know that. The Museum of Lead Mining at Wanlockhead in my constituency is a unique monument to the incredibly tough lives that the miners led, but I can safely say that it would not exist if it was not for the voluntary effort that is put in. Other members mentioned befriending schemes; prison visitors; drug rehabilitation initiatives; victim support; work with abused women, men and children; our sporting life; our cultural life; and our environment. All of those and more would be considerably the poorer without the input of volunteers, which is often unsung and taken for granted. I endorse and support the volunteering strategy and its aims. As members said, it is difficult not to support it. However, I do so with a belief that the correct level of state management of the voluntary sector involves a balance that is difficult to achieve but vital to attain. I will suggest two areas in which the Executive could act to improve the balance. I must be right to do so, because almost every member who has spoken has mentioned them. The first is funding—not the amount, but the timescale and the process. All too often, applications for funding, if they are approved, result in a three-year package. The funded body spends the first year becoming established, the second year carrying out the work it was established to do and the third year trying to secure further funding to guarantee survival. Surely that is not the best way either to ensure the best return on taxpayers' input or to make the best use of volunteers' efforts.  The second area that is ripe for improvement is the process that is required by Disclosure Scotland. It is sad that the process is required at all, but it is necessary. The complex processes that we have had since the introduction of disclosure have put some people off volunteering and made recruitment to voluntary organisations much harder. I welcome the commitment that the Minister for Education and Young People made in yesterday's debate to simplify the process and end the ridiculous requirement for multiple disclosures. Those changes cannot come soon enough. They will give a welcome boost to volunteers' morale and bring an overdue element of common sense to a process that no one wants but which is forced upon us by some of the darker elements in society. I am interested in the commendably compact brief that Volunteer Development Scotland issued. As well as being a perfect example of how to present a brief to MSPs, it contains a subtle message. It says, "Please continue to support us along the lines of the volunteering strategy. Please help us to build on the positive base from which we start in Scotland. Please continue to debate what Parliament can do, with others, to energise the latent resources of the people of Scotland." However, it also seems to state an unwritten message: "Beyond that, please keep your hands off and let us independently do what we do best: volunteer, with minimal interference, to the huge benefit of our country and our citizens."

Will the minister confirm that an announcement is imminent on the formation of the Solway shellfish management association? That association would license cockle fishermen, thus making the identification of illegal fishermen all the easier. Does the minister agree that the successful enforcement of regulations by either the SSMA or the Scottish Fisheries Protection Agency could only be made easier by the full involvement of the private owners of the foreshore and sea bed, who are currently largely excluded from the process of managing these valuable assets?

Like the SNP, we acknowledge the positive aspects of the statement and welcome the steps to which the minister drew attention. In particular, I applaud the way in which the Forestry Commission has completely opened up to community and leisure use the asset of forestry in Scotland, through projects such as the 7stanes project in my constituency, which the minister mentioned. Being awarded superstar status has had an enormous effect. I am not sure what it will do to the quality of our timber, but it must mean that the Forestry Commission is doing something right. However, I cannot help but feel that the minister has missed a massive opportunity to address some of the real concerns that exist in the forestry industry. Does she realise that current new plantings are less than 5,000 hectares a year, when in order to meet the Scottish Executive's target of 25 per cent coverage they should be nearer 14,000 hectares a year? Richard Lochhead referred to that. Does she acknowledge or even understand that, when the support mechanisms for forestry are merged within the Scottish Executive Environment and Rural Affairs Department—she mentioned that in her statement—current restocking grants will disappear? That is an important development, because much of the high-quality restocking that is the commendable hallmark of our second generation of forests—including open spaces, far more use of broad-leaved trees and better-quality commercial trees—is largely dependent on such grants. I wonder whether she has taken that in. Without the grants, restocking is likely to be of less environmental benefit, to produce poorer-quality  timber and to be of less long-term economic benefit to the rural economy. I acknowledge the key role that forestry has to play in that economy. The minister had the option of telling us how she will accelerate new planting to meet strategic targets and how she will maintain high-quality restocking. I hope that she will tell us when she answers my question. She has also announced £2 million to be spent on 30 projects. Over what period will that money be spent?

Like Jackie Baillie, I am interested in the minister's reference to increased funding for industrial museums. Will that allow an expansion of the institutions that fall into that category, to include institutions such as the unique Museum of Lead Mining at Wanlockhead in my constituency, which currently receives no central funding, despite its historic, educational and national importance?

I applaud what the minister has said in pointing out the successes of the college. Does the minister accept that, unless the Executive intervenes to ensure that the Crichton project receives the capital funding that it now requires as a result of those successes, the current partners will be forced to abandon the project altogether? Does he acknowledge the vital role that the campus plays in providing further and higher education in a remote and rural area? Does he also recognise the enormous role that it plays in social inclusion? Will he acknowledge its potential for the regeneration of Dumfries in Galloway and the south of Scotland, just as the university of the Highlands and Islands holds potential in the north of the country?

I join others in congratulating Elaine Murray on obtaining this evening's debate. The issue may be a reserved matter but it affects a number of people in the east of my constituency who use the post office in Dumfries. The loss of any major asset from the centre of a community is always hard to bear. One need only look at any small rural village that has lost its school, shop, church, post office or even its pub—some villages have lost all those things—to see the devastating impact that such a loss can have. Only last night, I attended a public meeting in the Haugh of Urr, which is one of three communities in the Castle Douglas area that are taking part in a pilot scheme for a new form of postal service delivery in small rural communities.  No one who was present at that meeting—some of whom are in the public gallery this evening—will or can doubt the depth of feeling in that community, whether or not they agree with that feeling. One lesson from that pilot scheme is that Post Office Ltd has a long way to go before it can be said to be promoting communication, consultation and inclusiveness in undertaking the efficiency programme that was set by the UK Government at Westminster. We should be under no illusion about the fact that the actions of Post Office Ltd are a direct consequence of Government policy. It is for the Government to decide whether the Post Office is a service or a business. I have no difficulty with the concept of an efficiently run Post Office. Unlike, I suspect, some members, I have little difficulty with the principle that the Post Office might in effect franchise out service delivery, notwithstanding the serious staff issues to which Elaine Murray referred. That model appears to have been fairly successful, at least in economic terms, where it has been carried out. But I have considerable difficulty when the transition from a directly managed post office, such as that in Great King Street in Dumfries, to a Spar franchise retail outlet is presented as more or less a fait accompli. I also have difficulty with the accompanying consultation exercise, which has little to do with consultation and a great deal to do with information. This is exactly what happened at the beginning of the rural scheme I mentioned, which I believe would have been much better received by the local community if there had been genuine consultation, openness and inclusiveness on the part of Post Office Ltd. I am sorry that lessons appear not to have been learned in relation to the exercise in Dumfries. The closure of the Great King Street branch would be all the more poignant as it is one of a tiny handful of UK post offices that has been awarded and bears the charter mark. Although the branch wears the badge with great distinction, it will be lost for ever in any transfer. I understand that the change in Dunfermline would involve a Spar shop moving into the existing post office. I am not convinced that that model has been fully explored with regard to the post office in Dumfries, where I imagine transferring the sorting office would provide ample space for a popular retail outlet in the very centre of the town. Last week, when I and our former colleague David Mundell met Royal Mail officials, I was heartened to hear one official highlight Post Office Ltd's commitment to maintain a strong presence on the high street. I thought that that was excellent, but it stands in direct relation to the proposal for Dumfries. Frankly, anyone who thinks  that Whitesands is the high street of Dumfries knows neither the town nor the area. Whitesands is not and has never been the high street, and putting the post office into the Spar there will not make it so. In summary, I am happy with the principle, but I am deeply unhappy with the proposed location. I note with considerable interest that—here I quote rather reluctantly from The Guardian — "The new boss of Britain's post office network", Mr Alan Cook, "expects a showdown within months ... with ministers over the future of rural branches, many of which would shut if the government makes cuts to its £150m subsidy." I hope that he has that showdown and that he is successful. Rural Scotland and its communities need their post offices, and I do not see how they can be maintained without some level of public financial input. I very much support Elaine Murray's motion and congratulate her on securing the debate. I trust that Post Office Ltd will not totally close its mind to other alternatives in Dumfries until all possibilities have been thoroughly and fully explored.

No one in their right minds—or even in their wrong minds—would argue against the general principles set out in the motion that we debate this afternoon. Indeed, it is noticeable that none of the amendments seeks to do so. However, it is equally noticeable that two amendments refer to the "vision", "aspiration" and "rhetoric" that have so dominated the first six and a half years of this Government's performance at the expense of any meaningful action to introduce the sustainable development that we all seek. Let us fervently hope that, in the spirit of a new year, that is about to change with the acceptance of the strategy this afternoon. I share some of John Swinney's concerns about the timescale for action that we have witnessed in past years. Like him, I need look only at my constituency for several examples of how that inactivity has held up investment and entrepreneurship and has dampened economic expansion in a way that should be an embarrassment. There is no finer example of that than in aquaculture—specifically in shellfish—along the Solway coast, where there is the potential for a massive sustainable industry. Previous overfishing and free-for-all harvesting, which existed under Governments of all shades, led to a depletion of cockle stocks to the extent that it necessitated temporary closure of the beds. They recovered magnificently and—with the very best of intentions, I believe—the Executive set up the Solway Shellfish Management Association in typical style, involving a myriad stakeholders and a great deal of bureaucracy, in order to establish a workable and sustainable licensing regime. Over  the past four years or so, however, that organisation has become so bogged down in internal conflicts of interest—as well as in the bureaucracy to which I have referred, which this Executive has always promised but spectacularly failed to reduce—that the project appears to have hit something of a brick wall. The principal reason for that may be that the one vital cog in the wheel was not brought into the debate until almost the last minute. That cog is the private owner—the individual, the entrepreneur—who owns the sea bed and holds the key to developing the asset sustainably, with a potentially massive jobs benefit in a region that desperately needs one. I am fully aware that the two words "private" and "ownership", especially when they are joined up, are not terribly welcome in the realms of Executive policy making, but unless the private owners along the Solway are released from the bureaucratic stranglehold under which they currently appear to be held by the Executive, that sustainable development with all its potential will remain—rather literally, in this case—dead in the water. As the minister is aware, a constituent of mine applied for a several order last February, almost a year ago, in order to begin the process of putting considerable investment into aquaculture in that area, but he has yet to receive anything other than an acknowledgement. A report from a local inquiry into the SSMA proposals appears to be being sat on, and in the meantime the level of illegal cockle harvesting continues to rise, using up the valuable resources of the Scottish Fisheries Protection Agency, which I am sure could be better employed elsewhere. I am sure that the minister would agree that the Solway coast is the very epitome of sustainable economic development waiting to happen, and I plead with him to take radical action this year to help that development to happen. He will have my entire support if that can be progressed. On a different topic, last Saturday morning I attended a public meeting in the village of Springholm in my constituency, where there is considerable unrest over a proposed housing development that will virtually double the size of that small community. I do not pretend that we do not desperately need new housing in Dumfries and Galloway, for purchase and also particularly for rent, but I share some of the concerns raised by the residents of that village at that meeting. It seems that one of the principal reasons behind the development proposal is that the developers believe that they can get permission from Scottish Water to build there. The same is true of other proposals in the constituency. The inevitable result of that is that people end up building houses where they can get permission to  build them rather than where they are most needed, and the result of that is simply to increase car journeys—and I emphasise that, because we will never replace the car in rural Scotland—by a massive amount as more and more people have to commute to their work. As the occupants of those new housing developments tend to be commuters, the very communities that have those developments thrust upon them can suffer an adverse knock-on effect. Springholm has just had a phase of expansion completed, and as one of the Springholm residents told me on Saturday, "We need time to absorb the first expansion into our community before we have to take on yet another increase." Communities need to be sustainable as well, and that does not necessarily just mean that they need more and more people in them. Given the time restrictions, I finish by saying that this has been a good debate. It is an annual debate and it is always a good one, on a very worthy subject. I have little argument with either the strategy or the general principles that lie behind it, but I do not have a lot of faith in the ability of this Executive to deliver it.

To ask the Scottish Executive when the Minister for Justice last met the chief constable of Dumfries and Galloway constabulary. (S2O-8441)

I think that I also meant to ask what matters the minister discussed with him. That might have hinted at my next question, which is  whether she discussed antisocial behaviour in some of our smaller rural communities. I am receiving a growing number of letters from members of rural communities right across my constituency which draw my attention to the increasing incidence of antisocial behaviour, which is usually committed by a very small number of disruptive youngsters. As the minister will be aware, such behaviour can cause mayhem and a considerable amount of stress in small communities. What further measures could and will the Executive take to address that problem because, in spite of Roseanna Cunningham's remarks about Dumfries and Galloway and what the Deputy Minister for Justice has said in his replies to several questions, the current measures are simply not working in many of our small rural communities?

Is the member not going against the usual principle, to which we all hold, that one is innocent until proven guilty?

In the debate in February, to which other members have referred, I said: "Frankly, I believe that anyone who sees fit to vote against the motion should not come under the auspices of the order because they should not be a member of the Parliament."— [ Official Report , 24 February 2005; c 14799.]  I stick to what I said then. As other members have pointed out, the Standards Committee was given its remit on the matter under the Scotland Act 1998 and has had no choice but to continue to take it forward. This morning, I reread the Official Report of the February debate. I was struck by many of the wise words that were said, not least these—which I would think are wise, because they are my own. I said: "I believe that a requirement to declare every single tiny facet of our existence would constitute a gross intrusion of members' privacy, to the extent that it could even put people off any ambition to be a member of the Parliament. That would be a retrograde step. There is a limit to the amount of intrusion that any register should involve and we must be careful that we do not step over that limit."— [ Official Report , 24 February 2005; c 14800.]  With the benefit of hindsight, which we now have, I say without hesitation that we have stepped over that limit. I say that because I have met somebody who has drawn back from his original intention to become a member of the Scottish Parliament. That is deeply regrettable, not because of the individual involved, who may or may not have been a terrific member, but because we want everyone to aspire to becoming a member of the Parliament. If people are put off that prospect by what we have effectively imposed on them, we as an institution will be considerably the poorer. We are not an exclusive institution but, if we are not careful, we may find that we have helped to build one. It is important to remember that, until now, input to the bill has been made only by committee members. As Linda Fabiani said, it is healthy that the matter is now to be handed on to a wider selection of members. The committee has done a pretty good job of getting the bill to this stage, given the remit that the Scotland Act 1998 imposed on us. We have all laid down little markers for the changes that we would like to see and I believe that we have done the job that we should have done in coming to a consensual agreement on what to lay before the Parliament. We have been driven by circumstances that are rapidly changing. It is right that we should reflect on one or two of the proposals of most concern as we hand the bill over. I am particularly concerned about the onus on members to register interests—be they shares or heritable property—that are owned by spouses or cohabitees, because that raises serious problems. Donald Gorrie said in the debate in February: "It is quite wrong to ask a partner or spouse to declare such a shareholding. Progress in recent years in the system of taxation has seen husbands and wives taxed separately—after all, they are separate people."— [ Official Report , 24 February 2005; c 14803.]  Indeed they are. In this day and age, increasingly they will not be too keen to hand over information to their partner or spouse.

I notice that Stewart Stevenson intervened on Donald Gorrie at exactly this stage in the debate in February.

I refer Stewart Stevenson to  the Official Report , column 14803, and the answer that Donald Gorrie gave to him when he made that point in February. It is a perfectly valid point, but Donald Gorrie answered it much better than I could. This business of the heritable property of a spouse is a potential minefield. Let me give a brief example. If my wife was to inherit a piece of heritable property and I said, "Well, that's very nice, dear, but I'm just off to work this morning and I'm going to register it in the register of members' interests," she might reasonably say to me, "Over my dead body. I am not having every Tom, Dick and Harry and member of the press knowing what I have inherited." Why should they, frankly, and why should I be put in the position of having to register that interest when my wife has asked me not to? I would stand accused of being extremely disloyal either to my wife or to the Parliament. I do not want to have to make that choice, because it is unfair. [ Interruption. ] Sorry, I missed that. If somebody said that the decision would be difficult, they could well be right, but I do not want to go down that line.

Yes, one would go to the Parliament. I am also concerned about the use of the set figure of 50 per cent of MSPs' salaries as a measure to register various items. Surely it should not be the value as a percentage of our salary that is registrable, but the degree of influence that the interest has on us. If I had £30,000-worth of shares in ScottishPower—which I do not—I would be totally unable to influence anything that the company did. However, if I had a £30,000 shareholding in a small company, of which I might or might not be a director—if I was, I would have to register that fact—I might be able to have a lot more influence on the company, certainly more than I would have with the same amount of money invested in ScottishPower. I am struck by how things have moved on. I am concerned that every time we in this Parliament try to make ourselves more accountable and open—which is absolutely laudable and as it should be—we succeed in making it easier for those who seek to do us down to do exactly that and we end up being held in even less esteem. The loser in that equation is this institution and I do not want that to happen. The changes have largely been fuelled by the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002. I challenge those who will consider the bill not to shirk from radical change, if they deem that necessary, and to "think the unthinkable". I believe that those words were said by the Prime Minister  to Frank Field. I hope that the ad hoc committee lasts longer in its role than he did in his.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it considers that waste oil should continue to be incinerated under the Waste Incineration (Scotland) Regulations 2003. (S2O-8339)

Is the minister aware that the cost of the part A provisional licence that is now required to incinerate waste oil is £10,000 in Scotland but only £300 in England? Does she agree that, rather than face the increased costs of disposal that will be incurred under the new regulations, businesses such as small motor garages will be sorely tempted to dispose of their waste oil in a considerably less environmentally friendly manner? I am thinking of the current practice of a constituent of mine who gathers waste oil from neighbouring small garages and incinerates it to heat his business premises.

I made it clear that a great deal needs to be done to improve the safety of the A76 with a fairly low financial input. The member is twisting the debate into something that it is not.

I thank the members who supported my motion—they are not many in number, but they all recognise the real problems to which the motion refers, which are all too tragically highlighted by the recent death of an eight-year-old schoolboy whose school bus was involved in an accident with a lorry on a stretch of the A76 that was being resurfaced. That awful accident took place three weeks after the motion was lodged. I lodged the motion following two separate incidents that took place during our October recess, both of which claimed a life. I entitled the motion "The Case for Improvement", because there is no doubt in my mind that a strong case can be made. As we have now witnessed five deaths in five years on the section of the A76 that runs through my constituency, I welcome the opportunity to put that case. I hope that I will be forgiven for concentrating on the southern half of the route, which runs through Dumfries and Galloway. My reasons for doing so are well laid out in the A76 route action plan, which was last updated in October 1996. That document states: "The assessment has shown that the majority of the A76 in East Ayrshire is largely to a reasonable geometric standard. Once into Dumfries & Galloway, there is a marked deterioration in geometric standards". It continues: "The Geometry of the route largely dictates the level of service which is available to drivers. Where the road is to a reasonable standard, as in much of East Ayrshire, journey  times are faster and more reliable due to there being frequent opportunities to overtake slow moving vehicles. The converse is the case in much of Dumfries & Galloway where journey times are slower and frustration often builds due to the lack of overtaking opportunities". No member who knows the route would argue with that, yet I am sorry to say that not one action has been taken since 1996 to change the situation. Action needs to be taken on the A76, if for no other reason than that the nature of traffic flow and traffic type is changing rapidly. The figures show a fairly steep rise in vehicle numbers in the past two years. I am not surprised by that, because I have suggested on several occasions that upgrading to motorway standard of the A77 from Glasgow to Kilmarnock—which is at the northern end of the A76—would have a significant impact on the A76, because it is an alternative route not just to Dumfries, but onward to England. That has proved to be the case. Of course, there has been an equal increase in northbound traffic. The increase has had a huge impact, not just on the road, but on the communities in my constituency that straddle it, such as Kirkconnel, Sanquhar, Mennock, Carronbridge, Thornhill and Closeburn. However, another factor is highly significant in the argument. The Scottish Executive's transport statistics show that the percentage of the vehicles that use the route that are heavy goods vehicles is the fourth highest in Scotland for that type of road: 18 per cent over a seven-day period and 21 per cent Monday to Friday. In other words, one in every five vehicles is an HGV thundering up or down a road which, according to the route action plan, shows "a marked deterioration in geometric standards" in Dumfries and Galloway. Furthermore, all predictions are that traffic flow will increase by some 25 per cent by 2012. On road safety, the action plan—which we should bear in mind was written almost 10 years ago—noted that a section between New Cumnock and Sanquhar exhibited a higher accident rate than the national average, but that remedial measures were believed to be having a significant effect on the level of accidents on that stretch. I respectfully suggest that five deaths in five years, three of which have occurred on the same stretch just north of Sanquhar—on which, apparently, remedial measures have been taken—indicates an urgent need for a fresh approach to the mounting problems on the route. Such an approach is long overdue. It is the easiest thing in the world for MSPs to leap up and down and demand a dual carriageway from end to end of any given road in their constituencies; others may wish to make that argument, but it is not what I seek because I  realise that it is completely unrealistic. However, I strongly suggest that much could be done at reasonable cost to arrest the rapid decline in the safety record of the route. One of the route's main problems is that although there are several straight sections on which overtaking is entirely possible in the right conditions, they are all too often interspersed with sections of sharp bends and rises and falls, which can take unsuspecting drivers—even, sometimes, suspecting drivers—by surprise. That is exacerbated by the frustration to which the route action plan refers and which, in itself, is increased by the unusually high number of temporary traffic lights between Kirkconnel and Dumfries—seven sets at my last count—and which seems to increase every time one visits the route. All those lights do is increase platooning and the consequent frustration that queuing traffic—20 per cent of which, I remind members, is HGVs—inevitably incurs. The three deaths just north of Sanquhar took place on a stretch of road that would have been upgraded by now had not the Executive withdrawn the plans at a late stage and with no notice three or four years ago. Instead, a dedicated three-lane overtaking opportunity is to be created south of Sanquhar on a stretch that already allows overtaking under the right conditions. I can only conclude that that decision was taken on the ground of cost. As my motion suggests, I believe that such decisions should instead be taken with safety as the primary consideration. I do not seek a motorway or a dual carriageway, but I hope that I have shown that there is a need to take action. I ask that the route action plan be revisited urgently in the light of the latest traffic figures, and that priority upgrading be redefined on safety grounds. I also believe that much could be achieved by better visibility and signing. There is a need to limit the number of temporary traffic lights on any given stretch of road to reduce as much as possible platooning and the consequent frustration, but I am also certain that traffic should be restricted where a resurfacing project is under way. The eight-year-old schoolboy to whom I referred earlier lost his life on a newly tarred corner that had not had the final anti-skid coating applied and on which there were neither white lines nor—crucially—any traffic restrictions. Proper restrictions under those circumstances would almost certainly have saved a life. Accidents will always occur and some will involve fatalities. Sadly, that is inevitable, but it is our duty to do everything in our power to minimise them. Much more can be done to that end, and I have suggested some measures that I believe would be appropriate. I look forward to hearing what other members have to say and to a positive  response from the minister. I commend the motion to Parliament.

The executive secretary of the Abbeyfield Stewartry Society informs me that Dumfries and Galloway Council has not yet charged council tax to individual residents of the Abbeyfield homes in its area, but that the very threat that the council might do so increases stress on people at a time when they can ill afford that. Does Alex Neil agree with those comments?

A laudable sentiment.

We last debated this subject on 21 April, in the unfortunate circumstances of the run-up to a general election. I had hoped that the somewhat calmer political circumstances surrounding today's debate would lead to a more constructive approach, but I am not convinced that they have. A constructive approach is what the vast majority of my constituents in Galloway and Upper Nithsdale, who currently have no access to any form of dental service, let alone NHS dentistry, urgently require and assuredly deserve. I care about them every bit as deeply as Dr Murray does. Like Tricia Marwick, I am somewhat bemused by the opening sentence in the motion that is before us this morning. As Mike Rumbles pointed out, since the earliest days of the Parliament, rural members from all parties have increasingly drawn Parliament's attention to the issue. However, it was not until 17 March this year that Rhona Brankin, the then Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care, uttered the first words on dentistry in the Parliament, after almost six years of its existence. In response to questions following her statement that day, she said: "The package that I have announced today will encourage people to come into NHS dentistry, it will encourage dentists to stay in NHS dentistry and I hope that it will encourage dentists who have gone into private practice to come back into NHS dentistry. I am confident that the package that I have announced today will do just that."— [ Official Report , 17 March 2005; c 15542.]  She must be very relieved that she was reshuffled, so that she does not have to lead today's debate.

My time has been cut, so I cannot take an intervention. The stark reality is that eight months on from Rhona Brankin's statement, an increasing number of practitioners are leaving the NHS, none has returned and surveys continue to show that 3 per cent of dental students intend to practise full time in the NHS. I welcome the bursary arrangements that the minister has announced, but I suspect that after five years the trend for people to leave will continue. We have now reached the sorry situation that my local health board, Dumfries and Galloway NHS Board, is hoping to be allocated a number of Polish dentists from the second tranche of imported professionals. I share Elaine Murray's plea for the Executive to look on that bid sympathetically when it comes in. The board is also seeking to place a highly lucrative contract with a private company, Integrated Dental Holdings, to establish a number of NHS practices across the region. One of those is likely to be in Newton Stewart in my constituency, to service the west of the region. That is fine, but what does it say to the one remaining dentist in Newton Stewart who still deals mostly with NHS patients? I could tell members what he thinks about it, but I do not have time to do so. Members should take my word that he e-mailed me on the subject yesterday in order to make me aware of the strong distaste that he feels for the way in which the Executive has treated him. He highlighted the fact that the new primary dental services contract and the large number of incentives with which IDH will be tempted north of the border will hugely disadvantage existing NHS dentists, who until today have been offered virtually no support to ensure that they remain NHS dentists. Like Roseanna Cunningham, I await with interest my constituent's reaction to today's announcements by the minister. The sad conclusion that I draw is that there is virtually nothing to suggest that any of the Executive's actions, well intentioned though they may be—I believe them to be well intentioned—will lead to any improvement in the delivery of NHS dental services in remote rural areas. Members from all parties have drawn attention to that point today. The time may have come for us to differentiate between how dental services are delivered in remote rural areas and how they are delivered elsewhere. I suggest constructively that the Executive indulges in a bit of blue-sky thinking on this desperately important subject. It will have to encourage, rather than bully, the dental profession to think laterally, too. The answer to the problem may lie in the Canadian model of rural dental  practice to which I referred in April's debate. The idea is not new, it works and it accepts the absolute fact that, for historic, social and economic reasons, newly qualified dentists will always tend to congregate in our major centres of population. Under the Canadian model of care, most dental services are provided by therapists, hygienists, prosthetic technicians and dental health educators, who are largely locally recruited and trained. The dental practitioner carries out an initial examination, determines the dental plan and performs only the more complex treatments. He or she covers a wide area and has a very large number of patients under his or her umbrella. However, the practitioner's expertise is maximised and the local training of the allied professionals provides a welcome layer of quality employment for many young people—who currently in Scotland have to go elsewhere to seek work. The problem calls for radical thinking and acceptance that Polish dentists and corporate investment do not provide a long-term solution to it. I commend the Canadian model warmly to the chamber.

Is it in order, Presiding Officer, to point out that this is a debate on dentistry?

How can we take any comfort from that figure when research shows that only 3 per cent of those dental students intend to work in the NHS?

I am genuinely grateful to Dr Murray for raising the issue of a route that virtually bounds our two constituencies, and I want to discover her secret for getting picked to ask questions. The minister may be aware—I hope that he is—that one of the deaths that tragically took place between Sanquhar and Kirkconnel was on a stretch that would have been upgraded by now had one scheme not been withdrawn by the Scottish Executive in favour of a less complicated and less expensive one to the south of Sanquhar. Given that there have been three deaths on that stretch of road over the past five years, is the minister prepared to prioritise that improvement? I suggest that he consider seriously the Conservative policy of having a black-spot fund, so that where deaths regularly and tragically occur, a degree of prioritisation can be achieved.

The minister will recall the extensive correspondence between his department and me in 2003 on the need for measures to protect the local livelihoods that are provided by the sustainable fisheries in Luce bay. Is he aware that evidence from two incoming vessels in the past few weeks strongly suggests that the so-called "super-crabber" raids in 2003 damaged the stocks to such a degree that a viable stock of scallops in the bay no longer exists? Will he concede that the measures that his department put in place in 2003 simply have not worked and should be strengthened and extended as a matter of urgency?

On behalf of my colleagues, I thank the ministers for making copies of their statements available in such a timeous manner. Because of the low risk to which the Minister for Environment and Rural Development referred, there is a danger that we might not take the threat seriously. Conservative members very much welcome the fact that the minister has said that he cannot overemphasise the importance of vigilance and self-protection. It is important to get that message across at a time of risk, albeit a low risk. Notwithstanding the Executive's announcement yesterday in which it set out the process by which low-risk gatherings could be allowed to go ahead, the minister will be aware that the avian world is in the middle of its show season and that many clubs have put in a considerable amount of effort in  arranging events. Those clubs have incurred considerable costs for hall bookings, accommodation, printing, awards and all the paraphernalia that go with such shows. Constituency correspondents inform me of a considerable lack of information in the avian world about the licensing process, about the ban procedure, about what shows can and cannot take place and about the criteria that accompany Executive announcements. What is the Executive doing to raise awareness of such issues, in order to bring some clarity to those who are working during a busy time of year for their chosen hobbies?

I am grateful for the opportunity to participate in the debate, even late in the day. I have been struck by how non-party political the debate has been and by contributions from members of all parties. I look forward to the minister's statement and in particular to finding out the extent to which it reflects concerns from throughout the chamber. I vividly recall my earliest days in the Parliament in 1999. As an innocent country boy from Galloway, I was genuinely taken aback by the number of homeless people who slept rough on the streets of Edinburgh between our old offices on the Mound and my accommodation in the west end. The contrast between that and the signs of robust economic expansion that were obvious in Edinburgh could not have been starker. No one—and certainly not I—would argue that the action that was taken to address that problem was not fully justified. I welcome the fact that that action appears to have paid off in that someone sleeping rough in a doorway is now a much rarer sight. That is homelessness in its most basic form. The image of someone sleeping rough is what comes into most people's minds when they are asked what homelessness means. However, that is no longer what we, ministers or officials mean when we talk about homelessness. The first telephone call that I received in my capacity as a constituency member after the 2003 election was from a young couple with three small children who lived in a two-bedroomed housing association house in Castle Douglas. The two older children, who are of different genders, shared one tiny bedroom, while the youngest slept with her parents. If I remember rightly, they were third on the list for transfer and had a high number of overcrowding and medical points.  Three weeks ago, that family contacted me again—they have done so many times. The two eldest children—I remind members that they are a boy and a girl—are now aged 12 and nine. They still share a tiny bedroom, which is against every guideline in the book. The family are no longer third on the list; they are now seventh. They seem to have virtually no hope of securing the transfer that would transform their lives. We are all familiar with such situations. Why do such situations arise? It is because every time a suitable house becomes available, people are leapfrogged on the list by someone who is deemed to be of greater need—they may well be—and, more often than not, by someone who qualifies as homeless under the 2003 act. I suggest that the act has led to the situation that John Home Robertson described well in his excellent members' business debate on affordable housing last month. I hope that he will not mind my quoting him—I will do so even if he does mind. He said: "At present, there is just no hope for people on the waiting list unless they are priority homeless. Sometimes, the only way out of the trap is the degrading and traumatic process of going homeless, whereby families have to be put out of their parents' homes so that they can be housed as homeless people. That is unfair and uncivilised."—[ Official Report , 28 September 2005 ; c 19569 .]

I am sorry; I would like to give way but I cannot, as I have been asked to reduce my speech. The situation is unfair and uncivilised and I suggest that it has become slightly dishonest, because many of the homeless people are a million light years away from sleeping rough or matching the traditional concept of homelessness. Redefining priority need will not solve the homelessness problem, because it will lead to almost every available house being allocated to homelessness referrals. People will therefore be encouraged—even more than now—to present themselves as homeless to obtain a house. If the estimates of Loreburn Housing Association in Dumfries and Galloway are correct, more than 90 per cent of people in Dumfries and Galloway will do so once the new measures are introduced. That is hardly the equitable balance that Des McNulty seeks. As a briefing paper by Scottish Churches Housing Action states, "Redefining priority need does not add to the supply of affordable housing". That statement points the way forward for us as we try to tackle a growing problem. As members have said, we must embrace and involve the private sector. We must provide more affordable housing for renting and buying. Sadly,  most estimates show that the Executive's targets are woefully inadequate in that regard. As Mary Scanlon pointed out, the danger is that there will be increasing tensions between homeless applicants and others who are on waiting lists. If the right number of suitable houses is not provided, those tensions will be real. Regular audits should be undertaken so that people live in housing that suits their needs. There is also room to re-educate young people to benefit from the pleasures of flat sharing for a few years before they get a place on their own. Fewer people are sharing flats, but doing so is a valuable part of people's upbringing. Most of all, I believe that it is not priority need that should be reassessed; rather, we should seriously consider redefining homelessness because the definition of that status is so wide that there is a danger of its applying to almost anyone who wants a house rather than to people who desperately need and deserve a house. We must focus on the latter. I hope that the minister's statement will reflect that and that the committee will consider that during its post-enactment scrutiny.

I hear what the minister says, but does he know why NHS Dumfries and Galloway did not apply for those dentists? Can he help me to explain to my constituents, who are in the second-worst affected area in Scotland, how the placement of the first tranche of Polish dentists to the Fife, Forth Valley and Argyll and Clyde health board areas can be anything other than party political? Does he recognise that organisations such as IDH, which may be coming to Dumfries and Galloway to provide some sort of dental cover, always have a high staff turnover and that that is not conducive to effective dental treatment? Will he confirm that such measures will be for the shortest time only?

Does John Home Robertson agree with Dumfries and Galloway Council's housing strategists that the Executive's proposal to abolish the priority needs test for homelessness in 2012 will lead to a situation in 2017 in which more than 90 per cent of all vacancies will be filled by referrals under section 5 of the Homelessness etc (Scotland) Act 2003? That will simply increase the problems to which the member draws attention.

If I employed a speech writer, which I do not, I would have suspected Tricia Marwick of passing her a used fiver, because the beginning of her speech and the beginning of mine bear remarkable similarities. I make no apology for repeating the points, because they are important in the context of the debate. On behalf of the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party members, I welcome the report and the motion. Although it is self-evident that the topic does not bring people flocking to the chamber, it is nonetheless important in that it addresses one of the issues that has so bedevilled modern politics: cronyism. I recall a very senior—and, I am grateful to say, now retired—politician advising a group of us some years ago that one should never give up the power of patronage and that it was too important a weapon to be surrendered lightly. If a line exists between patronage and cronyism, I suggest that it is very fine indeed. I suggest strongly that whatever we call it, cronyism must be rooted out of our public appointments system once and for all. The committee recognises in its report that there exists a public perception of cronyism. I suggest respectfully that that is a massive understatement. It has got to the stage where cronyism is almost taken for granted by the general public. On occasion, I feel sympathy for individuals who are appointed perfectly acceptably to high-profile public appointments for which they are probably eminently suited, because the very fact of their appointment can lead a sceptical public to wonder what their political connections are and what favours they might have carried out in order to deserve such a seemingly lucrative reward. We very much welcome what I consider to be the key point in the code and the commissioner's  resolve to tackle it head on. We simply must eliminate all suggestions of cronyism if respect for public appointments and public agencies is to be fully restored. What else needs to be done to restore faith in this politically sensitive area? I believe that it is vital that such appointments are genuinely open to all, and we look forward to the production, as soon as is practicable, of an equal opportunities strategy to promote vacancies to the widest possible audience. Although we accept that it is not the function of the code of practice to raise awareness of vacancies, we are encouraged by the commissioner's candid admission that more work needs to be done to encourage a wider variety of people to apply for positions. On that issue, we are clearly heading in the right direction. The third aspect of the code that we welcome is the stress that it places on the importance of the commissioner not only being at arm's length from and 100 per cent independent of Scottish Executive ministers, but being seen to be so. The committee rightly questioned the commissioner in some detail on that aspect. Although we accept that the minister must specify the desired criteria for the appointment at the outset of the process and should be given a summary of candidates at the end of it, the success of the code is totally dependent on there being no ministerial involvement at all in between those two extremes. The process will require careful monitoring if that aim is to be achieved, but its importance cannot be overstated. Ultimately, both the code of practice and the equal opportunities strategy will further the stated desire of eliminating the perception of cronyism in public appointments only if ministers themselves respect and encourage the commissioner in her goal of ensuring that all appointments are made accessible to the widest possible pool of talent and are awarded on a visibly non-political basis. As long as that remains its aim, the code will continue to have our support, as does the motion before us this afternoon.

I draw members' attention to the entry in my register of interests that declares that I own land, part of which is under development as part of a wind farm. I express the hope that that statement finds more approval with members of the committee than it possibly finds with some of my colleagues. Earlier this year, I was half listening to a programme on the radio when I heard a phrase that gave me quite a jolt and grabbed my attention. The person who was being interviewed had started to talk about global dimming. Like everyone else, I had heard a great deal about global warming, but that was a new one to me. Apparently, in the three days following the tragic events of 11 September 2001, during which the world's aircraft were universally grounded, scientists could detect a significant improvement in air quality, due to the lack of aircraft fuel vapour in our skies. I found it quite frightening that such a measurement could be detected in just three days. It certainly put to the back of my mind any notion that climate change could be either a figment of some scientist's imagination or part of the natural cycle of our planet's evolution. We undoubtedly have a problem that is man-made; therefore, it is the duty of man to address it. Conservative members welcome and accept the broad thrust of the committee's report. As a former convener of the Rural Development Committee, I commend the Environment and Rural Development Committee for the impressive work that it has put in to produce it. However, like all reports, it is to a degree designed to be thought provoking. In the short time that is available to me,  I would like to provoke a little thought on one or two issues. The report states that by 2015 transport is predicted to take over from energy as the biggest emissions sector. The report recommends that the Executive's transport strategy should firmly integrate emissions reduction targets into transport planning. That is a fine statement, but I am not sure that it stacks up if it is intended as a one-size-fits-all approach. If one compares the use of the car in my very rural constituency, coupled with the comparative lack of alternative means of transport, with the use of cars and availability of alternatives in the central belt, one sees that there cannot be a one-size-fits-all solution. Although I take this opportunity to welcome the Minister for Transport and Telecommunication's announcement yesterday that three identified improvement projects on the A75 are to be put out to tender, that should be part of an on-going process of improvements to the route, certainly for economic reasons and also because there are genuinely beneficial environmental reasons for some targeted road improvements. I understand that it now takes something like 12 Minis to produce the same amount of pollution as one of the original models used to produce. The technology must continue to improve, but we must guard against punishing use of the car unnecessarily in our most rural areas as we seek to address the important global issues.

I really do not have time, but if I find that I do, I will let the member come back in.

I am grateful that I had time to take that intervention and I thank the member for her reassurances on the matter. We must not allow theoretically sound projects to falter through not being properly thought through. I give members a brief example. Dumfries and Galloway Council's waste PPP proposals could have resulted in the waste-derived fuel at the end of the process being used to create  energy, fuel a greenhouse-based enterprise and create a significant number of new jobs. Indeed, when I questioned several aspects of the proposal, just such a venture was paraded before me by the preferred bidders as a sop to my concerns. However, once the PPP was awarded, the proposer of the energy-from-waste plant was unceremoniously dumped so, for at least seven years, the waste-derived fuel will simply be consigned to landfill. What sort of environmental improvement is that? The Executive must ensure that such potentially beneficial schemes are properly thought through; currently, they are not. The Presiding Officer's patience will probably run out shortly but, according to the report, 40 per cent of energy could be saved. That is simply another way of saying that 40 per cent of energy is gratuitously wasted. The Executive could do a great deal to highlight some of the small items that are referred to, such as the use of energy-saving light bulbs, which could make a real difference. If the report is to lead anywhere, we need not more targets from the Executive, but a little more action.

I wonder whether the minister shares my view that the old military line between Stranraer and Cairnryan is one line whose restoration would merit serious consideration, particularly before the ferry terminal is moved up the loch. Does he accept that the real fear is that, if the rail link to the ferry terminal is broken, there may be less requirement for any rail link to Stranraer at all? Given that fear, will the minister  consider the possibility of restoring that rail link? If not, will he guarantee the continuation of a railway link to Stranraer after the ferry terminal has moved out?

One part of the NHS that the minister has perhaps carefully skipped around is dental provision, which in my constituency is chronic to say the least. I was contacted yesterday by a constituent whose 15-year-old daughter has had orthodontic advice to have four teeth removed and on-going treatment. She cannot access an NHS dentist. Is the minister satisfied that enough is being done to attract more dentists into the area?

To ask the Scottish Executive when the Minister for Environment and Rural Development last met NFU Scotland and what issues were discussed. (S2O-7297)

I am sorry that I was unable to bump into the minister on that occasion, due to a particularly unpleasant throat. In his discussions with the NFU, was the issue raised of the growing anger and frustration among producers of previously unsupported products, in particular, at the fact that retired farmers who have sold their farms since 2002 can tick the necessary boxes allowing them to continue to claim the single farm payment by renting an area of rough grazing fairly cheaply? Given that some claimants no longer live in the United Kingdom, never mind Scotland, does the minister think that that is right? If he agrees with me that it is not, what does he propose to do about it?

I do not think that I will be able to take up the 20 minutes that might be available to me, but I will try to speak a little more slowly than usual in an effort to help out the Presiding Officer. I am sorry to say to Sarah Boyack—and I got her name right—that if she was as disappointed as she said she was by Alex Johnstone's speech, I fear that I will be taken off her Christmas card list, if indeed I am on it. It is the duty of Opposition to hold Government to account. I am disappointed in members who have belittled our contributions when they said, as Mark Ruskell did, that we seek to drag down standards. I do not accept that. It is absolutely legitimate for us to draw attention to concerns that have been put to the committee and are still felt. Sarah Boyack herself mentioned the distance between the concerns of practitioners and the aspirations of those who are guiding the legislation. All that we seek to do is to highlight the perfectly legitimate concerns that have been raised not by big business, as Karen Gillon suggested, but by Government agencies and  bodies. I cannot accept that it is wrong of us to do so. I have always been a firm believer in the motto, "If it ain't broke, don't fix it." It seems to me that we are in severe danger of trying to fix something that works reasonably well at the moment. My suspicions are heightened by an apparently throwaway line in the conclusion of the committee's report. Paragraph 119 says that the committee was struck by the fact that there was substantial support for the bill from witnesses "with the exception of one or two witnesses raising concerns about the possible effect of additional, unnecessary regulation". I find that rather worrying. In this day and age, surely we should take concerns about unnecessary regulation extremely seriously. However, the committee seems to have rather brushed aside those concerns.

I hear what the member says and I recognise the work of the Subordinate Legislation Committee. However, I will explain why I have little faith in that work bearing fruit. The bill that we are discussing is being furthered by the department that despite, in the early days of the Scottish Parliament, establishing a committee to cut out unnecessary red tape and bureaucracy in the agriculture industry has presided over an inexorable rise in those same burdens to unprecedented levels. The Scottish Executive is not an Administration that is well known for minimising regulation. We should take extremely seriously any evidence from those who seek to warn us about even more of it. To be fair, the committee's report notes that the bill has caused "a significant degree of nervousness amongst responsible authorities about what it will actually mean for them, in terms of financial resources and other factors such as staff capacity." In other words, the legislation will cost the responsible authorities a great deal of money—up to £12.5 million—that they do not have and will require work to be done by staff who currently do not exist. No wonder that, as Alex Johnstone pointed out, CBI Scotland said that it was very disappointed that the EU directive was to be extended. It also said that it considered that the legislation was  "at odds with public statements that the economy is the Executive's number 1 priority" and that it ran counter to commitments made by the UK Government to the business community that there would be no further gold plating of EU legislation. Despite the minister's reassurances in that regard, it is clear that the UK Government chose to ignore the Scottish Executive when it made that statement because, as all of Scotland is beginning to realise, this Labour-Liberal Democrat Administration is proving to be the master of all gold plating, the champion of overregulation and the instigator of levels of state interference that threaten to control almost every facet of our daily lives. No one disputes the principle of environmental protection or environmental assessment. However, when the delivery of that noble objective is turned into a charter for consultants, which is what this legislation is in danger of becoming, the proposals should be thoroughly overhauled and amended, which is what we will seek to do at stage 2. The legislation starts, wrongly, with the assumption that almost all plans and programmes are inherently bad for and damaging to the environment. That is not the case and, rather than subjecting every responsible authority to this cumbersome and expensive procedure, we should be seeking to ensure environmental protection with the absolute minimum of Government interference. As Maureen Macmillan pointed out, Scottish Water talked of duplication. Further, Scottish Enterprise warned of increasing process delays and a slow-down in decision making. Rosie Kane's speech showed accurately why such concerns are fully justified. COSLA recommended that there should be a pilot scheme to enable all the implications to be assessed. For once—uniquely, I think—I am in complete agreement with all those bodies at one and the same time. I am also in agreement with Highland Council.

I give way to the minister.

Minister, I am sorry. Could I ask you to repeat your question? We have plenty of time.

I entirely accept the minister's point, but it does not in any way remove the real concerns of not just big businesses but Government agencies and small businesses about the impact of the legislation. Does Mr Ruskell want to intervene?

I hear what the member says, but it is COSLA, rather than me, that he needs to convince. I mentioned Highland Council—that was so long ago that I have almost forgotten where I was. I agree with Highland Council's blunt statement that "budget constraints will force Local Authorities to choose between delivering frontline services and meeting their statutory duty to SEA." However, I do not think that that is a choice. A loaded gun is being pointed by the Executive at every responsible authority on which the legislation will impact. At stage 2, we must take the finger off the trigger. I am afraid that I have come to the end, Presiding Officer.

Is the minister aware of an initiative that was launched jointly last year by the Tymes Trust for ME sufferers and a Japanese company, the name of which escapes me? They put together an information technology distance learning package specifically designed for people with conditions such as CFS/ME. If she is not aware of that, will she undertake to look into it to see whether it might have application in the delivery of education to sufferers in Scotland?

It would be churlish of me, as convener of the cross-party group on ME, not to acknowledge and be grateful for the steps that have been taken, albeit that they have been taken over a longer period of time than one would have wished. I acknowledge those steps entirely, but does the minister accept that if Dr Gow's research project comes to fruition and delivers the promise that it might deliver, all the steps that she outlined will be completely unnecessary?

Almost.

This is the second opportunity that I have had to bring the subject of ME to the Parliament for debate. I am very grateful to the members of all parties who, by signing my motion, have given me that opportunity. The first debate, which was held in 2002, prompted the Scottish Executive to establish a short-life working group on ME; in fact, the group was originally described as a short-life action group, until the full implications of the acronym "SLAG" were realised. The group's report was published some 18 months later, following which the Executive asked all health boards to evaluate the situation in their areas and to report back. Well over another year later, they did so and their responses proved what we all knew anyway—that the health boards' efforts to diagnose and treat ME patients vary from the commendable introduction of a specialist nurse in the case of Fife NHS Board to no action at all in the case of Tayside NHS Board. In Dumfries and Galloway, staunch efforts are being made to establish a managed clinical network for ME patients, while in Orkney or the Western Isles, an ME patient will be hard pushed to find any sympathy at all. Even ministers now accept that provision for ME sufferers in the national health service is haphazard at best. Rhona Brankin told the Health Committee: "The information that we have received from the short-life working group and, subsequently, from NHS boards shows that provision is patchy—there is no doubt about that."—[ Official Report, Health Committee , 26 April 2005; c 1909.]  The tragedy for ME sufferers is that it has taken almost four years for that to be acknowledged, during which time the number of sufferers has risen inexorably. During those four years, the established therapies of cognitive behavioural therapy and graded exercise have continued to fail abysmally to bring about any measured improvements; during those four years, we have continued to fail a growing patient group by sticking rigidly to the established—and establishment—thinking that ME is basically a psychological condition rather than a neurological disease, which no less a body than the World Health Organisation now recognises it to be.  Members might well think that I am somewhat biased in that statement and that the establishment has a much more open-minded approach than that. To prove that that is not the case, I quote what Dr Cornbleet, the minister's departmental adviser, said to the Health Committee: "The treatments that clinical trials have verified as being of benefit are those that lie within the province of the psychologist and psychiatrist rather than the neurologist ... At the moment, the most appropriate referrals are to psychologists or psychiatrists."—[ Official Report , Health Committee , 26 April 2005; c 1912.] What Dr Cornbleet failed to say was that the number of patients who benefited from the treatments to which he referred—cognitive behavioural therapy and graded exercise—represented less than 10 per cent of the total number of patients who were involved in the trials and that a large number of patients got significantly worse. I am one of the many people who argue that if someone benefited from those therapies, they may well have had some form of chronic fatigue, but they did not have ME. Although the Executive has given approximately £0.5 million to continue psychiatric research into the disease, it has given less than £10,000 to what I would call biological research. We need to ask ourselves one simple question. If our current approach to ME is sufficient and cost effective, why do we all know a family that is directly affected by the disease—I bet that that is the case—when 20 years ago, there was only a faint chance that we might have come across something that was rather cruelly called yuppie flu and which we did not take seriously at all? The answer is as simple as the question: it is because ME is on the increase, in spite of the best efforts of the establishment. In other words, I am suggesting that established thinking is wrong. It is time to admit that and to begin to think out of the box on ME. Several years ago, the philanthropic Barclay brothers funded a research project—through the University of Glasgow—at the Southern general hospital. The project has been led by a number of eminent neurological researchers whose names  are revered by ME sufferers almost as much as they are disapproved of by the establishment. Drs Behan and Chaudhuri are but two of them. Several years on and, crucially, many funding streams later, the research is close to achieving a major breakthrough in identifying both a diagnostic test and a cure for ME through the relatively new science of genetics. By studying the microarray analysis of gene expression in ME/chronic fatigue syndrome patients, the researchers have generated a comprehensive map of gene expression by whole-genome DNA microarray assay for people with ME/CFS. In the absence of Stewart Stevenson to explain to members what that means—I am sure that he would have done so—I will say it again more simply. The genes that are responsible for the disease have been identified. Equally, or even more importantly, a cocktail of drugs to counteract the genetic imbalance is also believed to have been identified. To put it at its most simple, a cure is on the horizon. In Scotland, we stand on the brink of a medical breakthrough of world-wide importance. The University of Glasgow deemed the research to be of enough significance to patent, yet we are about to lose it through—members will have guessed it—lack of funding. Just as all those years of research, which have always been done on a shoestring budget, are about to pay off, the shoestring appears to have broken. Latterly, the project has been part funded by Scottish Enterprise. The current project leader, Dr John Gow, applied to that agency again, but the application has just been turned down. Scottish Enterprise is to fund, through the University of Glasgow's research and enterprise department, an independent company to conduct market research into ME. I am sorry, but I find that project almost repulsive in nature. We do not need market research; we need biological research. In an e-mail to me yesterday, Dr Gow said: "This means that we have no clinician here to diagnose/treat patients and we have no funding for research staff or consumables. Many individual people and the ME Association/MERGE"— which is a Perth-based charity— "have been very kind and sent donations from £10 upwards. I now have a few thousand to keep my research assistant employed until the end of July. I will apply to other funding bodies for salaries/consumables but at the moment, everything stops at the end of July." An estimated 15,000 to 20,000 Scots suffer from ME. Those people are desperate to return to school, college, university and the workplace to play a full part in the economic life of this country. I note the Executive's fresh talent initiative, but I point out the vast number of ME patients who are already here and who are  desperate and willing to use their talents fully and yet are unable to do so because all we can offer them is a bit of graded exercise and some psychological mumbo-jumbo.  The CFS Research Foundation's latest newsletter states: "'It is clear that in these patients the gene function has changed and these changes can be detected and measured.' This Newsletter is being written with a feeling of profound thankfulness." That profound thankfulness could well be shattered next month for the lack of a comparative pittance. The minister has the power and the authority to ensure that that does not happen. I beg her to use it.

I share the minister's optimism about the possibility of a Dunragit bypass. However, is the minister aware that the continued delay of the schemes, to which Alasdair Morgan referred, simply exacerbates the problem of convoys of traffic speeding through villages such as Springholm and Crocketford on the A75? Residents are increasingly in danger whenever they need to cross the road. Does the minister agree that those villages also fully deserve a bypass? In the meantime, will the minister consider temporary installation of speed cameras to reduce persistent law breaking—which is what it is—once and for all?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Over the past two weeks or so, the agricultural industry has been highly concerned by the impact that the Scottish Executive Environment and Rural Affairs Department's reassessment of support paid under agri-environmental schemes would have on individual producers. It is commendable that the Minister for Environment and Rural Development has ordered a swift rethink, but in doing so, he has publicly and strongly condemned officials for the unsatisfactory state of affairs that has come about. In her response to Tricia Marwick's point of order yesterday, the Minister for Parliamentary Business stated: "it is not appropriate to call into question the actions of officials who cannot answer for themselves in this chamber."— [ Official Report , 25 May 2005; c 17211.]  If it is wrong for Tricia Marwick to call into question the actions of officials, may I ask why it appears to be in order for ministers to do so?

Will the First Minister join me in extending the condolences of the chamber to the families of those who lost their lives in the Solway Harvester tragedy in January 2000, in the light of the collapse of the trial against the owner of the vessel yesterday in the Isle of Man on the ground of insufficient evidence? Will he explore, perhaps with the Solicitor General, any possibilities that might still exist to assist those families in bringing about the closure on this tragic issue that they so desperately seek and which now appears to be denied them?

The whole chamber would agree that communication is important. Does the member agree that it is totally unsatisfactory to give the tourism industry only one month to respond to the Executive's current consultation on the draft Private Water Supplies (Scotland) Regulations? Does she also agree that it is necessary to extend that timescale, given the importance of those regulations to many parts of rural Scotland?

I am sure that the minister will join me in congratulating the pupils of Kells Primary School in New Galloway in my constituency on their recent incredible achievement in coming second out of more than 600 entrants in the recent United Kingdom-wide BBC "Songs of Praise" junior school choir competition. The school has traditionally had a very strong musical ethos. Does he agree that it is more than just a coincidence that the pupils of that school also regularly exceed every academic target that they are set and that perhaps a stronger musical ethos throughout Scotland's schools might point a way towards better pupil achievement?

Does Janis Hughes agree with the point that I made when I intervened on the minister, which was that the secret of the success of such a programme of supervised brushing is the proper training of the supervisors?

I thank my colleague Jamie McGrigor, who was originally scheduled to take part in the debate but who gave way so that I could speak. He did so on the promise that I would mention the Western Isles—by saying that, I hope that I have fulfilled my commitment to him. He is very concerned about dentistry in the Western Isles. The fact that I have not heard Dumfries and Galloway mentioned so much in a debate since the unhappy days of foot-and-mouth disease perhaps shows why I am so keen to take part in the debate. Anyone who saw the pictures of my constituents queueing in Stranraer last Monday to sign on with a dentist who has opted to leave the NHS could have been forgiven for thinking that they were looking at some scene from the great depression of the 1930s. However, the only thing that they would have had wrong was the date, because a great depression sums up exactly the mood of my constituents in Galloway and Upper Nithsdale when it comes to access to dental services. One has only to scan the excellent research report to see why—no health board area comes out worse than Dumfries and Galloway does. Perhaps the only mistake that was made by Mr Barr, the Stranraer dentist who opted out on Monday, was that he did so during a general election campaign. Only a couple of months ago, a dentist in Castle Douglas opted out and, although he attracted much local criticism, he avoided the unnecessary and unpleasant political invective that has been rained on Mr Barr—bizarrely, from the very political party whose stewardship of the  NHS in the past eight years has brought about the seemingly endless stream of dental practitioners who have had enough of the NHS as delivered by the Executive and who have taken what they feel is the only alternative that is left to them, which is to go private.

I shall come to that in just a second. Mr Barr was quoted in Tuesday's newspaper as saying: "We have been squeezed and squeezed by the Government. A steady erosion of funding and a huge increase in bureaucracy has prompted our move away from the NHS." I agree with Alasdair Morgan, who pointed out—I assume that it was his only reason for coming into the chamber this morning—that it was a shame that the minister had changed her plans to meet Mr Barr and instead visited the one remaining NHS dentist in Castle Douglas, who is very good. She might have learned much more by visiting Stranraer that day, as she planned originally to do. In answer to the minister's question, I say that I would infinitely prefer to see Mr Barr working in the NHS, but I totally defend his and any other individual's right to exercise their constitutional right. I also feel free to criticise—I do so in this instance—the Executive's stewardship, which has led Mr Barr and others to take that regrettable course of action.

I have absolutely answered the minister's question. I think that we should move on before the debate gets more heated than it already is. Duncan McNeil is speaking next, so I have no doubt that it will continue to become more heated. In January, I was contacted by a constituent who sounded really excited to have got an NHS dentist in Dumfries to give her an appointment for a dental check-up at last. She is really looking forward to that appointment—next December. Only last Friday, I was visited in my monthly surgery in Newton Stewart by a constituent who has had open heart surgery and therefore requires regular dental checks to ensure that he is entirely free from infection. Only the chance mention that he was in receipt of pension credit gained him access to an NHS dentist, and that some 40 miles away. A general practitioner told me recently that the state of children's teeth in his practice is as bad as he has ever known it and is deteriorating. That is the reality out there. It takes more than a year to  see an NHS dentist, if people can get one to see them, and our youngest generation looks set to increase the problem rather than to decrease it. I accept and welcome the fact that the minister announced on 17 March actions to try to tackle those problems, however belated that action might be. However, I would like to quote from an e-mail from another constituent of mine—a former dentist who now acts in a consultative capacity and is highly regarded. Members must believe me when I assure them that he holds no brief for me, politically or otherwise, or for my party. He made that very plain when he came to see me. His e-mail said: "I have just read the press release by the minister and it does not begin to touch on solving the problem either nationally or our own local problem." He goes on to dissect the minister's plans dispassionately and logically. I shall forward a copy of the e-mail to the minister as a constructive criticism of her plans by a highly qualified and informed source.

Mr Rumbles will get the answer to his second question shortly, when I wind up my speech. In answer to his first question, the Government has had eight years to alter things since the last Conservative Government went out of power. He cannot go on for ever blaming the Conservative Government for all the ills of the current Administration. My constituent finished his e-mail by saying: "there is no point appealing to dentists' wallets in this way, the NHS dental service is no longer about money it is about working conditions. This smacks of closing the stable door after the horse has bolted ... Will it have any real effect on the nation's NHS dental provision and public dental health? I hae ma doubts". If he is proved right—many people agree with him—what is the answer? I believe that we need to consider the Canadian model of dental care, in which far greater use is made of dental assistants and allied professionals, which leaves the dentist free to plan each patient's treatment and to carry out in person only the most complex dental procedures. The minister referred to that, but she needs to go further. Dental assistants could be recruited and trained locally, which would hugely improve retention rates. Above all, they can be recruited and trained quickly.  The minister's intentions are good, but I suspect that a more radical rethink on how rural dental services are delivered will be required. I urge the minister to think outside the box if the dental care of this nation is to be addressed properly and in a way that every member in this chamber would like.

I agree with Shona Robison's comment about the language that has been used. I will address that in my speech. Does she agree that the endless stream of dentists who appear to be opting out of the NHS has less to do with money and considerably more to do with working conditions, bureaucracy and regulation?

In countries such as Denmark and Sweden, specialised dental health educators supervise children's toothbrushing sessions. Will the minister expand on the plans in Scotland? Who will supervise such sessions and train teachers on how to provide information to children?

Will the minister take an intervention?

I will let John Swinney in, as it is his debate.

I share the minister's enthusiasm for the work that the authority's board has done so far and the cohesion that it has brought to the process. Recently, I attended a reception that it gave and was impressed by what I saw and heard. Does the minister accept that none of the board members threw up their hands in horror at the prospect of the park being extended into highland Perthshire?

I am in such a state at the moment that I came here tonight prepared to listen to Andrew Arbuckle's debate, which I think is scheduled for tomorrow night. However, I am delighted to be involved in this one because, as John Swinney said, I had the great privilege and honour of convening the Rural Development Committee, which considered the legislation that established Scotland's first two national parks. It was a privilege because, during that process, the Rural Development Committee pioneered—if I may be so bold—a method of public involvement in committee meetings that has since been echoed by other committees. It gave members of the public who came to the meetings that we took out and about to all parts of Scotland a real sense of being involved and included. Nowhere was the public keener to get involved than at a meeting in Kingussie. I will long remember it. They flocked to the meeting in droves. All had meaningful input for that committee meeting and none intimated a desire that highland Perthshire should be left outside the national park boundary. As John Swinney said, Scottish Natural Heritage is not an organisation that does not court criticism. I, perhaps more than many other members, have found considerable cause to criticise it during this and the previous parliamentary session, but I did not do so in this case because every member of the Rural Development Committee believed that the exercise SNH had undertaken and the report and recommendations it published thereafter seemed totally logical, completely sensible and in accordance with the views of the vast majority of those who responded. All members here have stated all the reasons why highland Perthshire should be—and I will always believe should have been—included within the national park boundary. When it became obvious that the Executive would not listen—only the Scottish Executive or, rather, the Labour part of the Scottish Executive would not listen—and would not be swayed, there were last-minute meetings between members of all parties and organisations such as SNH, Scottish Environment LINK, PARC, the National Trust for Scotland and all other serious bodies to try to get the Executive to rethink.  I was deeply disappointed to see a recent letter to Bill Wright from the minister in which he said that the park had to have a coherent identity and be of a manageable size, and that the existing park boundary allows for better management and more efficient use of available resources. I simply cannot accept that. The only significant change is that the number of local authorities has been brought down to four from five. Sadly, I can only agree with other members that the decision on the boundary was purely political. As John Swinney rightly said, that is no basis on which to establish a national park. As long as highland Perthshire is excluded from the national park, the park will be deeply flawed and incomplete and the Parliament will be rightly criticised for letting petty party politics get in the way of common sense and a logical conclusion. In the letter, the minister also says that, in his view, it is too early in the life of the park authority to undertake a boundary review. I am sorry, but it is no such thing. Highland Perthshire should have been included in the first place. It would not be a review; it would be putting right an omission that was made at the start. I am prepared to forgive the minister for everything if he will announce tonight that Scotland's third national park will be the Galloway national park. It is not likely that he will make that announcement and, on that ground, I urge him to please all Scotland by saying that highland Perthshire will, from here on, be included in the Cairngorms national park boundary.

During a recent fatal accident inquiry into five separate deaths at Dumfries and Galloway Royal Infirmary, the bereaved families were utterly distraught at the procedures and processes which left them feeling excluded, unwanted, misled and ignored. I have written to the Solicitor General on the matter. In any review, will the minister ensure that bereaved families are fully included and, above all, informed about the procedures of fatal accident inquiries so that these emotions are not experienced in future?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it will take to ensure that producers of unsubsidised crops are not disadvantaged by the single farm payment scheme. (S2O-5915)

I recently failed to get much sympathy from the minister on the issue with regard to deer farmers in Scotland; I hoped that the minister might have a little more sympathy for Scotland's potato producers. Does he accept that an increased area-based payment south of the border is bound to be reflected in the market price of potatoes throughout the United Kingdom, and does he also agree that Scotland's potato producers will be put at a serious competitive disadvantage because their support payments will be based on historic payments, for which potato crops did not qualify?

Of all members, Mr Arbuckle will agree that we need a strong rural economy in Scotland. The swift roll-out of broadband would have helped to achieve that. When Parliament discussed the issue, we were told constantly by a Liberal Democrat minister that something called the pathfinder project would deliver broadband in the south of Scotland. Given that, two and half years later, not one broadband connection had been made as a result of that initiative, can the member blame Opposition members for a little bit of negativity in a debate of this nature?

I thank the Deputy Presiding Officer for allowing me into the debate at a fairly late stage. Like other members, I commend Margaret Mitchell enormously for securing this debate, if for no other reason than it allows me to congratulate myself on outdoing every Labour woman—and indeed women of other parties—in the chamber. I am wearing not just something red but a red and white striped shirt. As I learned this afternoon, red and white are the defining colours of deafblindness. I was not going to speak in this debate, but I was moved to do so by the attendance this afternoon of Mr Donnelly from Newton Stewart in the heart of my constituency. He and his guide-communicator have taken three hours to get here, and the fact that he and everyone else in the gallery have taken such trouble rather underlines to me the debate's importance. I want to make only one substantive point; after all, every other member who has spoken has made extremely good points, none of which I disagree with. Several members have said that we are not talking about a lot of people. I hope that the number of people will in no way affect the Executive's response to any issue. More important, I want to expand on the point Bill Butler and Dr Jean Turner made about the number of deafblind people in their constituencies and areas. Bill said that he had been told that eight deafblind people live in his constituency.  Rather worryingly, I was told this afternoon that I have one and a half. There are actually three, the number being split between Dumfries and Galloway. I was also told that if recognition and registration were carried out in the same way in Scotland as they are south of the border, there would be 60 such people in Dumfries and Galloway. If that kind of increase is applied across every constituency—where at present only one, two, three or eight people are registered—the total number becomes very significant. We are talking about a significant number of people who are being treated in a system that is considerably less robust than the system south of the border. That is neither just nor fair. It is not what most of us thought devolution was about. In her speech, I sincerely hope that the minister will say explicitly that we will not tolerate the present situation for much longer.

rose—

It is no secret that I went to one of those fee-paying schools—I hope that the fact that John Home Robertson and I both did so suggests that there is not too much about such schools that is elitist. Will Mr Sheridan come clean about the fact that his policy is to get rid of those schools altogether? Would it not be better to do that by reducing demand for those schools by making sure that the state sector provides such a good education that demand disappears, rather than by making public schools more exclusive than they already are, which is what the member's amendment would achieve?

rose—

I will intervene to help the convener fill his time—I am consensual as always. Further to the point that Mr Ballard made, at the end of the day an element of common sense will surely prevail with such matters. The simple rule is, "If in doubt, register it."

I accept what Tricia Marwick has just said, but does she accept, in the context of what I said during my contribution, that that particular organisation engenders a reaction peculiar to itself, and that there is a great danger for a potential witch hunt that should be resisted at all costs?

The rapturous applause meant that I was taken by surprise when the Presiding Officer called me to speak. Thank you for doing so. The convener of the Standards Committee has laid out the background to the motion and I hope that the requirement for the bill is clear to all members. There is a legislative requirement to introduce a bill on the register of members' interests. Frankly, I believe that anyone who sees fit to vote against the motion should not come under the auspices of the order because they should not be a member of the Parliament. I will consider one or two aspects of the committee's deliberations and consultation that preceded the debate. The consultation document was widely distributed, as is the manner with the plethora of consultation documents that we have these days. The fact that, as the convener mentioned, only 32 responses were received, is more than worthy of note. I do not like to contradict the convener, but the number of responses from private individuals was 22—I think that he said that the figure was 28. Twenty-two of the 32 responses were from individuals who, it has to be said, came largely from one fixed viewpoint. There is nothing wrong with having that fixed viewpoint and I commend those individuals for the time and effort that they took to table their submissions. However, when 22 or fewer individual submissions are received on potentially contentious issues such as gifts, paid advocacy, intra-family gifts and non-pecuniary interests, I have to believe that the several million residents of Scotland who did not table submissions are in effect content with the current arrangements that cover members' interests. As on all matters, there is a responsible balance to be achieved on these issues. In my opinion, the majority of the 22 submissions from individuals  failed to strike that responsible balance. Rather, they tended to come from one particular position: they would like to see every MSP declare every single thing from what time they get up to what time they go to bed and the number of breaths that they take in between. Although it will, rightly, be for the whole Parliament to decide on the issues, I believe that a requirement to declare every single tiny facet of our existence would constitute a gross intrusion of members' privacy, to the extent that it could even put people off any ambition to be a member of the Parliament. That would be a retrograde step. There is a limit to the amount of intrusion that any register should involve and we must be careful that we do not step over that limit. Further debate on the matter will undoubtedly follow as the bill progresses, but I believe that the committee was entirely responsible in its desire to ensure that the register of members' interests contains all the relevant information, while stopping short of requiring the grossly intrusive information that a few people seek to have included. In my limited experience, such information is used only by those who seek to make mischief out of it. Some current requests under the Freedom of Information Act (Scotland) 2002 tend to support that position. We should act responsibly to ensure that members register matters of genuine interest, which might, as the report says, prejudice their actions or the work that they do as MSPs. That is what the bill is about and I believe that the committee is united in that view. That is why I believe that the objective test is absolutely correct for the Parliament. I will quote from the report. The test will require "each Member to ask themselves, not whether they would or might be influenced by the interest but, whether a fair minded and informed observer would conclude that their impartiality would be or appear to be prejudiced by the interest." Any other course of action would suggest that MSPs were irresponsible individuals who could not determine such issues for themselves. We are legislating and scrutinising legislation for the betterment of our country, but at the same time we might be about to suggest that we are not even capable of determining questions to do with interests. That would be a diabolical position to be in. I accept that some—or even much—of the press corps and a few individuals believe that we are irresponsible, but it is simply not the case. Members are, on the whole, fair-minded and informed on these matters, which is exactly what we ask members of the public to be when concluding whether members' impartiality would be, or would appear to be, prejudiced by their interests. The position that we have taken is clear  and mature. It allows grown-ups to make those decisions. We have to be careful about the potential to indulge in witch hunts through the medium of this bill—especially in relation to matters under the heading of non-financial or non-pecuniary interests. As the committee's report states, that issue engendered by far the most numerous responses—and, I would add, the most heated responses. That was particularly true in relation to membership of the masons. At one point, my colleague and friend Bill Butler and I were accused of all sorts of chicanery and filibustering to cloud the issue. I think that Bill would deny those accusations as vigorously as I do. At one point, I was challenged to declare my interest in that particular organisation. I am happy to state categorically in the chamber, and therefore on the record, that I have never been, am not, and in all probability never will be, a member of that organisation. However, if I was, I would seriously consider not whether I would or might be influenced by that membership but whether a fair-minded and informed person would conclude that my impartiality would be, or would appear to be, prejudiced by the membership. I would do the same with membership of my local football club, my local rugby club, or indeed my local snakes-and-ladders society, if one existed. That is exactly as it should be. If a member is found to be in breach of the members' interests legislation, that member will be in trouble. That is also as it should be. On that basis, I am happy to support the motion in Brian Adam's name.

One thing that is certain is that farmers will have far greater freedom to diversify away from traditional livestock farming under the single farm payment support structure. Many current livestock farmers may, for example, choose to diversify into deer farming to satisfy the ever-increasing market for venison. Does the minister agree that it is grossly unfair that any farmer who chooses to do so will receive full single farm payment as long as he has entitlement, whereas current deer farmers who have been farming without support for some years will receive no support?

Having received an accusatory look from Tavish Scott when Pot Noodles were mentioned, I should say that I have never eaten one in my life, nor do I intend to. Presiding Officer, you will not be surprised to hear that I welcome any opportunity to debate agricultural issues in the chamber. Jamie Stone's motion is no exception. I thank him for lodging it, as it contains issues that I deem to be very close to my heart. Indeed, members will not be surprised to learn that I intend to concentrate on the motion's agricultural element, particularly on the need for greater employment on the land. Although my constituency is as far from Jamie Stone's as it is possible to be while remaining in Scotland, both share a high degree of dependency on agriculture and agricultural products. Before the foot-and-mouth outbreak, 23 per cent of Dumfries and Galloway's gross domestic product derived directly from agriculture. One could argue with considerable justification that that percentage is too high; however, it underlines agriculture's importance to the region and explains my determination vigorously to oppose any attempt to redistribute agricultural support funding from Scottish Executive, UK or European sources. I am sure that other members would like such redistribution to happen, but the importance of that funding to my region is too great for me to support such a move. I have always opposed such redistribution and will always do so. However, the reform of support funding is a very different matter. I will spend a few moments on the opportunities that will open up with the advent of the single farm payment, which replaces the headage-based subsidies that predominated for many years. Many of my farming constituents have bravely pioneered projects that are designed to add value to their own products. In doing so, they have often found themselves at considerable financial disadvantage when they consider the support that they would have received if they had carried on farming in the traditional way.  For example, I highlight to the minister the excellent Cream o' Galloway Dairy Company Ltd venture at Gatehouse of Fleet in my constituency. The venture started by turning the organic milk that was produced on the farm into what I contend is the most delicious ice cream in Scotland and led to the creation of a highly successful visitor centre, which employs many permanent staff and many more temporary staff at the height of the summer season. The venture achieved the greatly increased employment on Scotland's land for which Jamie Stone's motion calls, but it did so despite the considerable cost to the farming business that the proprietor's outside-the-box decisions brought about. I cannot remember the exact figures, but the decision to go organic led to the loss of many thousands of pounds in subsidies, despite the conversion grants that were available at the time. I concede that grants have improved since then. Under the single farm payment, farmers and other land managers will be free to think outside the box as they attempt to maximise the returns that they receive from the marketplace, as long as they operate within the restrictions of cross-compliance. I suspect that they will have to think outside the box if they are to maximise their returns, because I do not expect the marketplace simply to cough up for any financial deficit that is incurred as a result of the change in support funding. As Scottish agriculture adapts to the new system in the coming years, we are likely to witness changes and I have considerable faith in the ability of Scotland's agricultural entrepreneurs to maximise their returns. There is enormous scope for adding value at the point of production, which in turn will maximise the employment potential at the point of production, providing the financial contribution to the viability and indeed the vitality of our rural communities to which Jamie Stotion refers—I meant Jamie Stone's motion, but the name "Jamie Stotion" might stick; it has something about it. Farmers are now quite fortunate in that they can make outside-the-box changes while being a little cushioned by the single farm payment. Their brave and innovative forebears, such as the people at Cream o' Galloway, had to make such changes at their own expense and financial loss. The motion is correct to suggest that such jobs are crucial to the viability of our communities and I commend it to members.

I welcome the expansion of the scheme to include the replacement of boilers that have broken down irreparably. Given that a breakdown, by its very nature, suggests something of an emergency, does the minister agree that it is unacceptable that people have to wait for up to five months under those circumstances, especially at this time of year? Will he re-examine that part of the scheme, so that those who find themselves in an emergency situation are treated with the urgency that their situation merits? Will he consider providing either a fast-tracking option for such breakdowns or, as Elaine Smith suggested, a grant-aided scheme to  alleviate those affected with the immediacy that their circumstances both deserve and require?

I have no trouble with that.

Presiding Officer, before I begin, I apologise to you, to other members in the chamber and to Christine May for conversing with Jamie Stone. That is not something that I recommend too often, but I am afraid that, sadly, I get rather over-enthusiastic when people extol my constituency's high-quality excellent field sports, in which Mr Stone is a regular and keen participant. Those field sports play a vital role in extending my constituency's tourist season into the autumn and winter. The motion is sadly lacking in that it fails even to touch on the anxiety and uncertainty that currently enfold the sector at area level in a way that almost defies belief. We all accept that change will always create anxiety and uncertainty. The changes that are being brought about as a result of the introduction of tourism network Scotland are no exception to that rule, as many members have ably demonstrated. The need for transitional funding, which members have mentioned and which is rightly highlighted in both amendments, is one of the main concerns of Dumfries and Galloway Tourist Board in my constituency. In moving from a membership-funded organisation to one that is funded by service delivery, there is bound to be a transitional period of financial uncertainty, which only the Executive can address. There will be no automatic rush to purchase the new services by those who are involved in the industry. As I was told recently by an accommodation provider in my constituency, whether the new set-up is successful will depend entirely on the value for money of the advertising and marketing that it will offer to businesses. Any element of loyalty that may have been engendered by the previous membership organisation will no longer exist. As I was told, it remains to be seen what products will be put on the counter.

Yes. In other words, which I think the member used, the proof of the pudding will be in the eating. In this case, former area tourist board members will want to see the proof before they purchase the pudding. There will be a gap, which will require the Executive's attention. I hope that the minister will be able to reassure us on that issue, if only to enable the hubs to put together some form of business plan and budget for this year. They are currently treading water and are completely unable to do so. If the minister finds herself in reassurance mode, perhaps she can provide some reassurance on  the future of eTourism Ltd, the somewhat mysterious company behind visitscotland.com. I have a simple question for the minister: how long can the company survive? The latest returns from Companies House to the year ending December 2003 show a loss of £3.6 million. Turnover exceeds costs by only a tiny fraction and administration costs come in at £2.3 million. Unless something drastic is done, eTourism Ltd will be on course for bankruptcy some time next year, although a contractual commitment for a further £3 million that was made with Schlumberger Sema and that I presume has been passed on to its successor, Atos Origin, may help to extend eTourism Ltd's life for a further year. Something may be very wrong, and I hope that it is pertinent in the context of this debate to ask the minister just what that something is. In my opinion, if we take a large information technology company with no tourism experience and the misguided assumption of VisitScotland and the Scottish Executive that internet bookings will rocket, and feed in the growing loathing that the general public has for call centres, we have a recipe not for success, but for a potential disaster, which may be just around the corner. In answer to a parliamentary question that I put recently, the Executive indicated that internet bookings with no manual input stand at a miserable 6 per cent of total accommodation bookings. I also have a number of concerns about the definition of automatic bookings that was used in the response that I received. Answers are required, and I hope that the minister will be able to provide them today. If not, I ask her to provide them to me in writing. The motion asks us to note a benefit to the economies of rural areas that will accrue from 50 per cent revenue growth. However, that depends on how well all areas are promoted. The recent experience of one of my constituents who attended Crufts dog show last month suggests that VisitScotland has a great deal to do as far as my very scenic rural constituency is concerned. On spotting a VisitScotland stand—I commend VisitScotland on promoting Scotland at Crufts—my constituent posed as an interested tourist and asked why on the displayed map everything west of Dumfries was a grey blur. That suggested that the area was basically empty, except for the designated tourist route from Dumfries to Ayr. On asking whether there was nothing worth visiting in the area, he was astonished—and I do not blame him for being so—to receive the reply, "Oh, but we want people to visit the real Scotland." I am sorry, but a' the airts of Scotland have a great deal to commend them. I am far from convinced that the current promotion of our country recognises that. Unless we get the  promotion right, we can forget the Executive's supposed ambition, the targets and the self-congratulatory attitude. I reject the motion before us and will support the amendment in the name of my colleague Jamie McGrigor.

Like the cheese industry?

Will the minister give way?

Assuming that the minister is successful in attracting more people to return to Scotland, does she agree that when visitors venture out into rural Scotland, too often they are encouraged to stick to designated tourist routes? That discourages them from spreading out across rural areas and tends to keep them on a rather narrow path, often missing perfectly welcoming scenery and other attractions that lie off that path. Will she consider reviewing the tourist route network?

I join other members in congratulating Eleanor Scott on bringing the subject to the Parliament for debate. I also welcome the fact that the Green party has embraced the Scottish Conservative party's manifesto commitment to explore every possibility that might encourage the reinstatement and reinvigoration of rural abattoirs. As the motion rightly points out, the number of such abattoirs has nearly halved in 20 years. The pressure is on-going. Earlier this year, in my constituency, one of the last true rural abattoirs in the south of Scotland, the one in Castle Douglas, announced that it would have to close. It has enjoyed a chequered career, including a spell when the local council owned and managed it in a valiant effort to keep it afloat, despite the fact that it no longer had to do so. Everybody in the area hoped that its future was secured when it was taken over by Buccleuch Scotch Beef Ltd, an attached downstream business that is a local co-operative that specialises in absolutely top-quality beef and which has proved to be a tremendous success. That arrangement, which was similar to the one  that George Lyon mentioned, encapsulated everything that I believe about how local produce should be dealt with in a perfect world. My belief applies as much to timber, milk, lamb and other primary produce as it does to beef. Buccleuch Scotch Beef took a product that was born and reared locally, slaughtered and packaged it locally, and distributed it to the wider world only when the last ounce of added economic benefit had been wrung from it. That is what the debate is really about: maximising the beneficial economic impact of local primary produce before it leaves the area and ensuring that local job opportunities are given the highest priority so that the economic trickle-down impacts on the whole community and does not stop at the farm gate. The good news is that Buccleuch Scotch Beef is closing the abattoir only because it is too small to accommodate the required throughput, but the tragedy is that nobody is queuing up to take it over. Unfortunately, the Green party makes something of an art form out of lodging motions with which I very nearly agree, but which always have something that makes me stop. Like George Lyon, I did not sign the motion, because I cannot agree with the argument about the "impact on animal welfare that results from increased transportation times". Eleanor Scott said that nobody would disagree with that point, but I do. The argument is a fallacy and falls into the same category as saying that if something is organic, it is healthier than other products or that an animal that is organically reared has been better treated than other animals have been.

I am sorry, but I have only three minutes. Abundant research exists to show beyond any doubt that journey times do not have a detrimental impact, if regulations are adhered to, and that any impact comes during loading and unloading. I do not accept the basic tenet that the journey time has a negative welfare impact. However, I agree that local abattoirs have a wider benefit to the local community and I accept the desirability of slaughtering farm stock as close to the point of production as possible. If we were to have a vote on the motion, I would support it if the distance/welfare equation were amended out. As it is, I encourage the Executive to endorse the Conservative's policy of exploring every possibility to reinvigorate and encourage the rebirth of local abattoirs. I suspect that the plea to invest in them directly will fall foul of the European state-aid rules, but no doubt the minister will deal with that issue.  I welcome the opportunity to debate the issue, but I am sorry that, even at this time of good will to all men, women and, no doubt, political parties, I cannot give the motion my full support.

Will the member confirm that one of the main reasons why Austria has managed to maintain a large number of rural abattoirs is that for many years it enjoyed a derogation from the European regulations?

On the subject of the health of the product, is the minister aware of the international proposals that are being circulated by the Codex committee on food additives and contaminants that would raise the current acceptable levels of radionuclides to such a degree that most shellfish from the Solway firth would be unsaleable? Given that there is a fledgling aquaculture industry in the Solway firth, will the minister defend the Food Standards Agency's position that those proposals are based on false science? Will he assure the chamber that he will defend robustly the FSA's position on those tolerance levels?

I was, in speaking to the amendment in my name, going to congratulate the Green party on bringing the subject to Parliament for debate. Unfortunately, Shiona Baird took only two interventions—it is not so much a debate as a lecture. I congratulate George Lyon and Alasdair Morgan on managing to intervene during her opening speech. They obviously know a great secret that I do not.

I agree. The subject is topical and fairly relevant and touches on two issues. The first has been, and remains, of concern to many communities throughout Scotland, and the second was brought vividly to our attention recently by the lobby from NFU Scotland. I will touch on both subjects. This morning, Chris Ballance asked me whether my amendment was a bit weaselly, to which the answer is no. He asked whether we could have lodged an amendment that said that we almost agreed with the Greens' motion. As many members have said, one can agree with much in the motion. We thought long and hard about whether to propose adding words to the motion, but were forced to conclude that the second half of the motion's first section—if that is not too complicated—is too prescriptive. It is too simplistic to say that all supermarkets are bad, which is in  effect what the motion says. I accept the need for better product information, but to suggest that the dominance of supermarkets is having a negative impact on consumers' health almost defies belief.

Unlike the opening speaker for the Scottish Green Party, I will give way.

That is not what the motion says. If the member studies the motion, he will find that the Scottish Green Party is saying that all supermarkets are bad. That is the only way I can read the motion, although I accept that it deals with the fact that there are four dominant supermarkets. Despite the wording of the motion, consumers can make one simple choice, which is not to buy from supermarkets. However, year on year they seem to choose to do so. We cannot and should not try to get away from the fact that, on the whole, customers like supermarkets. The question that we should ask is this: How do we achieve the right balance in a free and competitive society? That question is currently being asked in my nearest market town, Castle Douglas in Galloway, which makes a very interesting example. Castle Douglas is renowned all over the south-west of Scotland as an excellent shopping town. Remarkably, for a town of its size, it retains four butchers, one of whom is a specialist pork butcher, as well as a diverse range of independent retail outlets, very few of which represent national chains. The town draws people from far and wide, to such an extent that come election time it is hardly worth canvassing or leafleting the main street on Saturdays, as most people in it come from outwith the constituency. There is also a Co-op supermarket within a short distance of the main street. Tesco is now proposing to build another supermarket outwith the town centre, which is the cause of no little controversy. Most of the existing retailers, almost everyone from outwith Castle Douglas and many of those who live in the town are opposed to the proposal and everyone agrees that there is room for only one supermarket in the town. However, one must accept that for many people, especially the less well-off people in the town, the proposal offers greater choice—to begin with, at least— possibly cheaper food and job prospects of sorts. It is a question of balance that is not easy to answer. Like other members, I have considerable reservations about the impact that the opening of a superstore can have, particularly on a small rural community. However, the motion's claim that there is no good side to supermarket development is not true. We accept that supermarket development can have a negative impact, but we cannot accept that that is, as the motion states, always the case. It is not. We are happy to support the second part of the motion, which draws back from the call that has been made of late for a legal toughening of the supermarket code of practice. I am pleased that the motion does so, as that is the preferable way forward. A code is not a hard and fast law, but any code must be enforceable and fair to all parties, but it is crystal clear that the supermarket code of practice is not working for all parties. I suggest that it is working only for the supermarkets. As other members have said, the current plight of the dairy farming sector illustrates the point all too clearly. As the member for a constituency that has a high proportion of Scotland's dairy farmers, I cannot be other than deeply concerned about that plight. Ross Finnie was absolutely right when he said last week at question time that "moves must be made towards creating more vertical integration so that we are less dependent on the raw milk price."— [ Official Report , 18 November 2004; c 12053.]  I understand that that means revisiting competition law, which is a UK matter, but one on which the Scottish Executive should exert considerable pressure. I sincerely hope that it is doing so. Until the Executive's pressure bears fruit, enforcement of the code of practice—some way of ensuring that the pot of money that is available throughout the chain is evenly spread—is important. It cannot be right that the producer of a litre of milk should receive 17p or 18p, when the retailer gets 45p or 50p and it costs at least 20p to produce the milk in the first place. It certainly cannot be right that fear of being delisted by the supermarkets prevents complaints by producers. If an enforcer could change that, we would support it. If legal back-up or strengthening were required as a last resort, we would support that, too. Something drastic needs to be done when 200 to 300 cow herds are packing up in my constituency—I am talking about modern and efficient units in a producer-friendly arena. That is a serious situation, and serious situations demand serious action. We do not accept that all supermarkets have a negative impact or that all have a positive one, but we believe that they could do much more to present a positive image—a point on which my colleagues will expand later. As has been  mentioned, they could source more local produce. Better and clearer labelling is important. We could encourage farmers' markets to expand the choice that is available. Above all, we could ensure that our primary producers are consistently paid a fair share of the overall moneys that are available for their product, whatever it may be. The goal must be fair shares for all. It is a tragedy that we have to call for that in the first place. Doing something about it is a different matter. I move amendment S2M-2056.2, to leave out from "negative" to end and insert, "impact that the dominance of supermarkets can have on Scottish farmers, producers and communities; notes the Office of Fair Trading's report that fear among suppliers of being delisted by the major supermarkets is preventing them from complaining under the current Supermarket Code of Practice; calls for an independent overseer of the code of practice who will proactively ensure that it is enforced and who will protect complainants from reprisals, and further calls for the code of practice to apply to the whole food supply chain in order to ensure fair trade for all, with particular emphasis on ensuring that the primary producer receives a fair reward for his or her product."

Will the member take an intervention?

The minister will be aware of the comparatively benign conditions that exist in my constituency for dairy farmers. I am sure that he will therefore share my concern that, in recent weeks, a 200-cow herd and a 300-cow herd have ceased milk production. Those are efficient and modern units that are unable to make ends meet  even in the most favourable conditions for dairy farming. Does the minister understand the anger that dairy farmers feel about the introduction of the national beef envelope because they will be contributing towards it but receiving no benefit from it? Will he consider reviewing the criteria so that beef calves from the dairy herd will qualify for support under the envelope?

With great respect, I cannot help but feel that the minister is slightly sidestepping the nub of the debate in listing the worthy aspirations of the Executive. She said that it might be helpful if any of the parties involved approached the Executive with a view to getting involved. If any of those parties did that, would the Executive get involved in trying to bring about a negotiated settlement?

Like other members, I congratulate Roseanna Cunningham on securing the debate on her motion, to which I was happy to attach my signature. She and Christine May both spoke about the fact that people often remember football clubs because they heard their names being read out during the results. It is funny that Christine May mentioned Cowdenbeath in that regard because I have, as long as the two teams have been in the same league, always tried to ensure that I catch the result of any match between Stranraer and Cowdenbeath. Sadly, when I first started doing that—I fear that it must have been on the home service, because I am sure that I am older than Christine May—the score was nearly always Stranraer 0, Cowdenbeath 0. However, if there happened to be a goal, it usually ensured that one or other of those clubs got out of their position at the bottom of the league. I was interested in those two clubs because I was at school near Cowdenbeath and was born in Stranraer. Times have changed, and Stranraer is now doing extraordinarily well. Andrew Welsh was quite right when he spoke about the importance of a club to its community. It is notable that, on the back of the success of its football club, Stranraer is bursting with pride, enthusiasm and a renewed sense of confidence. The letter that I received from that club's secretary—I am sure that Christine May and everyone else received it as well—stresses what  £20,000 means to the community that the club represents. I recognise the problems of the pools companies, to which everyone has referred, and I can understand their desire to renegotiate. However, I have to say that I am concerned about the procedures and tactics that are being employed. The reasons for those tactics being used were put extraordinarily well by Michael Matheson. The language that has been used is confrontational and aggravating—it is as if a challenge has been issued to the clubs to take the pools companies to court if they do not like the situation. Of course the smaller football clubs—and, these days, probably the bigger ones—simply cannot afford to do that. The correct way to renegotiate is to do just that: to negotiate again around a table over a set period of time while current agreements continue. The incorrect way is to hold a £20,000 double-barrelled shotgun to the heads of clubs such as Stranraer. The size of the club is unimportant; that is a big weapon to hold against them. I hope genuinely that all parties in the dispute can get around the table and that the pools companies can reconsider the tactics that they have used as a result of their understandable desire to renegotiate. Finally, I hope that, after this debate, the minister will do everything that she can to bring about an acceptable solution for all the parties.

I am happy to underline the fact that we on this side of the chamber agree with the majority of the bill. I particularly welcome the minister's announcement about giving extra powers to the water customer consultation panels. I hope that the powers will be extensive and enforceable and will turn what are currently well-meaning but toothless organisations into ones with meaningful power and a beneficial output. As Alex Johnstone said, although we are in favour of the bill, we cannot support it because it shows a lack of desire to embrace the full benefits of choice and thus displays a lack of understanding of the benefits that true competition would bring. I am constantly amazed by the number of my constituents—not all of whom, by any means, are members or supporters of our party—who now passionately declare the wish that Scotland's water industry had been privatised many years ago. I for one do not believe that we would be facing the problems that we currently face had that been the case. One of the problems with the current set-up is the almost complete lack of accountability of Scottish Water to its customers. It simply cannot be right that that massive monopolistic giant can be virtually unanswerable for its actions, and I sincerely hope that the new commission will get a grip on that situation. It is not just me who is calling for that greater accountability. I would like to quote from Dumfries and Galloway Council's response to the consultation exercise, which says: "there should also be 'accountability' to stakeholders as a criteria for Q&SIII. Scottish Water should also be required to constructively engage in Community Planning. Unless this occurs it will not be possible to have a genuinely joined up approach to Public Service provision in Scotland. The criteria as drafted lend themselves to supporting cost effective sustainable urban solutions, rural areas like Dumfries and Galloway with a large number of small settlements however will be disadvantaged by these criteria and a different approach is required." I welcome the proposed commission in the hope that it will provide a different approach, or help to do so, and it will certainly not be short of issues to deal with, many of which are covered in the parallel consultations that are running alongside the bill. I feel that there has been a missed opportunity to use the bill to encompass any recommendations or changes that are agreed or proposed as a result of those consultations, but I am willing to bet that every response from rural agencies, organisations and councils will concentrate on the current development constraints imposed by Scottish Water, as Roseanna Cunningham has underlined.  I have said before that Scottish Water has in effect imposed another layer of planning requirements and constraints across my constituency, which is hugely constricting desperately needed developments of affordable local housing. One of the problems is that Scottish Water itself sometimes appears not to know the status of many of the systems to which it is refusing to allow connections under Q and S II, never mind Q and S III. If it were simply a case of the left hand not knowing what the right hand was doing, it might be manageable, but Scottish Water appears to outnumber an octopus when it comes to limb numbers and there appears to be very little joined-up thinking between any of them. In a recent case in which I was involved, Loreburn Housing Association in Dumfries and Galloway had sought Scottish Water's permission to connect to the sewerage system in Gatehouse of Fleet. It got three different replies from three different Scottish Water offices. Following consultation with SEPA, which had no reservations about the capacity of the system to absorb that development, Scottish Water eventually withdrew its objections, at the very last minute, on condition that Loreburn undertook to pay the extra modelling and connection charges. That ensured—only just—that an injection of valuable housing capital into an affordable local housing project went ahead, when it would otherwise have been lost.

The only water that Jeremy Purvis needs is a sprinkler outside his office window, in case he is tempted by the odd cigar. Having said that, I shall give way to him.

I am saying only what has become absolutely apparent to me at constituency level. It appears that development officers in Scottish Water, who are based in Aberdeen or Inverness, do not know the status of some of the smaller systems in my area of Dumfries and Galloway when it comes to allowing or refusing connections. That is backed up by SEPA locally. I am also flattered that Jeremy Purvis thinks that I might think of scripting such a reply. I can assure him that I did not.

No, they did not. It was purely off the cuff. The example that I have given leads me to another problem—the insistence by Scottish Water that developers pay for the extra costs where connection is permitted. That was mentioned by Roseanna Cunningham. I will quote again from Dumfries and Galloway Council's response, which said: "The problems faced in rural areas like Dumfries and Galloway are different from urban areas. The scale of the problems ... and the large geographical area affected by development constraints is a serious concern. The economies of scale which may be available in urban areas, to enable developers to make contributions as part of large development sites to solve infrastructure problems are not readily available in areas like Dumfries and Galloway which for example require affordable housing in small settlements." Recently, a small building company wished to build three houses in the village of Kirkinner in Wigtownshire. After a struggle, Scottish Water agreed that the houses could be connected to the public system if the developer paid the extra costs. The developer, not unnaturally, inquired what those costs might be and was told that the figure would not be known until the houses had been built. That is nothing less than diabolical and it sums up perfectly the rural dimension of the issue. Connection and modelling costs are probably quite sustainable when they are spread over 200 houses but not when they are applied to three houses. To put that into context, Loreburn Housing Association, to which I have referred, which is the only mechanism through which local affordable housing is built in Dumfries and Galloway, builds considerably fewer than 200 houses a year throughout the region. The vast majority of its developments are the small-scale ones that are being penalised most by Scottish Water. There is a need for heads to be knocked together. Interagency co-operation and consultation, in particular between SEPA and Scottish Water, are essential, but they do not seem to be happening. If the new commission can get a grip on that situation, good will come of the bill. I sincerely hope that that is the case, but I am not holding my breath.

I would like to be part of that meeting if possible, because I have had many meetings during the past weeks and have visited several agencies in my constituency that will be affected by this decision. They include alcohol and drug support, an agency where the service demand has doubled in the past year; Women's Aid in Wigtonshire, which in the past year has gone from three to 11 support workers, four of whom are totally dependent upon supporting people funding; and the Loch Arthur community, an incredible trust whose work with disabled  people gives it a genuinely productive community role and real worth in society. That funding is benefiting those at whom it is aimed and it cannot be right to curtail funding to Dumfries and Galloway Council, as has been done to East Lothian Council, just because that region has been successful in rolling it out. Will the minister consider acting in line with the terms of Elaine Murray's motion on the issue and agree at least not to decrease the resources that are available under the supporting people initiative?

It would be nice if members always flooded into the chamber when I rose to speak. I can barely imagine what qualities it takes to be a good foster-parent. I guess that infinite patience, a high degree of wisdom and an extended forgiving nature come very high on the list. Like the children in their charge, no two foster carers or foster-parents will be alike. I was interested to read the aims for partnership of the Fostering Network, which state: "We believe that the greater the involvement of children and young people, parents, foster carers and other relevant professionals in social workers' plans, the more likely it is that children and young people will have a satisfactory experience in foster homes." I have no doubt that that is absolutely correct. However, constituency experience tells me that the aim is far from being achieved across the board. I have met a parent whose son was in foster care and who voiced concerns to social services about apparent bruising on his son. The boy was very quickly removed, but the foster carer continues to foster. Another constituent told me of a young girl in foster care in a very small village who was not having an easy time in the community and kept coming to him because she was not allowed back into her foster home after school. I am acutely aware that there may be perfectly sound reasons in both cases and that there are two sides to every story. However, this morning we have heard from almost every speaker about the acute shortage of foster carers. Social work departments nationwide are desperately short staffed and often stretched to the limit. Obviously, the natural parents of the child in care have real problems of their own. There are problems with the number of foster carers, with the number of social workers and, naturally, with the parents. Those are three of the four elements that appear in the Fostering Network's partnership aims, with which all parties in the chamber agree. I welcome the Executive's intention, as stated in the motion, "to invest in the future of the fostering service to increase the number of high quality placements". However, that phrase would seem to be a tacit admission that there is a degree of variance in the quality of foster care that is on offer. That alone demands improvement.  There is a simple, low-cost, family-friendly way of bringing about improvement. Several members, notably Donald Gorrie, Robin Harper and Christine May, have already touched on the issue. Currently, where there is no option except to take a child or children into care, the wider family of that child or those children is sometimes treated with something that borders on suspicion, but it may have a huge amount to offer. I believe that the wider family should be prioritised by the authorities to the extent that, where acceptable, the first choice for the care of children under consideration should be to place them in the protection of their wider family. That would not be practical or desirable in every instance. However, this week I was pleased to meet the group Grandparents Apart and I have also met a number of grandparents in my constituency who are desperate to help to bring up their grandchildren but are effectively estranged from them. I have no hesitation in stating that in many instances the wider family could and should play a far greater role than it is currently able to play.

I respect the background and experience that Mr Barrie brings to the debate and am aware of the provision to which he refers. However, constituents' experience suggests that it is not being used as much as it should be. That is where I am coming from. An emphasis on the role of the wider family would ensure—as is obviously intended—that the child was kept in the heart of the family, on which the Executive rightly places such strong emphasis. It could make up for a large percentage of the acknowledged shortage of foster carers and would serve the ultimate well-being of the child, the family and, possibly, the natural parents concerned. Given the Fostering Network's recent statement that 91 per cent of local authorities are receiving funds at a level below the organisation's recommended minimum, it is absolutely correct to examine rates and funding. I hope that the minister's announcement today will allow a genuine improvement in this selfless service to take place. I fear that the £12 million may simply begin to close the gap. If the minister embraces actively the immediate wider families of these poor, disadvantaged children, a genuine improvement can be achieved. I welcome today's motion.

I am sure that I speak for everyone in the chamber when I say that I was disappointed in Frances Curran's speech. I hasten to add that I was disappointed not by its content but by the fact that she was unable to enlighten us on whether she will be a contender for the leadership of her party. Perhaps we will find out more about that matter later. I am very pleased to contribute to today's debate and particularly welcome the acknowledgement in the motion that there is no substitute for a strong family background as the best medium for an upbringing in which a child can thrive. Some people in today's society would question that claim, and I welcome the Executive's commitment to the immeasurable benefits of a traditional strong family upbringing. However, in doing so, I recognise with sadness that, perhaps all too often, for some people a life that starts out with the very best intentions can end in collapse. Hope can  become despair and dreams too often are shattered. That can happen for such a wide variety of reasons that I see no point in trying to cover all of them. For whatever the reason, in May 2004, 11,500 children in Scotland either had to be removed from their original surroundings and taken into care or became looked after in some other regulated and supervised way. I dare say that, for some of those children, such a move must come as a relief. However, for others, it must be deeply traumatic. For some, it would mean separation from siblings and, for others, separation from trusted and loved friends. For all those children, being removed by the authorities, the state, the social services or the courts—whatever people want to call them—must be deeply disturbing and could lead to emotional and psychological damage. The fact that that child is in care or in a foster home instantly means that they have a tag or a label that differentiates them from their peers. That alone must have distinct individual consequences. Every child is bound to react differently to that label, which is where the incalculable value of the carer or foster-parent comes in. At that point, Presiding Officer, I will pause in my speech to allow for the minute's silence.

Like other members, I congratulate my colleague David Mundell on bringing the issue to the chamber. The debate has been the focus of attention for members with interests in the south-west of Scotland, but nonetheless the issue is important.  Chapelcross is not in my immediate constituency, but the footfall of its economic impact most certainly is. Indeed, many former and some current employees live in Galloway and the relevance of the debate is every bit as important in Galloway and Upper Nithsdale as it is in Dumfries. I will speak, if I may, from the regionwide perspective. I am tempted to say that, for those of us with an interest in the south-west of Scotland, Chapelcross is our Motorola. However, the situation is far worse than that, because the final decision to close Chapelcross came on top of the virtual mothballing by the Ministry of Defence of the West Freugh airbase in the west of the region. That was yet another public sector closure in an area where replacement jobs are nowhere near as easy to find as they are around Livingston, for example. That is a major difference in our region and I hope that that fact gives the Parliament considerable cause for concern. As the constituency member for Galloway and Upper Nithsdale, I wish the economic regeneration strategy group every success, as the knock-on effect of that success will undoubtedly be keenly felt in my constituency. However, I am slightly concerned that we have several such regeneration groups in the one region: we have the group at Gretna-Lockerbie-Annan; we have a West Freugh regeneration group; we have the Stranraer harbour redevelopment group; and we have a fledgling and badly needed regeneration group in Upper Nithsdale. All those groups are important and badly needed but, given the infinitely superior transport links that the Gretna-Lockerbie-Annan area enjoys over the other areas that I mentioned, there is a danger that the main thrust for economic regeneration could deflect the focus away from those other areas, which are arguably in even greater need of economic regeneration than the Gretna-Lockerbie-Annan area. After speaking to some of the local enterprise officials this afternoon, I am comforted to learn that they are keenly aware of that danger. I hope that they will therefore try to ensure that the different strategies work as much as possible in a complementary, rather than competitive, manner. In seeking to highlight the need for economic regeneration throughout the region, we should not underestimate the importance of public sector jobs in an area that one could argue is still too heavily dependent on agriculture, forestry and the traditional industries for its economic well-being. It will be for ever a matter of considerable local regret that the Executive did not see fit to relocate the Forest Enterprise jobs to Dumfries, given the importance of forestry in the region. To that end, I understand that an interesting ministerial announcement—if I can put it that  way—will be made in Dumfries next week. I hope that ministers will seriously consider the merits of jobs relocation to places such as Newton Stewart and Stranraer—smaller places in more remote areas—as part of any sensible regeneration strategy. Private efforts can do only so much, but I applaud the role that local stakeholders have played in all the strategy groups, along with the enterprise company, right across the region. The Motorola job losses were hugely regrettable, but they seemed to be absorbed rapidly into the dynamic economic activity of the central belt. The fact that that level of activity is not reflected in Dumfries and Galloway underlines the need for robust, proactive Executive support for the excellent work that is being done locally. Such support can encompass infrastructure improvements in road and rail, to which Alasdair Morgan referred. Moreover, Scottish Water needs some serious heads to be banged together, or even heads to be seriously banged together—both, probably. There is also a crying need for local housing provision, which brings economic regeneration in its wake. The Executive can and should accelerate all those matters. For the sake of the whole region, as well as for the interests of my immediate constituency, I urge the Executive to do so. I support the motion.

Will the minister address the point that George Lyon raised and state whether some of that money will be available for local authorities to use on roads?

Eleanor Scott.

Will the member give way?

I understand from what the minister said today that the strategic timber transport fund will be administered solely by Forestry Commission Scotland. Does the member share my concern that there is a need for local authority input into the administration of the fund?

It will be noted that, in common with Richard Lochhead, I have not sought to delete any of the Executive's motion. How could I possibly do that? I acknowledge that the minister is relatively new to his brief and I take this opportunity to warmly welcome him to it. The motion does three things: it ignores the real concerns in the forestry industry; it pays no heed to the vital role the private sector of the industry has to play; and it leaves me completely dumbfounded as to why we had to wait until 5 o'clock on Tuesday evening to be informed of the wording of what I can only describe as a somewhat vacuous motion. That is compounded by the point Alasdair Morgan made about the report being published on the same day as this debate, which is almost a discourtesy to the chamber. I am not surprised at the motion's wording: it simply reflects the consultation on the review of land managed by Forestry Commission Scotland, about which I noted that one major respondent said "It has been difficult to respond entirely constructively to each question due to the leading nature of many and the alluring yet vague language of much of the text." As with the consultation exercise, so it is with the motion before us this afternoon. Since devolution, the industry has been stuttering along on a stop-start basis, which has sapped much of the confidence that it richly deserves. Despite that, major investment has continued, particularly in the processing sector, which is just as well for the economy of rural Scotland and the many thousands of people the industry employs directly and indirectly. Investment will continue of course, because the industry is not able to uproot—if members will pardon the pun—and move to another country as other industries can and do. The first major post-devolution event to affect the industry was the suspension of the farm woodland premium scheme. That came without any warning whatsoever and led to a virtual six-month cessation of new planting schemes. Once it was reintroduced, the industry—along with many others—suffered from the effective moratorium that foot-and-mouth disease imposed on all rural activity.  Just as the industry was picking itself up from that, the woodland grant scheme was suspended prior to the introduction of the Scottish forestry grant scheme. Again, that introduction inexplicably took four months to put in place, which was another period of enforced inactivity. Now, in the wake of common agricultural policy reform, the industry is again in a period of complete uncertainty. Members do not have to take my word for it; the figures speak for themselves. As Richard Lochhead said, in 2000 10,400 hectares of new plantings was undertaken, all within the private sector. In 2004, that figure reduced to 6,700 hectares. Not only that, but restocking levels had been level-pegging at 12,000 to 13,000 hectares per annum for years, despite an ever-increasing hectarage of mature timber being harvested.

I agree. I have no difficulty accepting that. In fact, I was just about to refer to it. However, I do not believe that that affects what I am saying. We must ask ourselves why forestry matters. In the much-vaunted Scottish forestry strategy, Parliament endorsed the objective of having a strong, expanding and profitable forestry sector. Indeed, the Executive committed to a target of 25 per cent woodland coverage by 2050. That aim requires annual afforestation of 14,000 hectares, but we currently plant less than half that. Why? I suggest two reasons. First, the new grant structure administered by Forestry Commission Scotland appears hugely cumbersome and grossly bureaucratic. It has slowed down the process so much that not only are the commission's resources stretched to the limit, there is a less-than-complete update of the available grant funding. Secondly, we have CAP reform. Some months ago, in Ireland, it was announced that following the introduction of the single farm payment, land managers would be able to reduce their agricultural holdings by up to 50 per cent and not only retain 100 per cent of their single farm premiums but receive full forestry grant aid on the rest of the holding. In Ireland, everyone knows where they stand and everyone is deciding and acting accordingly. Here, in stark contrast, the Executive promised a stated position in early October, but we are almost in November and we still have no clarification. I am delighted that the minister said that clarification  is coming shortly, but I suggest that it is well overdue. The industry is certainly not expanding and neither is it profitable, given the points to which the minister alluded. In 1995, the standing price of coniferous timber was over £100 a tonne, but now it is less than £50. Despite the fine words and noble rhetoric of the forestry strategy, the Executive has failed to deliver its objectives. Therefore, the question is how it can do so. We believe that the answer lies to an extent within the private forestry sector, which must operate, let us remember, without the £80 million a year subsidy that the state equivalent receives. Calculations from Forestry Commission data show unequivocally that the cost to the taxpayer of forest management, excluding new plantings, is some £38 per hectare for Forestry Commission Scotland's estate. That compares with £4 a hectare for the private estate, which suggests strongly that the state sector has many lessons to learn from the private sector when it comes to management. In the short time that we have had to look at the review, it seems that few such lessons appear in it. In the management of the trunk roads network, the Executive turned to the private sector for reasons of efficiency and economy. I suggest that it is time to do the same with the management of the state-owned forest estate. The benefits of private sector management of the nation's forest estate could be immense. I hope that the minister will seriously consider the possibility of establishing a pilot scheme to explore the potential benefits. We must not overlook the multifunctional nature of the industry in considering ways to support it. It is a clean and environmentally friendly industry, but it receives no recompense for that. Out-of-the-box thinking is required. I commend the Forestry and Timber Association's manifesto, "A Level Playing Field for Forestry", for providing innovative thinking. More of the same should not be an option. The industry continues to invest, despite the disadvantages it faces. For that, it deserves the Parliament's fullest encouragement and not just a fairly meaningless motion once every few years. I commend the amendment in my name. I move amendment S2M-1899.2, to insert at end: "notes, however, that new planting is at an all-time low, that Forestry Commission Scotland and Forest Enterprise Scotland are budgeted to receive £80 million in the next financial year from the taxpayer with the consequential competitive disadvantage to the private sector and that the promised Executive statement on the link between the agricultural and forestry industries following the introduction of the single farm payment has still not been made, and believes that these factors demonstrate that the Executive  betrays a lack of understanding of the importance of the private sector to Scotland's forestry industry."

Will the minister give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive what representations it has made to the Department for Transport regarding the circumstances in which trans-European network funding would be applied for. (S2O-3476)

I am grateful to the minister for his substantive answer. [ Laughter. ] I am interested that he finds my question amusing, but I thank him for what was a brief reply. In a recent written response to me, he kindly informed me that TEN funding could provide 50 per cent of the cost of studies. I ask him—I am happy even to implore him, if that is what it takes—to consider accessing that funding to undertake an in-depth study of the economic impact of a major upgrade of the A75 from Gretna to Stranraer instead of the welcome but nonetheless unsatisfactory measures that have been announced. Such a study could determine not only the beneficial impacts that such an upgrade would bring to the whole of south-west Scotland, but the benefits that would undoubtedly accrue to the central belt, where I am sure that he agrees the transport infrastructure is creaking at the seams.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will publish the findings of the internal review conducted earlier this year by the Scottish Children's Reporter Administration on Munchausen's syndrome by proxy. (S2O-3308)

I am absolutely delighted to hear that, given that the Executive earlier seemed to feel that the findings would not be made public. I am delighted to hear that they will be and I hope that we will have an opportunity to debate fully the findings in Parliament. Does the minister agree that there is a need to balance the views that are given by so-called expert witnesses in cases that involve children? There is an urgent need to review the situation, so that more balanced opinions can be brought to bear.

As this is the first opportunity that I have had to speak in the new chamber, I wish to add my sincere congratulations to those who have worked long and extremely hard to make the building ready for occupation—and I do not refer to any members in saying that. I vividly recall Enric Miralles saying, during one of the early briefing sessions that he gave members in the former committee room 1, that he felt sure that his debating chamber would be a wonderful chamber for discussion. I dare say that it will be, but whether it will prove to be a wonderful chamber for debate—which is a very different thing from discussion—remains to be seen. I hope that it will be. Whatever happens, I look forward to continuing to represent the electorate of Galloway and Upper Nithsdale in what I do not think that anyone will deny is a strikingly impressive arena. It is upon the economy of Galloway and Upper Nithsdale that I will concentrate. I make no apology for repeating what I have said on many occasions. It is a traditional rural economy that still depends on the old faithfuls of farming, fishing and forestry, now combined with tourism, for the bulk of its gross domestic product. The major employers by a long way are the council and the health board, and the dependency on the public purse is, at times, almost alarming. Although I would not want that to put Tavish Scott off announcing, any day he likes, which public sector jobs will be relocated to Newton Stewart or Stranraer—a matter about which he has assured the council's convener by letter—it is an economy that is ready for expansion, ripe for innovation and raring for investment. However, before that can happen a kick start needs to be administered, and the only Administration that can provide that boost is the Scottish Executive. The private sector in my constituency, as in many other similar constituencies in rural Scotland, comprises a broad spectrum of the small and medium-sized enterprises to which Jim Wallace referred in his speech this morning. Those are the very businesses that have been hammered hard by Scottish Water, which has imposed increases in water rates of up to 700 per cent in my constituency. Those businesses could and should be able to benefit—some such businesses have been able to benefit for some time—from broadband technology. If that facility was more widely available, it would undoubtedly  attract new businesses to rural areas such as mine. When I questioned the Executive's commitment to rolling out broadband across the South of Scotland, in a speech to the Parliament on 9 January 2002, I was verbally roasted by Jim Wallace for not hailing the benefits of the pathfinder project, which would help to do just that. He asked where I had been over the past year "when we announced that on the broadband strategy the pathfinder project would cover the whole of ... Scotland".— [ Official Report , 9 January 2002; c 5184.]  Perhaps I am now entitled to ask where the Deputy First Minister has been for the past three years, during which time not one individual connection to broadband has taken place due to the pathfinder project. That probably explains why, having made no progress under the careful management of the Scottish Executive, that project has been handed over lock, stock and barrel to Scottish Borders Council and Dumfries and Galloway Council to administer. It has been left to private initiatives to bring broadband to the remoter areas of my constituency—initiatives that are now facing a quandary since the Executive's rather belated announcement that it will ensure that every community in Scotland is connected by 2006. Nevertheless, I welcome the minister's assurance that every exchange will be connected by that date. That assurance will bring comfort to many of my constituents. It is not only the information superhighway that needs to be upgraded. I make no apology for highlighting yet again the need for, and the economic benefit that would be achieved by, a significant upgrading of the transport infrastructure of the region. Recently, the Minister for Transport helpfully informed me by letter that trans-European network funding could provide a 50 per cent grant for studies. I urge the Scottish Executive to consider undertaking an in-depth study into the economic impact that a major upgrade of the A75, which is a trans-European network route, would have. That would not only accrue benefit to the south-west of Scotland; it would provide relief for the central belt, the infrastructure of which is already creaking at the seams. Finally, I mention the greatest current constraint on development—Scottish Water. Scottish Water has effectively become a second tier of planning procedure, and one from which it is considerably harder to gain approval for any proposal than that run by the local authority. Scottish Water now asks any developer to pay for the modelling costs and alterations required before connection to the sewerage system is granted. If a developer is building 500 or more homes, that cost might be bearable and sustainable. However, in my  constituency, developers usually talk of building three, four, five or six houses. When the cost is split between that number of structures, the project becomes impossible. In every village throughout my constituency there is a burning need for such small developments of local affordable housing, yet, time after time, Scottish Water stops them happening. The Scottish Environment Protection Agency will not allow septic tanks where it believes that there is a possibility of connection to the mains. We have ended up with a moratorium on development. There we have it in a nutshell. We have to sort the roads, provide the information technology and bring Scottish Water to book, then Galloway and Upper Nithsdale will give us an economy to be proud of—one that will build on progress and help to grow the economy for all of Scotland. Sadly, I have little faith that this Government has either the desire or the ability to deliver those much-needed improvements.

I welcome the Deputy First Minister's announcement, but will he tell us which of the 27 definitions of "community" that exist for rural Scotland he will use?

If John Swinney's question had been asked solely in the context of my constituency, I would have endorsed it 100 per cent. The advent of the new out-of-hours model that is proposed by Dumfries and Galloway NHS Board, along with the inconsistencies of NHS 24, is undoubtedly going to heap untold new pressures on the Ambulance Service. I recently met local managers who are seriously concerned about their ability to deliver on the targets. Will the minister ensure that the service is funded to the appropriate level to meet the extra challenges that it faces as a result of his reforms? Does he have a plan B in the event of the Ambulance Service not being able to deliver on its targets in some parts of the country, with a consequent collapse of the blue-light services that it is expected to deliver?

In contributing to this debate I will concentrate on one aspect of family law only—the role and rights of grandparents. Presiding Officer, I am sure that you will find it almost impossible to believe that I have recently joined, rather proudly, the ranks of that esteemed sector of family structure and, as a grandparent, I probably ought to declare an interest. I live in the serious hope of never being in the unfortunate circumstances of some of the surprisingly large number of my constituents who have contacted me about grandparents' rights. I accept that a blanket right to access for grandparents is probably not the right way forward, as it might create more difficulties than it solves. However, it seems to me that the current legal system too often biases the courts against grandparental contact on the somewhat spurious ground that as grandparents have no legal rights, it follows that they have no legal relevance. That attitude seems to infiltrate the mindset of social services, which seem too often to put  grandparents at the back of the queue when children have to be taken into care, whether temporarily or otherwise.

I agree with that comment 100 per cent. It is a good point and I thank Pauline McNeill for making it. To illustrate the point that I am trying to make, I must refer to the case, which will not be unique by any means, of the maternal grandparents of a family in my constituency for whom the issue has been of enormous stress. Their daughter became addicted to drugs some years ago with all the dreadful consequences that that addiction brings, and her partner, who is not the father of her two children, clearly resents the children's presence. When he is in prison, as is all too often the case, the children's situation is manageable, but when he is at home, they are regularly abused and social services rightly have to intervene. That intervention usually ends up with the children being taken into care with a foster family, despite the fact that their maternal grandparents live only 6 miles away and despite the children's stated desire to be with them. For one reason or another, the daughter has stated in writing that her parents should not have access to her children, so whatever the private views of the courts or social services, access is denied. Individual social workers agree in this case that grandparental access could only be beneficial, but all that they are able to deliver is a recent promise that this year's birthday cards from the grandparents will be delivered to the children. Big deal. Of course I understand that the minister cannot comment on individual cases—I would not dream of asking her to do so. However, I ask her to use that example as one that points to the fact that the current law needs to be amended to enable grandparents to play a greater role, where appropriate—I stress that phrase—not only in caring for their children's children but in helping to draw families back together to the ultimate benefit of all. Occasionally, although not often enough, grandparents have managed to take on responsibility for their grandchildren under circumstances such as those that I have described. That makes it all the more disappointing to discover that in such instances financial help is all too often desperately hard to  come by. As all parents know, bringing up children is not a cheap business, and that fact does not alter for grandparents. In fact, for the many grandparents who are dependent on their old-age pensions to survive, it becomes an enormous burden. It is patently diabolical that such grandparents receive virtually no assistance when we consider how much it costs the state—or rather, let us face it, the taxpayer—to keep a child in care. In her opening speech, the minister spoke about the importance of continuity of contact with the wider family, and I was heartened by and appreciate those words. I simply plead that she not close the door on changing the current law on grandparental access, albeit in certain specific instances. A change would save an enormous amount of grandparental anguish and could save the taxpayer a great deal of money. Most important by far, it would be of untold benefit to hundreds, if not thousands, of unhappy children.

Given the minister's worthy aim of reducing landfill, how can he possibly justify his decision not to call in for review the public-private partnership proposal for Dumfries and Galloway's waste collection, which includes a massive expansion of the landfill site at Aucheninnes near Dalbeattie in my constituency?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to combat the health causes of long-term absence of pupils from school. (S2O-2562)

Is the minister aware of reports that categorically position ME as the biggest single cause of long-term absence from schools? ME sufferers can learn, but they must do so in their own time and at their own pace. Will the minister undertake to play his part whenever possible in bringing together health professionals and educationists to ensure that local authorities take that information into account in formulating and implementing their home-education policies?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to make representations to Her Majesty's Government on the impact of rising petrol prices in rural Scotland. (S2O-2563)

Is the minister truly aware of the impact of high fuel prices in constituencies such as mine where, as has been said many times before, the car is not a luxury but an essential requirement for getting to work? Furthermore, is he aware of the impact of high fuel prices on tourism in rural areas as we enter the summer season? Given that the Treasury automatically benefits from rising fuel prices, will he endeavour to change the stance that the First Minister set out earlier today and get him to use whatever influence he has to persuade the UK Government either to freeze fuel duty or, better still, to reduce it? Will the minister also undertake to explore with the petrochemical suppliers the possibilities of reducing the iniquitous differentials between urban and rural petrol prices, which are, frankly, little short of discriminatory?

Will the member take an intervention?

On the subject of less well-known events in Scotland, has the minister decided to accept the invitation to open the fledgling wickerman festival in my constituency? The festival has an increasing reputation for quality, and he would be welcome.

I take the minister's point on appeals, but the problem is that the sheriff can only refer the decision back to the panel, which may not even consist of the panel members who made the original decision. I hope that the minister agrees that that must be considered a weakness in the system.

No, Presiding Officer.

I am ready now, Presiding Officer.

My apologies, Presiding Officer. I was not expecting to be called quite so soon. I say at the outset that I agree with my colleague Brian Monteith, who questioned why the Parliament should have a five-and-a-half-hour debate on the launch of a project, given that we are sometimes guillotined in stage 3 debates, which are in effect the last chance to alter legislation. That needs to be looked at. Nonetheless, I am pleased to take part in the debate and I welcome the review, which is badly needed—my only regret is the length of time that the consultation process will take. The first point that I will make was put to me at a briefing with the chair of the children's panel in Dumfries and Galloway. It reinforced a point that has been made forcefully by several panel members in my constituency. Section 1 of the glossy, multicoloured consultation pack contains a two-page explanation of how the children's hearings system works at present, under four headings: "Incident", "Investigation", "Hearings" and "Outcomes". In the "Outcomes" box, the final determination that is available to a panel is to recommend a supervision requirement in secure accommodation. Like other members, I have a high regard for members of children's panels and the work that they do and I am sure that no children's panel member would make that ultimate recommendation lightly. However, as with all justice systems, an ultimate sanction is a necessity. The problem in Dumfries and Galloway is that no secure accommodation is available. There is therefore an even greater reluctance to impose the ultimate sanction, given the panel's knowledge that the child will have to be completely removed from his or her local environment, with all the consequences that that will have on family contact, agency contact and other necessary processes of rehabilitation. That is a glaring gap in the local system, but it can be corrected relatively easily if the Executive has the will to resource the system properly—many members mentioned proper resourcing this morning. I will highlight one or two other areas of the system that demand review, not to undermine it, as some members suggested this morning, but to  improve it, as Brian Monteith said we all want to do. The areas that I will mention arise from a case involving one of my constituents—I hope that that is acceptable—whose two children were taken from her, put into care and ultimately adopted, an action that many, including me, believe to be wrong. The first concern is the grounds-for-referral document, whose purpose is to list the facts of the case that, if proven, satisfy the statutory test for bringing the child's case before the children's panel. It also provides the basis on which a child is taken into care. In my constituent's case, the first version of the document set out a number of grounds, including Munchausen's syndrome by proxy. Her local solicitor took the matter up with the reporter, who agreed to delete all references to the syndrome. However, the solicitor did not realise that those agreed deletions did not prevent the children's panel from raising any issues, including Munchausen's syndrome by proxy, if it chose to do so. In the event, it did choose to do so and, as a consequence, my constituent was continually faced with the allegation that she had agreed to the grounds for referral, even though the matter remained unproven. It cannot be right that an agreed deletion from the grounds for referral can become the reason and the basis for a child being taken into care. Where it is considered that there is a conflict between a parent's interests and those of a child or children, a panel appoints a safeguarder. The theory is that, through the safeguarder, the panel can receive an objective report from the child's perspective. In this case, I understand that the safeguarder who was appointed was an ex-employee of the reporter's office who went on to work with the local social work department. The fact of her former work and contacts can hardly have improved the objectivity with which the case was considered. I believe that that was a failure of the checks and balances that should exist within the system. We come now to the appeals procedure. A respected Edinburgh solicitor, from whom my constituent sought aid during her case, said in a letter: "It is notoriously difficult to appeal decisions of the Children's Panel as the Sheriff has to decide whether or not the Panel came to an unreasonable decision. This is an almost impossible hurdle to meet. Unless a solicitor acting for a parent can show that there has been some fundamental legal error committed by the Panel or a technical breach of the rules it is very unlikely that the Sheriff is going to overturn the Panel's decision as unreasonable. Almost by definition if the Panel is able to set out their reasons coherently then the basis for that reasoning cannot be challenged." Clearly, that solicitor came to the matter rather late in the proceedings and brought it before the  local sheriff in an appeal. The sheriff expressed concern and advised that the points that the solicitor was making ought to be taken back to the panel. The solicitor sought a hearing, but found that the panel was completely uninterested in any of the new points that were being made. I quote again from the solicitor's letter: "I was met with an arrogant Panel and an arrogant Social Work Department who were convinced that they were right and were not prepared to even give any possible consideration to another point of view. While in theory there is an appeal from the Children's Panel, in practice solicitors know that the chances of bringing a successful appeal are virtually nil." Finally, I question the increasing use of so-called expert witnesses in the civil courts and in matters of family law. Their evidence often carries enormous weight. Other experts may hold competing views, but they cannot have them aired in the adversarial surroundings of the system. Surely the system should encourage a consensus to be reached, especially when the outcome, as in the case that I have cited, leads to two children being removed from their natural mother, who is unlikely ever to see them again. As we recently saw in the case of Professor Sir Roy Meadows, far too much emphasis can be placed on so-called experts' evidence.

Absolutely. I agree entirely with that point. I am aware of Johann Lamont's constituency interest in some of those cases. The fact that people can get into a position whereby the system deems them the expert and no other point of view is allowed is a real concern. As I said, there is an urgent need to review that part of the system and not shirk from the conclusions that will be reached. On Sir Roy Meadows, I wonder whether the minister can say in summing up when the Executive will make public the report of the internal inquiry by the Scottish Children's Reporter Administration that was promised last March into cases in Scotland involving MSBP. My constituent deserves that report and she and many others deserve this review. The system is far from perfect and must be changed to become, as Michael Matheson said, fit for purpose in 2004.

Will the member give way?

On amendment 33 in your name, will you give me some indication of the timescale of the consultation exercise on species inclusion that you intend to carry out?

For the sake of the barn owl, I will move amendment 33A.  Amendment 33A moved—[Alex Fergusson].

I have listened very carefully to the minister's comments. Believe it or not, the purpose of amendment 33A is to give some urgently needed protection to the barn owl, which has been in steady decline for many years. It has also been the subject of considerable study and research by the Hawk and Owl Trust in my constituency of Galloway and Upper Nithsdale, which the bird appears to favour. That research suggests that time is very much not on the barn owl's side.  Members might well ask why the species deserves to be ranked alongside the white-tailed eagle in the proposed schedule. As the minister has pointed out, the white-tailed eagle is extremely rare. However, after its reintroduction following extinction, it is now happily established with a self-sustaining population. My reasoning behind amendment 33A is very simple. As the white-tailed eagle is confined to some of the remoter parts of the already remote Western Isles, it is incredibly difficult for someone to interfere with and destroy a bird's nesting site unless that person is intent on illegal activity. Conversely, it is incredibly easy to destroy the barn owl's nesting site. Indeed, such destruction is becoming easier and more common because it is in effect encouraged by our planning regulations. As the insatiable demand for rural housing continues, the conversion of redundant farm buildings for housing and other uses is now a common and often welcome sight. However, each conversion can potentially destroy the nesting site of a barn owl, which tries to stick to the same site every year and often has great difficulty in relocating if its site is destroyed. I am not for one second contending that the white-tailed eagle does not richly deserve the full protection of the provisions that are set out in amendment 33. However, in commending the Hawk and Owl Trust's work on the conservation of barn owls and in lodging amendment 33A, I seek to offer increased protection to the rapidly declining barn owl population alongside what is now a stable and—I hope—increasing white-tailed eagle population. I hope that in his summing-up the minister will announce a welcome change of heart and offer his support for the barn owl by accepting amendment 33A.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

Presiding Officer, you have just made my point of order rather better than I would have made it myself.

To ask the Scottish Executive what consideration has been given to the impact of the extended development of Aucheninnes landfill site near Dalbeattie on the biodiversity of the immediate area. (S2O-1749)

In the minister's reply to Chris Ballance's question on the issue last week, and again today, he referred to SNH's advice as highly significant in the Scottish Executive's decision-making process. Given that the Executive ignored the advice of SNH on the Robin rigg offshore wind farm development, will the minister counter what is clearly a politically motivated policy of selectivity and review the part of Dumfries and Galloway Council's waste plan that affects Aucheninnes moss, in the light of the fact that a significant number of recognised experts increasingly question the bog's environmental status?

So did George Lyon, I think, but I will keep to my four minutes, Presiding Officer. I am deeply grateful to the Scottish Green Party for bringing this matter back to the chamber today, principally because it gives me the opportunity to complete what I wanted to say last week, but was unable to say due to the fact that I was spending so much of my time venting my wrath at the Liberal Democrats. I will not waste my time doing that this week, other than to suggest to them that they do not bother trying to intervene on me, because I am not taking any interventions—at least not from them. Last week, I mentioned that a farming constituent of mine was recently quoted in the agricultural press as saying that he would certainly grow GM maize if he perceived an economic advantage in doing so, and I do not blame him for that. However, I do not believe that that is what the minister means by his assertion that the consumer will decide. If my constituent, and others like him, were to grow GM crops and use them as feed for economic gain, the opinion of the consumer would be completely irrelevant, and would have nothing to do with it. An increasing number of my farming constituents are pursuing innovative niche-marketing opportunities—and are gaining premium prices in the process—by developing markets based on high-quality traceable products of high integrity and purity. If my maize-growing constituents were all to grow GM maize—and there are more of them in my constituency than in any other constituency in Scotland—the entire businesses of other producers would be under  considerable threat. I do not claim, and never have claimed, to be a visionary, but I can see a picture emerging. I can see a south of Scotland—which, as Elaine Murray rightly said, has a splendid climate for agricultural products—in which GM crops will become quite common, and where it will become impossible to produce a high-quality niche product of high integrity, purity and value. I see a central belt, offering a natural buffer zone next to a voluntarily GM-free Scotland in the north, with the central belt and the north of Scotland enjoying all the benefits that I am increasingly convinced will come from being robustly and resolutely GM-free.

I am sorry; I do not have time. As a South of Scotland MSP, I will not stand idly by and let that happen. If there are any Labour and Liberal MSPs who should be searching their consciences today, it is those who represent the South of Scotland. They should think very carefully about how they will vote at 5 o'clock, because their constituencies have every bit as much to lose as mine does. I will probably make up for the extra time that George Lyon had, but I repeat my endorsement of one part of the minister's comments on this subject. I agree that voluntary GM-free zones should be encouraged. As I said last week, I believe that the whole of Scotland should be one. Paragraph 10 of the preliminary opinion of the Greens' counsel, which I thank them for making available, states: "it is arguable that the Scottish Ministers have discretion to refuse to accept Chardon LL maize on to a National List, the exercise of which would have been unlikely to have been successfully judicially reviewed." Whether or not Chardon LL has yet been listed—and I accept what the minister says on the matter—that part of the opinion suggests that the Scottish Executive can turn a voluntary GM-free zone into a compulsory one. If we as a country can afford not to support the motion today—

I am in my last minute, and I seem to remember that I had to remind the minister that he wanted to make an intervention on me last week. He will forgive me if I do not take one this week. The Scottish Conservatives will not take a risk; we will support the motion.

The minister may laugh at this, but I hope that he will be aware of the branding approach that is being taken by a number of towns in my constituency, Wigtown being the book town and Castle Douglas being the food town. Is he aware that Dalbeattie, which is the town next to the Aucheninnes landfill site, believes that it is being forced to accept the title of dump town? Given the fact that the community is unanimously opposed to the extension of the Aucheninnes landfill site—a proposal that would not receive planning permission under current criteria—will he consider ordering a review of the part of Dumfries and Galloway Council's waste plans that affect that moss?

Almost a century ago, scientists invented chlorofluorocarbons and the world was able to postpone its milk going sour by keeping it in fridges. We now know that we were simultaneously blowing a hole in the ozone layer, which may or may not be repairable. If we could rewrite history, I suspect that the invention of the fridge might have been somewhat delayed. Today, we face a similar dilemma of equal importance. We have a choice between accepting the commercialisation of GM technology—which science suggests is safe, although by no means unanimously—and continuing the research into and development of the technology but putting the commercialisation on hold. Unlike when the decision-making process that led to the introduction of CFCs took place, we now live in a world in which public opinion is supposed to be taken into account, or so Governments would have us believe. The UK Government spent £500,000 over six weeks on consulting its population of around 60 million. The New Zealand Government spent £2 million over 14 months on consulting its population of 3.5 million. That statistic is relevant to the debate because we can learn many a lesson from New Zealand about  marketing agricultural produce in the global market. Only two days ago, I attended a very good conference run by Quality Meat Scotland at which Gerry Thompson, the general manager in Europe for Meat New Zealand was a principal speaker. He told us that New Zealand was and would remain at the forefront of GM research and development, but he affirmed that the New Zealand Government, having listened to the concerns of its people and customers over 14 months concluded that neither the time nor the technology was yet right for wider commercialisation and that it would not go down that route.

No. We have heard quite enough from Mr Lyon today.

Mike Rumbles is right to be surprised. I do not usually get riled, but George Lyon is doing a good job of riling me this morning. Our Governments have caved in following the most minimalist consultation exercise ever devised. Shamefully, the Government in Scotland has done so without any justification, as any seed that is added to the certified list must be a proven improvement on what is already available.

I will take an intervention in a second. As Alex Johnstone and Mark Ballard clearly stated, we are told that Chardon LL is unsuitable for Scottish conditions. In any event, the trials involved the use of atrazine, which is a banned pesticide.

Certainly not from a Liberal Democrat. I will take one from the minister.

Roseanna Cunningham answered that question. The European requirements have changed considerably since then.  On the subject of atrazine, Professor Geoff Squire, who was a member of the farm-scale evaluation independent steering group said: "Obviously, if atrazine is withdrawn, we'll have to look at maize again. This is a package, the GM crop and the herbicide. If either element changes, we shall have to revisit it." Wrong, professor, we are not revisiting it, we are going to commercialise it. If we do so, my constituency is likely to be the most affected in Scotland. A farmer who is a constituent of mine is quoted in the latest edition of The Scottish Farmer as saying: "If I see a commercial advantage in growing GM maize, of course I'll grow it." I do not blame him for that—he is a businessman—but it blows wide apart the Executive's assertion that the consumer will decide the outcome. Our country cannot afford to lose the integrity and pure status of the food that we produce. I agree with the Executive's proposal for a voluntary GM-free zone—Scotland should be one. I urge members to vote for the motion.

The Scottish Liberal Democrat election manifesto for 2003 stated: "Until this process is completed and the public debate concluded we will not permit any further GM field trials or commercial growing of GM crops." Does Nora Radcliffe consider that the public debate has been completed?

Does the minister agree that the mid-term review of the common agricultural policy will leave Scotland's agriculture industry far more open to market forces than is currently the case and that every opportunity to attract premium prices by securing high-quality niche markets will need to be taken? If so, does he also agree that securing those markets will be heavily dependent on the purity and integrity of Scottish produce, which is likely to be put severely at risk once we have gone down the route of accepting GM commercialisation?

I am John Scott in another guise.

The member is quite right; John Scott has a touch more hair. I thank the minister for his courtesy in making the statement available in good time prior to his delivery of it in the chamber. In general, Conservative members welcome the commitment to full decoupling, including in the dairy sector, to the adoption of the historic basis for the single farm payment and to the opting at this stage for the maximum permissible amount of modulation. However, within that general acceptance, I have three questions for the minister. First, what will be the reference period for decoupling the dairy sector? If it is to be 2005 or later, can the minister explain why it cannot be retrospective, as it is with other sectors? Does he agree that a future reference date can only play havoc with an already distorted quota market and lead to an inflated price for quota that may be worth absolutely nothing in 2006? Secondly, the use of a national envelope for the beef sector seems to be inconsistent with the clarity and simplicity of the rest of the statement. Does the minister agree that a far better method of support for quality beef calf production would be through pillar 2 support under the rural development regulation? Will he confirm that any use of the national envelope will be for the briefest possible length of time? Finally, on modulation, can the minister confirm that the first €5,000 of support is not to be modulated? Will he ensure that—in line with his recognition of the economic, social and  environmental contribution that agriculture makes to rural development—farmers will have the first call on the recirculation of modulated funds? Will he assure members that, if the Chancellor of the Exchequer is not to continue the match funding that he currently provides on modulated funds, the Executive will not increase the burden on farmers to compensate but will reduce it to a degree that is similar to the chancellor's reduction?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the minister expand on the figures and answer the question asked by my colleague David Mundell about how much of the business is new and how much has simply been directed through that route because it had to be?

I thank the Presiding Officer for fitting me into what is a heavily subscribed debate; I will be brief. I have always been told that any successful website is entirely dependent on the links that it possesses. The fact that visitscotland.com will not link to any other site that offers accommodation or online booking services means that it has no links; therefore, by definition, it cannot be a particularly good website. That goes to the root of the problem, because visitscotland.com should be an information provider—an umbrella site that has links to the thousands of high-quality individual websites that accurately reflect the depth, quality and diversity that Scottish tourism encompasses. Instead, visitscotland.com is a commercial competitor in the tourism market, which means  that it acts to cut out information on other competitors altogether, even when it is meant to be promoting those competitors. On overseas access, if one takes five minutes to trawl through the website—particularly the foreign language site—page after page of accommodation inquiries are returned with the message, "Error: this page cannot be displayed". If somebody in Germany, Sweden or France gets that message two or three times, they will soon go to another website, which probably means going to another country. There is a potential cost to tourism. I will finish by quoting from a letter that was recently written to The Scottish Farmer by a constituent of mine, Joan Mitchell of Newton Stewart, on the subject of Quality Meat Scotland. She said: "If QMS want to see an example of the problems which occur when a national promotional body loses touch with a fragmented industry, they need look no further than the tourist industry and visitscotland." I point out that Joan Mitchell is the leader of the Liberal Democrats on Dumfries and Galloway Council and that she was the chair of Dumfries and Galloway Tourist Board when visitscotland.com was introduced.

I am grateful to Nora Radcliffe for initiating tonight's debate, but given the fact that members from the south and south-west of Scotland tried to bring the same concerns before the Parliament a year ago—I suspect that they would have said then what other members will say tonight—can Nora Radcliffe have any assurance that the justified concerns that she has highlighted will be paid any attention by visitscotland.com? That has certainly not happened over the past year.

Given the difficulty that the Executive seems to have in relocating jobs to Dumfries and Galloway, does the minister agree that there would be no better site for the new Scottish transport agency than Stranraer, in my constituency? Stranraer is the home of the second busiest port in the United Kingdom and is the British gateway to and from Northern Ireland.

Does the First Minister agree that there is now an urgent need to re-examine the procedure for assessing the credibility of expert witnesses in such cases, given that there are strongly conflicting views on the subject? Is he aware of the case of a constituent of mine, who has had her two children forcibly removed because of the testimony of one of Professor Roy Meadow's Scottish acolytes? When he agrees to the wider investigation that Nicola Sturgeon has asked for—which I thoroughly support and believe he must agree to, on moral if on no other grounds—will the First Minister ensure not only that evidence given by Professor Meadow is scrutinised, but that that given by his Scottish acolytes, whose testimonies may well have led to unjust and immoral actions, is also scrutinised?

I am grateful for the opportunity to take part in this debate and I congratulate the Environment and Rural Development Committee on its report. It asks thoughtful and thought-provoking questions. If its recommendations were to be implemented by the Executive, the national waste plan would be the stronger for it. I am only sorry that the opportunity has been missed to recommend tightening up of the most basic of all waste strategies, which is where we as individuals put our waste. I cannot believe that I am alone in abhorring the increasing amount of litter that so bedevils our countryside and townscapes. I have a bit of history on this: I once received a torrent of verbal abuse for overtaking a car, forcing it to a stop, and returning a crisp packet that the occupant had seen fit to throw out of the window. I thought the end of my life had arrived. It might be stretching the point to suggest that dealing with litter should be part of the nation's waste strategy, but I believe that the time has come to do something robust about that particular social disgrace. I want to focus on one specific part of the report—the section on contracts that is contained in paragraphs 49 to 53, which I am surprised have not been brought up already. The committee notes that only about four waste strategy areas are putting private finance initiative contracts in place. My constituency of Galloway and Upper Nithsdale forms part of one of those areas. Close inspection of the PFI, or public-private partnership, that the local council is on the verge of signing, completely endorses the concerns that the committee has identified. It cannot be right that, the closer a contract comes to being signed, the greater the number of unanswered questions about it that arise. However, that is the case with the Dumfries and Galloway proposal. The general principle is that domestic waste from the eastern half of my constituency—Kirkcudbrightshire—will be collected as usual by the council and then taken to a waste-transfer station, to be situated at an as yet undetermined site in central Kirkcudbrightshire. The original site was rejected following an inquiry. At that transfer station, the waste will be compacted and sent to a plant nearly 20 miles away—near Dumfries—to be turned into fuel. The fuel was to have been converted into energy for the national grid in a pyrolysis plant, but no one is prepared to pay for, back or fund that plant—it is not part of the PPP—so the preferred bidder has built in a seven-year comfort zone, during which they will have to come up with a client for the fuel.  In the meantime, the fuel will be returned to landfill, almost certainly at Dalbeattie, which was the original site of the waste-transfer station. No one has yet answered the question of what will happen if no client can be found for the fuel, but I would hazard a guess that it will simply continue to go to landfill, which would be a complete negation of the conversion process. Furthermore, the eco-deco plant—that is indeed its name—that will transform the waste into the unwanted fuel, will require all the waste that is currently generated within its catchment area in order for it to operate. The Executive has rightly put resources into recycling at source, because that could and should reduce the amount of waste that is available, which should be the number 1 target of any meaningful waste strategy. That means that we are in imminent danger of falling into the trap that the committee has wisely identified in paragraphs 50 to 52; namely, that the volume of waste that will be required by the PPP means that the council could be locked into a 25-year contract to provide a certain tonnage of waste, which in eight or 10 years' time will not be provided within the catchment area. That throws up the alarming possibility that the council will have to import waste—it might even have to pay to do so—to fulfil its contractual obligations, which would be to the eternal detriment of Scotland's environment and the Dumfries and Galloway council tax payer. That simply does not add up. I am truly sorry that, in paragraph 52 of its report, the committee notes that "a detailed examination of contract arrangements is beyond the scope" of its inquiry, because I earnestly believe that an in-depth inquiry into Dumfries and Galloway Council's contract arrangement would provide substantial evidence against proceeding with the PPP. Can it be right for the council to move the goalposts after a preferred bidder has been identified, as has been alleged in relation to the historic risk that has been attached to existing landfill sites? Can it be right for an existing landfill site to be extended, through the contract, into the only known site in Scotland where the bog bush-cricket lives—I bet that not many members knew about that—with the vague assurance that a new habitat for that rare species will be created by the bidder and monitored by Scottish Natural Heritage? I do not take huge comfort from that. I have even travelled to Brussels to raise my constituents' concerns that European directives on habitat and bird protection may be breached by the proposal—the European commissioner concerned has been fully alerted to that possibility.  Paragraph 53 states: "The Committee recommends that the Minister should examine carefully the nature and length of contracts which are suitable for waste management facilities", if for no other reason than to avoid the establishment of the perverse incentive of generating more waste in order to fulfil a PPP contract. That is a genuine fear. I believe that there is an urgent need to conduct such an examination in Dumfries and Galloway and I am sure that all elected politicians with an interest in that region will endorse that view. I urge the minister to take the opportunity that the report offers to carry out such an examination for the sake of the region's council tax payers.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has any plans to provide free prescriptions for terminally ill people. (S2O-1047)

I am genuinely grateful for that substantive reply. The minister will be aware that, at the time of their diagnosis, by no means all terminally ill patients are on medication and are therefore unable to seek extra payment through the usual DS1500 form. As their illness progresses, such patients almost always end up on several prescriptions per week for the relief of their suffering and pain. Does the minister agree that those patients should be given free prescriptions at source, to ensure that dying is not a very expensive process? Will he go a step further by agreeing that a review of exemptions from prescription charges, as well as the review for people with chronic health conditions to which he has referred, is long overdue?

If I had realised that, I might not have been so generous with my time. I do not mean that at all. As many members have said, the bill has been long awaited. I have been getting letters on the subject of nature conservation ever since I first became a member of the Parliament. It is also highly relevant to my constituency of Galloway and Upper Nithsdale, which I am proud to say is one of the few areas of Scotland that has been chosen for the reintroduction of red kites. Last spring, I was privileged to release a batch of nine chicks and I was horrified to hear about the death of five kites in that area in the late summer of last year. Although I do not believe that any illegal activity was aimed specifically at the kites, I deplore such activity and welcome all the parts of the bill that will strengthen the penalties for those who indulge in wildlife crime. The minister spoke of the empowerment of public institutions. I perceive a potential danger in that. The unaccountability of those institutions can lead to management by diktat rather than by consensus. In the previous session of Parliament, the Rural Development Committee conducted an inquiry into integrated rural development, which we recently debated. All over Scotland, one of the foremost barriers to that policy that was highlighted to us was the dictatorial attitudes and activities of agencies such as SNH. I hope that the  Executive, in altering management agreements covering areas of land under designations such as SSSIs, will take every opportunity to open up the operations of the public institutions to full accountability. There must be an increasing development of management by consensus rather than by order—Eleanor Scott alluded to that in her speech—and the bill provides a great opportunity to do that. On funding, which has been mentioned by members, it is obvious that mere legislation will not bring about the improvements that the bill promises. Robust funding will be required to back up the legislation. I share the concerns that have been expressed by several members, as well as by the committee, that the bill's funding back-up is unclear and uncertain at this stage. Frankly, I find that unsatisfactory. I trust that, when the bill returns to the chamber, the issue will have been suitably clarified. The subject of deer has arisen as a contentious issue. My colleague Ted Brocklebank has informed me that the director of the Deer Commission for Scotland, in a conversation with him this morning, confirmed that the commission does not seek further powers for the culling of deer, as it believes that it has enough powers under section 8 of the Deer (Amendment) (Scotland) Act 1996. As Alasdair Morrison rightly said, snaring is the most contentious issue, which is bound to come back at stage 2. I applaud the committee's brave conclusions on the subject and the minister's commitment to adhere to those conclusions. It would be easy to give in to the simple and highly emotive argument, which was made perfectly clearly by Rosemary Byrne, that snaring is cruel and must therefore be banned. The issue is not that simple. I believe that the minister would have agreed with my entirely helpful intervention—had he chosen to accept it—that any further diminution of a land manager's ability to control vermin will simply endanger the very biodiversity that the bill rightly seeks to enhance and conserve. If a suitable alternative to snaring is developed, I will be amongst the foremost of those who seek to replace snares, if necessary with the help of legislation. However, let us be quite clear. Currently, the answer lies in education and training to minimise the accidents and tragedies that quite understandably concern members. It is a question of balance, which a ban would fail to achieve. I urge the minister and the committee to reject any further attempts to ban snaring. I congratulate the Environment and Rural Development Committee on its report. As convener of the previous Rural Development Committee, I could not possibly say that the  committee has produced a better report than we would have done, but it has managed to come up with a report that is every bit as good as what we would have produced. I cannot be more generous than that.

Does the member accept that what she said about the non-increase in the number of raptors is a bit of a generalisation? I am sure that she would agree with the observations of many, including me, that some species of raptors, such as buzzards, are increasing enormously in number.

I will have a chat with the member later.

Will the member explain to the chamber what her preferred alternative method of vermin control would be?

Will the minister take an intervention?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to ensure that all national health service boards issue prompt responses to the report of the short-life working group on myalgic encephalomyelitis. (S2O-1013)

Does the minister share my concern that, by approaching each of the health boards individually, we are running a real risk of ending up with a piecemeal approach to the treatment of ME in Scotland? Given the recent announcement by Her Majesty's Government of £8.6 million of ring-fenced renewable funding for the implementation of a strategy in England and Wales, does he agree that such an approach would be far more robust and focused, considerably more sensible and much more likely to ensure a major step forward for ME sufferers here in Scotland? Will he consider adopting that approach in Scotland?

Does the minister agree that existing European legislation on animal transportation is more than adequate? As has been alluded to, the real problem lies with the policing of existing legislation, particularly on the other side of the channel. Will he therefore undertake to push for an extension in the  exemptions for short-haul journeys, in recognition of the fact that few problems relate to journeys within the UK, as the best way forward on the issue?

I would hate to think that, because we had run out of time, the minister had not had the opportunity to address the fundamental question that I put to him in my  opening speech. I accept what he says about the need for proactive management and for proactive steps to be taken. However, will he grant the sustainable fisheries temporary protection until the measures to which he referred are thought out and brought before the Parliament?

To tell the truth, I had rather given up hope of this motion's ever seeing the light of day. It was the first motion that I lodged after becoming the constituency MSP for Galloway and Upper Nithsdale and relates to the first big constituency issue that arose following the election. However, I am delighted that the motion has been selected for debate. As luck would have it, the debate is very timely, given the subject matter of a briefing on the future management of inshore fisheries in Scotland that Scottish Natural Heritage and RSPB Scotland gave jointly at lunch time today. During that briefing, inshore fisheries were described as a priceless national asset that is in desperate need of sympathetic protection and management. Those who attended the briefing were left in no doubt that, where inshore fisheries are concerned, a properly worked out local management structure involving fishermen, scientists and other stakeholders—I put them in that order on purpose—can result only in a win-win situation for all concerned. Furthermore, there is no doubt that inshore fisheries are often worked for hundreds of years by the same families, using equipment that has scarcely changed in that time, and that they are as important to the local culture as they are to the local economy. That is the exact scenario in the two Galloway bays to which my motion refers. From the waters of Luce bay and Wigtown bay, some 20 marine crofters—as I like to think of them—have for many decades eked out a living in a completely sustainable way that is possible only with an  intimate knowledge of local waters. In the five years from 1998 to 2002, the total number of days at sea hardly varied, ranging from a maximum of 1,057 days in 2001 to 920 days in 1999. Inspection of the monthly figures showed that from October to February, days at sea are minimal. Members might assume that that is due entirely to the adverse weather during those months, but they would be completely wrong. The fishermen lay off the stocks during those months voluntarily, to achieve the sustainability on which their livings depend. It is worth remembering that we are talking about people who scratch a living, rather than people who earn a fortune. As the secretary of the Scottish Fishermen's Federation put it at lunch time today: "There are no fortunes to be made from inshore fisheries." In short, in Galloway we have a sustainable fishery that is being sustainably fished. That was the case until June this year, when an event occurred that so alarmed the fishermen that within a very short time they formed the Galloway Static Gear Fishermen's Association. It is worth pointing out that the motion refers only to static gear fishermen. The association was formed to present a united defence of the fishery in the face of the attack that the fishermen had long dreaded. That attack came in the shape of a supercrabber—a vessel from the nomadic fleet that is made up, in effect, of factory vessels that roam Britain's coastline seeking out likely fisheries, which they harvest before moving on to another site. One might ask, justifiably, why those vessels should not make a living too. The answer can be found in the Galloway situation and the whelk fishery in particular. The total number of whelk pots fished by members of the local association is 900. They are full-time fishermen, although it is recognised that there are a number of part-time and hobby fishermen. The minimum number of pots that a supercrabber will deploy is 1,000 and some estimates show that it can deploy as many as 3,000. That gives one 80ft boat complete independence from weather constraints, given its size, and a potential catch level per day that is eight times the local fishermen's catch level per week. It does not take a rocket scientist to work out that just two or three visits to the waters a year by the nomadic fleet, or even just one vessel of the nomadic fleet, will clean out the stocks. The stocks might never recover and the word "sustainability" might as well be erased from the local dictionary. The Executive's initial response to the concerns that the association raised was encouraging, and I commend it for sending a senior civil servant to a  meeting in Wigtownshire, which I attended. The official intimated that should a 3-mile exclusion zone be deemed necessary for the protection of stocks, such a zone would be introduced, but that a number of consultations needed to take place before that decision could be taken. That is fair enough. However, in reply to my question S2O-483 on 25 September, in which I asked Ross Finnie under what circumstances he would consider a 3-mile exclusion zone, the minister referred only to the review of inshore fisheries management policy. My colleague Ted Brocklebank will comment on that review, but in relation to the situation in Galloway I must press the Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development for a fuller response tonight, because time is against my constituents. There is considerable suspicion that a further visit from the nomadic fleet in the new year is imminent. Given that the local fleet's effort does not get under way until much later in the spring, that could have devastating consequences, not just on the fishermen, but on the processing jobs that the fishermen in turn sustain. Given the crossroads that our inshore fisheries are at, with many comparatively new pressures on them from renewable energy projects, displacement of effort from the white-fish fleet, fish farming and the invasive practices of the nomadic fleet—to name but four—the minister is bound, rightly, to take considerable time to get the review of inshore fisheries management right. It was made plain to us at the briefing today that we must get it right. The fishermen of Luce bay and Wigtown bay do not have the luxury of time to spare. I urge the minister to consider implementing the main part of my motion—the introduction of a 3-mile exclusion zone from Corsewall point to Heston island—for vessels over a certain length and/or engine capacity on a temporary basis until a future management structure for all Scotland's inshore fisheries is agreed. Luce bay is now a candidate for designation as a marine area of conservation. Unless the minister takes immediate steps to protect the ecosystem in the bay, there is a real risk that there will be nothing left to conserve.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will extend the December deadline for horse owners applying for an equine passport. (S2O-821) The publication of that question has already prompted a response, but I would still like to ask it.

It is good to have an answer straight from the horse's mouth. [ Laughter. ] Sorry, but that opportunity was too good to miss. Seriously, is the minister aware of the considerable confusion that exists among the  horse-owning population? There is confusion because different passport-issuing organisations will charge different amounts; because many people who own horses have no idea that the rule is about to be implemented; and because the directive involved, which is designed to prevent veterinary medicines from getting into the food chain, seems to be extraordinary given that we do not eat horse meat in Scotland. Will the minister give an assurance that his department will use the extra six months that the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs has led him into granting to dispel some of the confusion, by informing the public better on the issue, rather than simply passing the buck to horse and pony breed societies, as is happening at present?

Like other members, I congratulate John Farquhar Munro on having brought the matter to the chamber. I share Alasdair Morgan's point of view. He spoke about people often thinking that rural Scotland refers only to the Highlands and Islands. During the election campaign, I was pretty much convinced that John Farquhar Munro thought exactly the same. Once, during that campaign, when I rounded the corner into Gatehouse of Fleet, in the very heart of Galloway and Upper Nithsdale, I came upon a signpost urging me to vote for John Farquhar Munro. I am glad that, just as his election campaign travelled successfully into the south-west of Scotland, the Presiding Officers have seen fit to allow his motion to succeed likewise. The motion addresses an issue that, as members have said, affects every part of rural Scotland. It is important and is often raised on the  doorsteps. The reason for that is quite simple. As John Farquhar Munro rightly pointed out, TV services and the reception that people get should not depend on where they live—especially as everyone pays the same licence fee. We have a standard licence fee; therefore, we have a right to expect a standard reception. Most of the practical points have been covered, and there is nothing to be gained in repeating them. One of the things that disturbs me is the reception that one gets—if members will forgive the pun—from the BBC when one raises the issue with it. I have found the BBC's attitude to be rather arrogant. Recently, I was told that the development of coverage by the addition of more transmitter sites is politically and technically complex. I agree with Stewart Stevenson that there will always be places in which, for geological or geographical reasons, there will never be adequate reception, but it is rather insulting simply to be told that development would be politically and technically complex. I presume that the political difficulty concerns people's inherent dislike of masts. However, given the forest of masts throughout most of rural Scotland nowadays, I do not believe that such development is as impossible or as difficult as has been made out.

, I will always bow to Stewart Stevenson on technical matters.

I am grateful to the member. He is correct—I was not aware of that. What he says backs up and confirms what I am saying. I do not accept that the matter is as politically difficult or technically complex as the BBC would have us believe. We live in a technical age and I do not believe that the technical problems to which the BBC refers are as difficult as it would have us believe. Frankly, the BBC is rather arrogant in that respect. Just because people live in rural areas, that does not necessarily mean that they deserve political or technical ignorance. That is all that I want to say. George Lyon talked about unfairness. There is unfairness. I could go further than that and say that there is almost discrimination towards those of us who live in Scotland's most rural areas.

I do not need any more time, Presiding Officer. The issue is simple. I do not like the arrogant response that one receives when one asks questions. I look forward to what the minister will say.

Perhaps I can clarify our position. My call for flexibility was to ensure that, in the allocation of entitlements from the base years  of 2001, 2002 and 2003, there is flexibility to allow those who are currently in anomalous situations and would not receive an entitlement to do so. That is not quite consistent with the position that Christine May has described.

Clearly I had better speak within that time limit, Presiding Officer. The subject of common agricultural policy reform, welcome as it is, is highly complex and lends itself perfectly to the old adage that the devil will be in the detail. I have attended three meetings in my constituency that were designed to explain fully the proposed changes, but I am still a long way from a complete understanding of the complexities involved. However, it is vital that we understand the subject, because in constituencies such as mine, which are still heavily dependent on agriculture as one of the main drivers of the economy, the financial input from European schemes is of paramount importance. More than 20 per cent of the gross domestic product of Dumfries and Galloway is still derived from agriculture, so we underestimate the importance of EU input at our peril. Although the Conservatives very much welcome the proposal to remove the link between support and production, we should not forget that studies have proved beyond doubt that payments based on headage—that is, geared towards production—have been effective in driving forward the local rural economy. As we look to change the basis of support, let us not concentrate on agriculture alone but keep a wary eye on any effect that those changes will have on the wider economy. The centrepiece of the reforms, as everybody has pointed out, is the breaking of the link, or decoupling. That is a word that would have been  almost unthinkable only a short time ago, but it is now the buzzword, and it has been an eye-opener to me to see how most farmers, sick to death of the increasing bureaucracy that so bedevils every current scheme, have embraced it. There is even a good argument that production-based payments have involved hugely increased costs at a time of diminishing market returns, and that consequently farm incomes have actually been damaged because of the support payments that were designed to bolster them. In theory, at least, a single decoupled payment will considerably reduce, if not remove altogether, most of the problems of the CAP that have attracted so much criticism over the years. We whole-heartedly endorse the proposal to fully decouple all sectors of agriculture, including the dairy sector, from the earliest possible moment—that is, from 2005. We believe that talk of partial recoupling or the use of national envelopes to provide sectoral support for, say, the beef sector should be resisted. Such support would simply extend the entire bureaucracy of the current regime while delivering only a percentage of the current support. That would simply delay the inevitable, as full decoupling will eventually become the norm. Furthermore, we are adamant that a single support payment, which will be the result of decoupling, must be based on the historic entitlements of each individual holding, rather than on any area-based payment. I am sure that the minister has had ample experience of the problem that redistribution of funding brings about with the switch from the hill livestock compensatory allowance payments to the less favoured area support scheme. Those problems would be as of nought if the new change were to be to an area-based payment. In any case, the reform is about changing the pattern of farm support, not the redistribution of it. We have two areas of concern about the single support payment. The first relates to the dairy sector, which we believe should decouple from 2005, as I said. Our concern lies in the fact that support payments to that sector are not to be linked to historic production, as in other sectors, which can lead only to imbalances within the dairy sector over the next few years. I wonder whether, in summing up, the minister might explain to me why dairy payments cannot be made retrospectively in the same way as with other sectors. Our second concern lies specifically with the suckler cow sector in the hills and uplands, which Andrew Welsh referred to. It is common practice for suckled calf producers to sell their calves on the white form. In other words, they can avoid the bureaucratic process of applying for the first  tranche of calf subsidy, as they know that the buyer will add that amount to his bid. In effect, therefore, they are getting their subsidy through the marketplace. The disadvantage of that, with the benefit of hindsight, is that they will have no entitlement to what is rightfully theirs, and that flags up the desperate need for flexibility—another word that I am sure will be common in the debate—throughout the process of allocating entitlements. The minister will be aware of a number of letters that I have written to him over the past few months highlighting constituency cases that will be anomalous when it comes to the allocation of those entitlements. Most of those letters concern very deserving cases of young people starting out on their farming careers or of others who are taking a while to restock after the devastating impact of foot-and-mouth disease. There are also several examples of people who do not deserve to be let down or ignored during the massive exercise of reform. I make another plea to ensure that the maximum amount of flexibility is shown throughout the process in order to minimise the number of people who lose out during the reforms. Our support is a little more cautious when it comes to modulation. The EU level of compulsory modulation is set to rise to 5 per cent by 2007, with a guarantee that 80 per cent of the funding raised will be returned to the member state. I am not particularly happy about the loss of that 20 per cent, but if that has to be then so be it. Our support for the voluntary modulation that the minister has intimated he will need to levy is based more on the Treasury's pledge to match fund that resource than on any in-built love of modulation itself. We believe that the farmer who is in effect contributing that funding should have the first refusal to reuse it within his own business. In other words, every farmer should have the option to take part in the schemes that are funded out of modulation, not only the few who are lucky enough to be able to second guess how many points the minister will require for inclusion in a particular scheme in any given year. If that can be achieved and continued match funding guaranteed, the minister will have our support. Obviously, cross-compliance is the price that farmers will have to pay for continued support. Our plea is that reduced bureaucracy, which has often been hinted at as the benefit of CAP reform, should become a reality. A temptation for officialdom will be to see cross-compliance as a way of expanding its numbers. That must be resisted at all cost and the real potential for bureaucratic reduction, in both forms and personnel, must be grasped with both hands.  The word potential is perhaps the one that best describes the proposals. I have no doubt that Scottish farmers will seize the potential that full decoupling offers. I move amendment S2M-556.3, to leave out from first "endorses" to end and insert: "encourages representatives of the farming and crofting industries to use the consultation process to lobby for full de-coupling of support payments based on historical entitlements."

As the amount of bureaucracy, recedes, will the number of bureaucrats also recede?

Like other members, I was somewhat confused by coming to debate the future of Scottish agriculture but finding the debate confined to the fairly narrow but very emotive subject of GM crops. That said, I think that it has been a good debate, and substantive points have been made on all sides of the chamber. In introducing his motion, Mark Ruskell gave an eloquent and impassioned speech. I cannot agree with it all, however, for the following reasons. Scotland has, as Alex Johnstone said, a proud tradition of plant breeding and research. Whether that is GM under another a name is probably the subject of another debate altogether, but we have always been at the scientific forefront of that type of technology. When we come to the science, we have to accept that the jury is still out on GM technology. Evidence is still being taken and, until it is all gathered and examined, the jury cannot  possibly deliver a verdict. I do not believe that we can turn our backs on the science or on any scientific advancement; nor, indeed, can we decide on the issue, or expect ministers to do so, until those evaluations are complete. Roseanna Cunningham's amendment is carefully worded, and it is tempting to agree with it, but I cannot do so because of the last sentence. The amendment asks that we consider "that the future of Scottish agriculture lies in maintaining the integrity of GM-free crop production", but surely that is what the debate is all about. The decision that has to be made is whether that is the case or not and, as I have said, the jury is still out. I can agree with the Executive amendment, with one proviso, and I hope that the minister can clarify that point. In the past, I and my colleague John Scott have spoken of the need to apply the ultra-precautionary principle on the issue of GM crops. The Executive amendment says that decisions cannot be made until the GM dialogue has been fully evaluated. I hope that the minister can confirm that, at that stage in the process, he and his advisers will apply the ultra-precautionary principle in evaluating the results of those processes. As well as evaluating the science, ministers must also evaluate the effect on Scotland's position in the agricultural marketplace. Will the introduction of GM commercial crops ruin for ever the niche markets that our agricultural producers are becoming ever more efficient at supplying? Will the position only accelerate under common agricultural policy reform, which we are to debate this afternoon? Such questions must receive substantive answers before ministerial decisions are taken. If the answers are provided within the ultra-precautionary principle to which I referred, the Executive position can and will receive our support. If GM crops are approved, I would take the unusual position of agreeing entirely with George Lyon and expecting all farmers to choose not to grow them. In closing, I must say that I hope that Stewart Stevenson will be summing up for the SNP, because that will be the first appearance in the chamber of what must be a genetically modified tie.

I will, if I may, use this opportunity to draw attention to a continuing and growing transport problem within my constituency of Galloway and Upper Nithsdale. The problem is of specific interest to other constituencies and regions such as the Borders, South and East Ayrshire and Argyll, where the level of afforestation is highest. In short, and this is vital—as Tommy Sheridan hinted—given the vast increase in mature timber that will be available in Scotland over the next few years, significant tonnages of mature timber are being effectively landlocked and prevented from gaining access to the marketplace because local authorities are unable to deal with the extra financial burden that this stage of forestry industry development is heaping on their shoulders. An example is that Dumfries and Galloway Council have placed a temporary closure order on the U111 road at a place called Polbae, near Newton Stewart, and have landlocked a significant amount of mature timber. Every time that the temporary closure order runs out, the council slaps on another one. The last attempt was appealed—an appeal that both I and my predecessor Alasdair Morgan supported. The Scottish Executive, to its credit, appointed a reporter and an inquiry was duly held. The reporter found in favour of the appeal and against the actions of the council, yet the council will not lift the order and the timber remains stranded, rendering significant investment of private and public money completely wasted. When I raised that issue at a members' business debate when the Parliament met in Aberdeen nearly 18 months ago, the Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development spoke positively of the possibility of a strategic forestry transport fund. Despite occasional warm words on that subject since then, the unacceptable situation that I have described remains. I ask the minister to address that issue in summing up. I welcome any effort to improve the integration of public transport in my constituency. Currently, residents of Twynholm village who wish to travel  east to Castle Douglas or Dumfries must get on a bus and travel 15 to 20 minutes west to Gatehouse of Fleet, change bus, retrace their tracks—which obviously takes another 15 or 20 minutes—and pass within a quarter of a mile of where they started before heading in an eastwardly direction. Chris Ballance would probably suggest that they could walk the quarter of a mile, but there is no bus stop to which they can walk. The system is as unintegrated as possible. Any claim by the Executive that it is improving its public transport strategy is clearly in tatters while such situations exist. No public transport system can replace the car in constituencies such as mine. For more than four years, the Executive has promised improvements to the A75, the A76 and the A77, but not even a kerbstone has been realigned on the A75. I do not have to remind the minister that that road is a trans-European network route, which most long-range hauliers who are making to Stranraer for what is still the premier crossing to Northern Ireland now consider to be more of a joke than a trunk road. I will try to leave the Presiding Officer with time in hand. In conclusion, therefore, I ask the minister to answer some questions in his summing up. What will the Executive do to improve the disastrous situation facing the forestry industry in relation to timber transportation? How will the Executive improve the shambolic state of its integrated public transport strategy in the most rural areas of Scotland? When will the first meaningful improvement to the trunk roads in my constituency take place? Will the minister simply leave things to the new, all-singing, all-dancing transport agency as a vehicle to blame for the Executive's failures?

Given that the member is a constituent of mine in Galloway and Upper Nithsdale, does he accept that, if a person walks 2 miles away from most of the villages and communities in my constituency, the only place that they will be close to is the place that they have just left? Does he agree that, in my constituency and in rural Scotland as a whole, a properly maintained roads infrastructure is vital, as it allows people to get to work in a way that public transport cannot deliver?

I was the convener of the Rural Development Committee when it went about the inquiry. It has been slightly strange sitting here and hearing the report being debated quite a long time after we finally agreed it, but I am grateful to the current Environment and Rural Development Committee for agreeing to my request, in a letter to the successor convener, that it should seek chamber time to debate the report, because it is a substantive report that took a great deal of time and resource. For it not to have been debated in the chamber would have been a tragic waste. If I may, I will take a brief moment to thank in particular the clerks and parliamentary staff who helped out in putting together the report. They put in an enormous amount of work, because the inquiry became wider than we intended it to be. Sarah Boyack rightly said in her opening remarks, and other members have mentioned, what a wide-ranging inquiry it was. The visits and public meetings that we had throughout Scotland took an enormous amount of time and resources. People worked tirelessly on them. As I said, I thank not  just the clerks but other parliamentary staff as well. It would have been impossible without them. I also thank the old Rural Development Committee for the way in which we went about the work and for the unanimity that we managed to reach at the end of the day. Unanimity often means compromise and it would be fair to say that some of the recommendations are not as robust as some members might have wanted them to be; nonetheless, there was a determination that the report should be unanimous, and it is all the better for being so. If I may indulge myself for a moment, I will go back to the reason why I wanted to conduct the inquiry. It grew out of a desire to produce something proactive and constructive in the wake of the unseemly length of time that the committee had had to spend on the Protection of Wild Mammals (Scotland) Bill. I cast no aspersions on the rights or wrongs of that bill, but it dominated our thinking for a very long period of time. There was a determination on the part of the committee to produce some rather more constructive work. The inquiry grew from an original idea of Rhoda Grant—who is no longer with us—to investigate the barriers that exist to the effective delivery of an integrated rural development policy. I remember the first public meeting outwith Edinburgh that I convened, which was not on integrated rural development; it was on the national parks legislation. In a hall near Drymen we had a huge turnout of people who were bursting at the seams to contribute to a committee of the Parliament—a Parliament, do not forget, one of the watchwords of which is accessibility. I was pretty horrified to discover that parliamentary procedures did not allow the public to contribute unless they were named on the agenda. The whole committee was united in its determination to ensure that during the inquiry we could hear from members of the public who were interested enough to turn up, and not just hear from the usual suspects, although one also wanted to hear from them. One of the pleasures of being on the committee during that process was that one witnessed the genuine passion and views held by people about integrated rural development. As Nora Radcliffe rightly pointed out, it is a subject on which a lot of people have a lot to say. I am proud of the role that the Rural Development Committee played in finding a way through the rather staid parliamentary procedure that prevented people from contributing, thereby allowing people to have a say. The procedure that we used, which I called the soapbox session, provided the absolute highlight of my parliamentary career, when a gentleman at Lochgilphead—

Really? I wish the clock would stand still for me, Presiding Officer. A gentleman at Lochgilphead drew himself up to his full height and said, "Gentlemen, you will never do anything about tourism in the Highlands until you do something about the Highland midge." I felt that that was an effective contribution. Members have mentioned the report's recommendations on small businesses, the lack of affordable housing and forestry, and they were right to do so. However, there is one thing that members have not mentioned. It is one of the biggest barriers to integrated rural development and was drawn to our attention at every single meeting we held around Scotland. That barrier is the increasing role of quangos—specifically the role of Scottish Natural Heritage, whose autocratic nature and imposition of often almost impossible restrictions create a very real barrier to an effective policy on integrated rural development. I draw the Parliament's attention to our recommendation following paragraph 89 in that respect. In her opening remarks, Sarah Boyack spoke about a lack of joined-up thinking. I highlight the recommendation that follows paragraph 97, on the need for a rural forum of some sort—there used to be one, after all—to co-ordinate the network of voluntary organisations, public agencies and sectoral interest groups relevant to rural Scotland. Sarah Boyack also said that agendas are moving on, and of course they are, because time does not stand still, other than for David Mundell. However, I put it to the chamber—and I hope that the minister will accept this—that much of the report remains highly relevant to achieving an improved rural economy and meaningful integrated rural development. The Executive's written response seems to be somewhat complacent. Rural Scotland does not deserve that. I hope that the minister's contribution will effectively put that to rest. Rural Scotland needs action, not complacency.

I am only too pleased to be able to take part in this important debate. I was sorry that during the summer recess I was unable to welcome Margaret Curran to my constituency of Galloway and Upper Nithsdale, because we could not merge our timetables, but she would still be very welcome. I think that she would appreciate and—I hope she will not be offended—learn from a visit to that most rural constituency to see at first hand not just antisocial behaviour in a rural setting, but some of the possible remedies that have been tried and tested with various degrees of success. In her opening speech this morning, the minister referred to the unacceptable behaviour of a small minority. I do not disagree with her in stressing that it is only a tiny core of persistent offenders who cause the vast majority of problems, as many members have mentioned. In most rural communities, everyone knows—probably by name—the even smaller number of people who drive that tiny core of persistent troublemakers, as Mike Pringle remarked. When I was growing up— all too long ago I am sad to say—the village bobby also knew the troublemakers by name. The bobbies usually nipped troublemaking in the bud with a bit of judiciously meted-out discipline. I can still feel my ears ringing from more than one occasion. Those days appear to be behind us, although I do not think that we should lose sight of the significance of local neighbourhood policing in dealing with antisocial behaviour. If the minister is still able to come to my constituency, I would like her to visit the communities of Kelloholm and Kirkconnel—two neighbouring villages that share a level of social deprivation often associated with the ex-mining villages that they are. I would like the minister to meet the community policeman who works there and who approaches his work with a commendable zeal, determined to deflect the youngest in those communities from a course that all too often ends up in custody. He does that by engaging with them at the earliest possible age and by doing his best to ensure that their questions are answered. He tells me that he is often asked, "What's it like in the Army?" He does not just give them a booklet or show them a video; he gets the armed services to come to the community to explain what it is like to be in the services and to show some of those kids that there are real alternatives to the dole, which is too often seen as an acceptable career option. The community policeman has virtually given up on the older teenagers as being hell-bent on their almost predestined course since before he took up his duties. However, the lesson appears to be that if we engage with young people early enough, that engagement can pay dividends. On the older teenagers who make up the gangs about which we have heard during the debate, a constituent made a remark to me yesterday that made me sit up and listen. We were talking about yet another example of mindless vandalism in his community, when he said, "Of course, we must remember that they are our punishment." I think that he was right. Our generation—the parents of those young people—has got something wrong. Therefore, surely it is incumbent on us to try all the harder to put that something right. A pilot scheme called the Ninian project, which was designed to do just that, took place in Whithorn, in my constituency—another scheme that the minister would benefit hugely from visiting. The pilot was simple: policemen—not wardens or finger-wagging council officials—were regularly put on the beat, where they were visible. It worked. A community that was bedevilled by vandalism and antisocial behaviour slowly returned to comparative calm. People of all ages could walk in the streets, day or night, without fear of abuse. A real sense of community was beginning to be re-established. However, the  funding for the project came to an end and, only two weeks ago, £4,000-worth of damage was done when every window in the village hall was smashed in. The solution could be simple. We must engage with the very young, both through education and through communities; we must put policemen back on the streets to watch out for persistent offenders; and we must ensure that, when the ultimate sanction has to be applied by bodies such as children's panels—I think that Robert Brown referred to them this morning—the resources are available to enable those bodies to act. We must also return to the family, which is the body that is ultimately responsible for our children's good behaviour. A constituent who operates a business as a contractor recently reported to the police that two of his mechanical diggers had been vandalised. The police duly investigated—taking quite a long time in that instance. The day after he had reported the incident, his diggers were burned out, at enormous cost to him. In the same area two weeks later, one of his men was unloading equipment from a van when he came under fire from an air rifle. However, my constituent and the man did not report the incident because they did not think that the system could deal with it or ensure the safety of their equipment and they did not think that the perpetrators would be brought to book. The challenge that we face, as responsible politicians, is to restore trust in the system. I do not believe that that is the prerogative of any one party, and today's debate has shown that, if nothing else, members from all parties have something worthwhile to contribute. My hope is that the minister will accept that truth in her final deliberations, as the bill takes shape. It will be a much better bill if she does so.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it will next meet the National Farmers Union of Scotland. (S2O-514)

When the minister next meets NFU Scotland, will he discuss the lack of land available to rent as a result of his policies over the past two years? He recently stated that the new tenancies should be in place by Martinmas of this year. Will he now admit that there will be no new tenancies this year and that people who want to make land available to the many who are desperate to rent it are unable to do so? Will he also admit that his policy has done exactly what we warned and has led not to a reinvigorated tenanted sector but to the death of it?

To ask the Scottish Executive under what circumstances it would consider enforcing a 3-mile exclusion zone for the protection of inshore fisheries. (S2O-483)

The minister will be aware of—and, I am sure, will have welcomed—the recent formation of a Galloway static gear fishermen's association. It was formed because of concern that 20 sustainable local jobs were threatened by the activities of a factory ship that had arrived to plunder the waters of Luce bay in my constituency. Does the minister agree that those marine crofters and the stocks on which  they depend deserve protection from such commercial over-activity? Does he agree that a 3-mile exclusion zone is the only effective way of ensuring their sustainability? If that is agreed to be the best way forward, as I sincerely hope that it will be, will the minister give me a time scale within which we can expect him to implement such a measure?

We have to be grateful for small mercies.

I congratulate Elaine Smith on lodging the motion and bringing an important debate to the chamber. I probably ought to declare an interest as the United Kingdom parliamentary WeightWatcher of the year, something of which I am extremely proud. The new members would not have recognised me this time last year, when I weighed 17 stone 8 pounds. I had to wear clothes that now resemble potato sacks and I knew the meaning of obesity for the first time in my life. I am reminded that I was always a big so-and-so, but my former farming lifestyle prevented me from becoming obese. What happened to me was a lifestyle thing. When I became a member of the Parliament, I carried on eating like the farmer that I was. Most meals came out of the frying pan—especially if I was cooking—and the lifestyle was not healthy. When I walked up the Mound one day and had to  stop for a rest halfway up, I decided that I had to do something, because I was becoming very unhealthy. David Davidson referred to the other costs of obesity. I can say from experience that one such cost is the loss of self-esteem. A loss of self-esteem leads to a loss of drive and a loss of drive leads to a loss of effort and generally pulls down someone's whole performance as a human being. I will touch briefly on two aspects that have not been specifically referred to, although they have been hinted at. One is the great difficulty of healthy eating. I will use as an example low-fat crisps—a very humble little product. Those crisps exist and they are perfectly good, but they are hard to obtain. I challenge anyone who does not believe me to try to get a packet of them next time they are out shopping. The chances are that the crisps, if they are to be found at all, will be found only in a multipack of 10 or 12, so people will end up eating four packets instead of the one that they would have had otherwise, which undoes all the good. It is nearly always difficult to obtain healthy food products. On top of that is the expense of eating healthily. I give no other example than the breakfast options in our parliamentary canteen. Until a year ago, when I joined the Parliament WeightWatchers scheme, I thought that the best part of being an MSP was the offer of five fried items on a plate for £1.10, which we can get in the canteen. That is incredibly good value and I had it every day—it was fabulous. However, it is a heart attack on a plate, unless one is following the Atkins diet. Now when I have breakfast in the Parliament's canteen, I have a bowl of fruit salad and two slices of toast and marmalade, which costs me £1.33. Neither cost is a big hole in my pocket, given my MSP salary, and I am not complaining, but there is something wrong when the healthy option that I now eat costs considerably more than the heart attack on a plate that I would still love to eat but have managed to get over. If that example is taken out into the big wide world, it shows that eating healthily is expensive. That should not be the case, because fitness should not be the preserve of those who can afford it and fatness should not be the preserve of those who cannot. That is the dilemma that we face. Until we as a nation and the Executive grasp that and attack it, obesity will continue to be too big a problem in our society.

I apologise to the Presiding Officer and to the minister for my late arrival in the chamber this afternoon. It was not intended as a discourtesy—I regret that I was unavoidably detained. I have a fair idea—probably—of what the minister was hinting at during the part of the speech that I missed, so I do not feel particularly disadvantaged by having been absent for a few minutes. As George Lyon said, I undertook with colleagues a study tour of aquaculture in Norway, as a guest of Ewos Ltd. Two memories of that visit remain firmly embedded in my mind as examples of what we can learn from that country. I was surprised when Jamie Stone said, or at least hinted, that we have no lessons to learn from Norway. I believe that we must always learn lessons from other countries. Compared to ours, the Norwegian attitude towards the aquaculture industry is something from which I believe we can learn. The industry has attained considerable economic importance to the rural economy of all Scotland, as has been acknowledged from all sides of the chamber. I say that with some feeling because, as Richard Lochhead said, the impression is often given that the issues relate  purely to the northern half of our country. I was delighted to notice, during the summer recess, that a freshwater fish-farming operation in my constituency of Galloway and Upper Nithsdale, which has lain dormant for several years, is to be reopened. Indeed, interest in aquaculture, in both the north and the south, seems potentially to be on the verge of another great leap forward, economic considerations aside. The Norwegian Government's attitude is, as George Lyon mentioned, based to a degree on a report that suggests that aquaculture could overtake oil in terms of economic importance to that country within 15 years. The Norwegian Government has accepted that with a focus and a vigour that I dearly wish could be visited upon our Scottish Executive, but an examination of the strategic framework gives me little faith that that will occur.

Indeed, but that is offset by the fact that an enormous percentage of Scottish aquaculture is owned by Norwegians, who have bought themselves into our industry in order to gain access to the Scottish market. I accept that the share of Scotland's product has increased in British terms, which is obviously to be welcomed. There is vast room for improvement, however, and I will come to that later. The Norwegians back their industry to the hilt with scientific support, particularly in the development of new-species aquaculture. Somebody asked where we could do better; that is one such area. As Ted Brocklebank said, by contrast with what the Norwegians are doing in this regard, we seem about to abandon the unit at Ardtoe. One of the major stated aims of the strategic framework is to promote the economic development of aquaculture. That is a laudable aim, but I fail to understand how we can possibly achieve it without a more robust approach to the scientific back-up on which that economic development can flourish—and it is vital that that is in harmony with the wild fish population. Again, that is an area where research input could be improved.  Our industry cannot possibly flourish with the maze of bureaucracy that aquaculture presently has to deal with. Compared with Norway, that leaves our practitioners on an uneven playing field; compared with Chile, where the industry appears to be entirely unregulated, we are on a different planet altogether. Despite those restrictions—as Rob Gibson pointed out—shellfish aquaculture grew by 41 per cent in 2001, according to the Executive's figures. That is tremendous, but think what could happen with a more proactive Administration and a little less regulation.

There is a difference between having proper, quality regulation and having a large amount of regulation. The Conservative party has difficulty with the amount of regulation. I agree entirely that the virtually unregulated conditions of the industry in Chile are helpful neither to the worldwide fish-farming industry nor in allaying the environmental concerns to which the industry gives rise. There should be regulation, but it must be properly focused, quality regulation, rather than the piecemeal regulation that we have at present. It appears that the actions suggested in the framework will make the next two to three years very busy—not only very busy, but also vitally important for everyone concerned with the aquaculture industry. Although I welcome the progress that the minister said has already been made, I implore the Executive to ensure that, while we protect our producers from the worst effects of dumping, to which many members have referred, we learn lessons from our competitor countries. Those countries have one great disadvantage—they cannot sell a Scottish product for which much of the world is still prepared to pay a premium. In farmed fish, as in so many of our traditionally farmed products, our Scottish quality is our watchword. In conjunction with other members, I commend the work of Scottish Quality Salmon, which has been completely vindicated by its Label Rouge accreditation. That is unique and wonderfully worth while. However, there is a limit to how much the Scottish brand can see the industry through. It will not do that unless robust and vigorous Executive backing is given to this exciting industry in the years ahead. The potential is enormous. The environmental concerns on which we have touched can and should be addressed, as maintaining consumer confidence is all important. Unfortunately, the Executive's motion does not address those issues. I am convinced that Ted  Brocklebank's amendment does, and I urge the chamber to support it.

I accept what the minister says about the bill not being about the project itself. However, will he take this opportunity to tell me what the difference is between those who have genuine concerns about the Robin rigg project and those who have genuine concerns about the M74 extension?

I now have to divert from my previous agreement with Alasdair Morgan, I am afraid, but he will not be surprised about that. Having just dealt with the final stage amendments to the Robin Rigg Offshore Wind Farm (Navigation and Fishing) (Scotland) Bill, to give it its full title, I want to express my disappointment that there was not one more amendment to debate. While I quite understand that it was deemed to be outwith the remit of the bill, I tried to lodge an amendment that, in effect, would have meant that the bill could not have been enacted until the project itself had been subjected to the full and open scrutiny of a public inquiry. I have always backed that view. It is one that is shared by all three local authorities north and south of the Solway, Scottish Natural Heritage, the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds and others, including the vast majority of my constituents, who are the people who will be most directly affected by the proposal. The background to the removal of section 5 from the bill this afternoon exacerbates the need for such an inquiry. I make a last-ditch plea to the Executive to hold one. Just after the election, I listened with interest to a televised debate between Lewis Macdonald and Rosie Kane on the subject of the M74 extension. During the debate, the minister said something to the effect—I cannot quote him accurately, but I am sure that he will tell me if he did not say words to this effect—that it was right and proper that the people who are affected by major proposals should have the opportunity to be able to air their views and have their concerns listened to. Only last week, the Minister for Transport, Nicol Stephen, issued a press release on the announcement of the inquiry into the M74 extension. In the release, the minister said  "The proposed completion of the M74 is a very significant transport project and it is right that those who have concerns are given the chance to have their say." The Robin rigg wind farm is a very significant renewable energy project and yet, apparently, it is not right that those who have genuine concerns are given the chance to have their say. Another project in Galloway and Upper Nithsdale proposes the construction of a waste transfer station in the town of Dalbeattie. The local council approved the plan by the narrowest possible vote, but the local area committee of the council voted against it. The Scottish Executive magnanimously granted an inquiry into that proposal and yet the Robin rigg proposal is denied one, despite opposition from the Executive's environmental advisers, Scottish Natural Heritage, the local authorities and the other organisations that I mentioned earlier. The decision defies belief—it smacks of a big brother mentality. It is all the more unbelievable when one realises that not one kilowatt of electricity from Robin rigg will come to Scotland. I presume that that means that the project will not count towards Scotland's renewable energy production target. I will close by reaffirming what I said in the stage 1 debate. I am not anti-wind farm. However, the concerns of many of my constituents, coupled with the dubious background to the removal of section 5 from the bill this afternoon, forces me to vote against the bill. That is virtually the only way that is open to me to express my dissatisfaction at the undemocratic handling of the bill. I urge others to do the same.

Perhaps John Home Robertson could answer the question that I asked the minister. If the debate had taken place when it was originally scheduled to take place, would John Home Robertson have lodged amendment 3?

I refer members to my entry in the register of interests: I have signed an options agreement with a wind farm development company. For what is probably the first time, I find myself agreeing with Alasdair Morgan. I speak against amendment 3 and against the background that has led to its being lodged. This debate was supposed to take place two weeks ago and we were informed that it had been postponed to accommodate other business. That seemed fair enough at the time, but subsequent inquiries have led me to believe that the real reason for the postponement emanates not from the Scottish Parliament but from Westminster. In particular I came to understand—and John Home Robertson has now confirmed this—that the Department for Transport had queried the competence of this Parliament to introduce exclusion zones, as set out in section 5. Indeed, the head of the shipping policy 2 division of the Department for Transport states in a letter to Babcock and Brown Ltd: "We consider it would be wise to avoid establishing a precedent in that Bill"— in other words, this bill— "which would appear to confuse or conflict with our future safety zone approach." It seems to me that the Scottish Parliament committee that we established to deal with the bill—and let us remember that we are talking not about an Executive bill but about a private bill—stands accused by a Whitehall department of introducing a confusing and possibly conflicting section. The committee spent a great deal of time coming to the conclusion that it was important to have the power to create exclusion zones for the greater safety of everyone involved in the project. If it was so important to have that power, I simply fail to comprehend how the remaining members of the committee can now argue that it is not necessary, on the basis of the vague assurance that UK legislation will be introduced some time in the future to cover the exclusion zone issue. That opens up the prospect of a vast project consisting of 60 90m-high turbines being erected  in the middle of the Solway firth without the protection or safety provisions that our committee deemed so important that it devoted a complete section to them. If the committee had acted outwith the provisions of the Scotland Act 1998, I could have understood what has happened, but if that had been the case, the committee would have been advised of it early in the proceedings. Why are we about to allow a project of this scale to proceed without sufficient safety measures in place to "address the hazard to mariners and to those constructing the works"? There is a perceived hazard. Above all, why were members of this Parliament not informed of the true reason for the postponement of the debate two weeks ago? I contend that we have been held in contempt and that the whole issue is shrouded in shady deals between the Government in Westminster and the Scottish Executive. I urge members to vote against amendment 3 this afternoon, for those reasons, but principally because of the safety implications of proceeding without exclusion zones.

Having sat on the committee that felt that it was so important to have safety zones—or exclusion zones; I do not mind what they are called—is Mike Rumbles content that a vast construction project of this nature should take place without having in place the safety measures that the committee recommended?

Is the minister telling us that, had the debate taken place two weeks ago, section 5 would have remained in the bill and amendment 3 would not have been lodged?

Bull's-eye!

I am pleased to be able to make my first speech in Parliament on two issues that are of increasing concern to my constituents in Galloway and Upper Nithsdale. The first concerns the much-vaunted integrated rural transport policy, which was beloved of the previous Scottish Government and will no doubt be equally beloved of this one. Last week, I attended the annual general meeting of the Castle Douglas branch of the Dumfries and Galloway Elderly Forum—not, before anybody suggests it, as a paid-up member. One member who lives in the village of Twynholm spoke about a regular bus journey that he has to make to Dumfries. It involves his taking a bus that is operated by one company to Gatehouse of Fleet to connect with another company's bus that travels to Dumfries. That would be fine if Gatehouse of Fleet were not 15 minutes in the opposite direction to Dumfries from Twynholm, and if Twynholm were not a mere one minute away from the A75 trunk road, along which the bus has to travel to  Dumfries. That gentleman has to travel for half an hour and wait for between 20 minutes and half an hour in each direction for absolutely no good reason. With an integrated transport policy like that, it is no wonder that the percentage of my constituents who are car owners must be among the highest in the country. Putting that problem right is hardly rocket science and I hope that the Government will get some sense into those policy areas. I wish only that my expectations matched my hope.

I will take a brief one.

Our proposal would change his life hugely for the better, but we do not have time to discuss that today. I am sure that we will have time to do so as we go on.

Exactly—the A75 would be brought up to scratch for a start. My second point concerns the recent announcement that Stena Line, which operates ferries to and from Northern Ireland from Stranraer, is to join with P & O to operate a single port at Cairnryan for both companies. Cairnryan is only about five miles from Stranraer harbour, on which is located Stranraer railway station. However, there is no rail link from Stranraer to Cairnryan and that will put enormous pressure on a desperately fragile road infrastructure, which—I point out to Ms Boyack—would be hugely improved under our transport plans. The Stena Line plan would also put almost intolerable pressure on the small village of Cairnryan. I urge the minister to undertake an investigation into the possibility of restoring the rail link between Stranraer and Cairnryan. It is not a great distance and such a link could have a dramatic impact on how freight is transported to the port—a subject that is close to the minister's heart, as he made plain in his introduction—and on the quality of life for the residents of Cairnryan village. Such a rail link would also be entirely in accordance with the wishes of the First Minister, as he made clear during today's question time. Further,  establishment of that rail link would send out a clear signal to the ferry companies—whose continued presence is absolutely vital, as the minister will be aware, to the region's economy—that the Government is committed to their continued presence. Because this is my first speech in this session, I am happy to offer the minister a win-win situation for himself and for my constituents. I trust that he will have the good sense to grab the opportunity that the commercial decision by the ferry companies affords him. I support the amendment that is in the name of my colleague David Mundell.

The minister mentioned continuing talks with COSLA. The Church of Scotland minister in Whithorn told me recently that talks between COSLA and the Church of Scotland have been on-going for 13 years. Does the minister agree that it is high time that the process was concluded by the Executive's stepping in to support the church in its care programme, for all the good reasons that Jamie Stone mentioned, and because, if the church is forced to close its homes, the only alternative will be for the whole cost of care to fall to the taxpayer, rather than the current shared cost?

I am sorry, Presiding Officer—[ Interruption. ] I was cardless. After your former strictures, I thought that I would remove my card. I move, That, under rule 8.14.3, the debate be extended for up to 10 minutes.  Motion agreed to.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Is it possible for me to move a motion without notice to extend the time limit for the debate, given that people are being cut off when they are just getting going?

Although I would never want the right of an individual to demonstrate peacefully to be compromised, I refer the minister to an answer given by Dr Lewis Moonie in the House of Commons on 20 March 2002. He stated: "Comprehensive environmental monitoring programmes have been in place at ... Kirkcudbright ever since the beginning of the DU munitions trials announced in the House in 1979. These programmes have focused on the collection and analysis of samples of soil, vegetation, freshwater, seawater, seaweed, molluscs and seabed and shoreline sediments ... This monitoring continues to show that DU does not pose a significant risk to members of the public or site personnel."—[ Official Report, House of Commons , 20 March 2002; Vol 382, c 312W.] Does the minister agree that, as no significant risk has been detected for 24 years, the Royal Society's assessment of the health effects of depleted uranium—that the risks are very low—is entirely correct and that that renders the need for demonstrations such as the one taking place in my constituency entirely unnecessary?

Last week, when answering a question from my colleague David Mundell, the minister was unable to assure the Parliament that a suitable scheme for the uplift of dead stock would be in place when it becomes illegal to bury such stock on farm. Following his discussions with industry representatives, is he able to update the chamber on any further progress that has been made on that issue? Can he guarantee that any farmer who buries dead stock on farm after April will not be prosecuted if no suitable scheme is in place?

In this interesting wander round the houses that Nora Radcliffe is giving us—

Or a wander round the Parliament. Could Nora Radcliffe tell us what is the Liberal Democrats' policy on enterprise? Is it simply to follow slavishly where Labour leads? We have not heard from any Liberal Democrat speakers what their policy is.

The minister will be aware of correspondence between us on the prioritisation of improvements  to the A76, the most recent of which has resulted in what is essentially a long smart new pavement with a green stripe where the A76 enters Dumfries. Does he agree that the considerable amount of money that has been spent on what is an entirely cosmetic improvement would have been far better spent on alterations that would improve safety on what is, as Alasdair Morgan pointed out, an unsafe road? Does the minister agree that he should urgently revisit the prioritisation of such investment, as I have asked him to do before?

I share George Lyon's hope that the new vehicles will be used. However, several members have said that we need a little settling-in time before we move on and make further changes. Does he agree that that will affect the way in which people look on how they use their available land?

By "go further", does Fergus Ewing mean the imposition of an absolute right to buy?

Before I address my amendment, I thank the clerks to the Rural Development Committee and my colleagues on the committee. Everyone worked long and hard to progress the bill at stages 1 and 2. The clerks did a magnificent job and I am happy to place on the record my thanks to them. I am sure that I speak for all my colleagues on the committee when I say that. I lodged my amendment in order to place on record something that I want to make absolutely clear to the Parliament: the Scottish Conservatives take no pleasure in voting against the bill, as we will, as we share the view that the tenanted sector of Scottish agriculture is in great need of reinvigoration and would have greatly benefited from the type of reforms that were originally envisaged when the bill was first mooted. We were promised a bill that would introduce two new types of tenancy that had been agreed by both the Scottish Landowners Federation and the NFUS. That was a revolutionary breakthrough in itself and greatly welcome. The way looked set for a progressive bill that would genuinely address the reform and relaunch of a sector, a move that almost everyone agreed was overdue and badly needed. That legitimate and welcome debate then became hijacked by another debate on the right to buy, which was not intended in the original proposal and was even denounced by the minister in Glasgow in May 2000. His complete about-turn on this issue is the sole cause of the tension that has built up around the limited partnerships that have become the focus of the on-going debate.  I have never denied that there have existed examples in which the relationship between landlord and tenant is far from perfect, although I notice that no one ever refers to the far greater number of examples in which the relationship is perfectly acceptable. Nor have I ever pretended that limited partnerships were anything but, as I said earlier, a perfectly legal dodge to circumvent the absolute security that the 1991 act confers.

I am about to do that. I have not yet given any reasons why we will vote against the bill. If Mr Rumbles bears with me, he will hear our reasons.

Mr Rumbles will not have to wait long. We have taken our eyes off the fact that all limited partnerships were entered into voluntarily and that most have continued beyond their initial period on an entirely agreed and mutually acceptable basis. However, the provisions of the bill, which the minister originally denied would impact on limited partnerships, have done so in a way that has set partner against partner and—worse—friend against friend. Even when offered a sensible and innovative way out by the SLF, the minister has opted instead for a confused and confusing approach that will do little to lessen the tensions that now exist in almost all such partnerships. I admire the Scottish Tenant Farmers Action Group for the way in which it has seized the moment and run with it. I also admire the industry stakeholders, some of whom were mentioned by the minister, for the way in which they have sought and—on almost all the contentious issues—achieved consensus. I suspect that members of the Scottish Tenant Farmers Action Group would, at the outset, happily have settled for the concessions that they have gained, and I believe that those concessions greatly improve the lot of the secure tenant. I welcome that now, as I do in my amendment. However, the mixed messages that have been sent out by the minister overshadow all the benefits that have been brought by the bill. The pre-emptive right to buy talks of a willing buyer and a willing seller. That is fine but, given that willingness, who on earth needs legislation? The  minister has left the door to further change—by subordinate legislation, at that—wide open. Moreover, some members have made it plain that they intend to raise the absolute right to buy in future years. I simply put one question to members: who in their right mind would risk the future of something of which they are in perfectly legal possession—that is, their land—to any form of meaningful tenancy, either new or old, under circumstances as vague as those that I have just described?

No, I am in my last five seconds. I genuinely hope that I am proved completely wrong, but I believe that practically no one will take such a risk. In other words, a bill that set out to reinvigorate the tenanted sector is in great danger of killing it stone dead. I cannot and will not vote for that. I move amendment S1M-3867.1, to insert at end: "but, in doing so, regrets that, despite the worthwhile provisions in the Bill, the pre-emptive right to buy has undermined them; notes that there are indications that land to let is already becoming unavailable; believes that the present arrangement of allowing greater flexibility in the detail of leases between landlord and tenant is imperative for the tenanted sector, and considers certain provisions within the Bill are contrary to the interests of that sector and fail to provide opportunities for the next generation of farming tenants, thus failing to reinvigorate the tenanted sector of agriculture in accordance with the Bill's stated intention."

I apologise to Mr Ewing for being absent from the chamber when he spoke—I was away on important business. Our opposition to amendment 42 is entirely focused on the first word of its title—"Prohibition". Any prohibition will surely have a limiting effect on the amount of land that is to be let in the future. That goes against the supposed aim of the bill, although I will argue in the debate to come that the bill itself will prevent the fruition of that aim. The effect of amendment 42 would be to rule as void any clause that is entered into SLDTs, LDTs or 1991 act tenancies where that clause has the effect of bypassing some other section of the legislation relating to those leases. The amendment would not only have a limiting effect in respect of increasing the supply of land to the tenanted sector, but would undoubtedly increase the supply of work to members of Mr Ewing's former profession, which has been given more than enough work by the Parliament already. If we are to amend the bill, we should do so in a way that frees it up rather than further restricts it.

I am not convinced that amendment 130 is quite as innocent as it looks. I fear that it hides a bit of a sting. It seems to me that to continue the power that has been given to ministers in future to use subordinate legislation to make further impositions on SLDTs and LDTs can have only a negative impact.  Surely by retaining the power to amend the new tenancies to make them more secure, the minister is sending out a clear message to those who have land available to let that they should do so entirely at their own risk, given that the new-style tenancies will be open to any alternatives under the 1991 act that any minister in the future sees fit to impose. We are therefore entitled to ask why anyone would consider letting land under any arrangement—never mind the widely agreed vehicles of the proposed new tenancies—in the light of the future uncertainty that amendment 130 promotes. It is no wonder that, since May 2002, only one farm has appeared for rent in the pages of The Scottish Farmer . Amendment 130 is the epitome of what the very people who have it in their power actively to reinvigorate the tenanted sector—those who have land available for rent—fear from this legislation. With such amendments, I guarantee that those people will choose not to make their land available in such a way. Amendment 130 goes against everything that the bill pretends to support, and we will oppose it.

We will accept Executive amendments 103, 104, 105 and 106. I have little else to say except that I find that, as always, Fergus Ewing's amendments seek to tilt the balance of the bill a little bit too far away from the consensus that the stakeholders group achieved. They would certainly tilt that balance too far for us to be able to support them.

I oppose amendments 96 and 97 on the grounds that amendment 96 seems somewhat unfair and amendment 97 seems somewhat inconsistent. Amendment 96 removes from compensation negotiations any loss to the value of the holding arising from the carrying out of conservation activities, the increase of which has in recent years been encouraged, and which we would all welcome as sound practice by whoever carries them out. Amendment 96 has to be seen in conjunction with the criteria governing the question whether the landlord's consent is specifically required under grant schemes associated with conservation activities. It is by no means inconceivable that a landlord will have consented to the creation by the tenant of, for example, an area of wetland under an agri-environmental scheme. That would almost certainly devalue the holding in terms of agricultural productive capacity. It is therefore surely illogical to require the landlord's consent on  the one hand, yet on the other hand to deny him or her the right to compensation where that is justified because of a subsequent loss of value to the holding. Amendment 97 includes conservation activities, and I do not see how that can work alongside amendment 96, which leaves out conservation activities altogether. Unless convinced otherwise, we will oppose both amendments 96 and 97, for the sake of clear legislation.

We oppose amendment 28, as it is a restrictive and proscriptive amendment that curtails the freedom of two parties to reach agreement. I find it strange that Fergus Ewing has chosen to lodge the amendment, given that he always welcomes consensus when it is reached. Amendment 28 would make consensus less likely. The process for which it provides would be counterproductive and would promote tension unnecessarily, leading to frustration and lack of co-operation, rather than enable genuine development opportunities to open up when agreement is reached.

I gather that time is pretty tight, so I will rattle through what I am about to say, if I may. The Conservatives remain resolutely opposed to the extension of the provisions of the bill to cover existing limited partnerships. We believe that that constitutes moving the goalposts so far from the bill's original intentions that the Parliament will send out entirely the wrong message if we intend truly to reinvigorate the tenanted sector. Like the right to buy, the extension of the provisions on limited partnerships was not an original aim of the bill. We should make no mistake. Limited partnerships were devised as a way round the secure provisions of the Agricultural Holdings (Scotland) Act 1991. They were a dodge—albeit a legal dodge—to ensure that vacant possession could be regained at some point in the future. We should be clear that they were entered into voluntarily by a willing lessee and a willing lessor. Agreements that had already come to the end of their period continued almost without exception on a year-to-year basis until it became clear that the bill would impact on them in a manner that would make eventual vacant possession almost impossible. The natural reaction to that was the unseemly issuing of notices to quit that has been referred to, which reached a peak on 3 February as landowners sought to retain their rightful property, just as an individual will always seek to retain what is rightfully theirs when they perceive it to be under threat. To portray the issue differently is to cloak it in a cloud of political dogma and rhetoric that is as dishonest as it is obfuscating.

I would like to do so, but I do not have enough time. I am sorry, as I would welcome hearing the views of a Labour member—we did not hear from one all morning other than the Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development. I hope that we will hear from a Labour member later. The minister has extended the bill to impact on limited partnerships and we must deal with that  reality. The Scottish Landowners Federation recently put forward a highly imaginative and constructive proposition to the minister that would effectively have removed limited partnerships from the equation altogether by simply converting them all into limited duration tenancies with a minimum term of three years. That would have allowed the bill to focus entirely on secure tenancies and the proposed new tenancies, which would have been hugely beneficial to all parties. Amendments 111, 112 and 113 go some way towards that aim, but they fail to provide the clarity that the SLF proposal would have provided; instead, they deal with each limited partnership as and when it comes to the end of its term. Although we do not see the amendments as perfect by any means, they constitute an improvement to the bill as amended at stage 2 and we will not oppose them. However, we will oppose amendment 111A, with which Fergus Ewing seeks to have his cake, eat it and then get some more cake. Amendment 114 essentially confers a right to buy to partnerships and new tenancies, as well as conferring unacceptable powers on future ministers to extend the provisions of the bill through subordinate legislation at any time in the future. I will say more about that when we debate amendment 130, but I oppose amendment 114.

I am slightly concerned about amendment 85, which seems to end the appeals route at its starting point—in other words, at the Lands Tribunal. After all, in most cases of appeal, the appellant has a right to go to a higher authority if they are not satisfied. I would appreciate it if the minister would give us his thoughts on that matter.

No.

Will Mr Ewing give way?

Does Mr Ewing now consider the April date, to which amendment 111A refers, to be the fair and just one? If so, why did he not ask for such a change to be made at stage 2, when he called for the September date?

My comments will be as brief as they get. Will the minister be good enough to explain why he wishes to remove the words "knowledgeable and prudent", which represent acceptable characteristics in the circumstances?

Does the minister accept that the limited partnerships on which notices to quit were served in the run-up to 3 February were partnerships whose initial period had run out, many of which could have been dissolved before but had run on on a voluntary annual basis? Does he accept—I believe it to be the truth—that those notices to quit were entirely triggered by the fears engendered by the bill?

It is probably fair to say that my sympathy is with the minister on that one.

I seek clarification from the minister, because I am not absolutely convinced of the relevance of the phrase, "for the time being". It may be a legislative requirement that I do not fully understand, but it seems to me that it could introduce an element of doubt into the existing clarity of the bill. At the moment, the bill is worded: "Where a tenant's interest in acquiring land is registered under section 24". That seems a perfectly clear and unambiguous precondition. Why is the issue to be clouded by introducing the rather vague and confusing phrase, "for the time being", to that equation? Good legislation should be simple legislation. On that ground alone, it is my instinct to oppose amendment 73, but I am sure that the minister will try to persuade me otherwise.

Does Mike Rumbles acknowledge that the situation to which I referred—albeit a hypothetical situation in the context of this debate—could, and perhaps does, exist? Of course everybody wants the fixed equipment to be in good working order but there are conditions. Not all landlords are loaded—as some members would have us believe—and not all fixed equipment on farms is in tip-top condition. Does not the member agree that amendment 64, if it were agreed to, would restrict the amount of land that could come on to the market for let?

Despite what the minister said, I seek further clarification as to why the word "if" needs to be followed by the words "and only if"; I remain unconvinced that they are necessary. It is entirely clear to me that the landlord may resume land if the resumption is for a non-agricultural purpose. To state that the landlord may resume land "if, and only if" that resumption is for a non-agricultural purpose seems to be unnecessarily prescriptive and somewhat irrelevant. I am prepared to be persuaded otherwise, but am I currently unconvinced about the necessity for amendment 65.

With this group of amendments, we start to get to the nitty-gritty of the bill. Within the group there are examples of what I believe to be the best, and the worst, amendments that are before us today. Amendment 62 is a good example of a productive and progressive amendment. Some members might be surprised by my saying that, because the amendment paves the way for a tenant being able to withhold payment of rent. However, given that the circumstances that would allow him or her to do that would arise only when the landlord had breached an instruction to remedy, the amendment seems reasonable and fair. I understand that any rent so withheld would be paid into the Land Court, which might subsequently repay the tenant for work carried out by him or her that the landlord should have done. Given that—[ Interruption. ]

Given that that would be work that the landlord was obligated to undertake, we will not oppose the amendment—if the machinery bears with me.

The minister will find out shortly. Amendment 64A is one of the poorer amendments to the bill. It would require the landlord to fund the entire cost of any improvements, which might be brought about even by future changes in legislation—about which more will be said later—irrespective of any alteration in either the purpose or period of time for which the holding is let. I also have considerable difficulties in accepting amendment 64, despite the fact that it is in accordance with the consensus that was achieved by the stakeholders working party, which has worked hard to achieve consensus on a number of contentious issues that relate to the bill. My difficulties with amendment 64 stem from the  fact that I believe that it will increase the cost of tenancies and the amount of rent that is paid under any new tenancies that are entered into. That would contravene the bill's stated aim of reinvigorating the tenanted sector; the Conservative party very much welcomes that aim, but we do not believe that the bill will achieve it. We will resist any amendments that will, in effect, make tenancies in the future more exclusive. Amendment 64 would also mitigate against circumstances in which a person is keen to let land on which the fixed equipment has, for one reason or another, become less than perfect, but where there is a perfectly willing prospective tenant—perhaps a neighbour who wants to expand. I cannot see the landowner being willing to let such a property if the amendment is passed. I therefore view the amendment as overly restrictive, because it will tend to reduce the amount of land available for rent, rather than increasing it as we should be trying to do. We welcome amendment 62, which is fair and reasonable, but we will oppose amendments 64, 64A, 137, 100, 100A, 29 and 30 as being exclusive and against the reforming principle, which the bill purports to embody.

I am perplexed by amendment 82. At times like this, I wish that I had a legal background, rather than an agricultural one. I have read the amendment several times and am instinctively opposed to it. Is it right that a tenant can farm in a way contrary to a landlord's wishes—indeed, to what the tenant and landlord have agreed in the lease—that could result in a coincidental increased value for which the landlord must provide compensation? If that is the case, is legislation in this area really necessary? The provision appears to remove any flexibility from the arrangements for compensation. I would be grateful if the minister would clarify those points.

I am stunned by Mike Rumbles's supposition, which seems to be that, just because one body does not approve something, another body is not allowed to bring it up. It seems astonishing that Murdo Fraser is not allowed to lodge perfectly reasonable amendments on another body's behalf just because Mike Rumbles does not agree with them. It will surprise nobody—certainly not Fergus  Ewing—that the Conservatives will not support amendments 9, 10 or 12, because they reverse the onus of responsibility where the assignation of a lease is possible. It is well established—and has been established already in this short debate—that a tenant who wishes to assign a lease should demonstrate that their successor is able and competent to fulfil the lease's terms, not, as Fergus Ewing's amendments 9, 10 and 12 would mean, that the landlord should prove to the contrary. I am not being in any way judgmental, but it makes perfectly practical sense that the onus should be on the outgoing tenant and his successor.

They have come up with an agreed response, but that should not prevent others from challenging it if they feel that there is a challenge to be made. I cannot see any reason for Mike Rumbles's intervention on that point. He is obviously feeling touchy about some of the issues that we are discussing today. No doubt we will see more of that later. As I said, I am not making a judgmental point, but it makes perfectly practical sense that the onus should be on the outgoing tenant and his successor. After all, the successor will take on responsibility for, and the future good management and husbandry of, the landowner's investment. It is only right that the successor should be competent to do so. As Murdo Fraser pointed out, that applies to a shop tenancy every bit as much as to a farm tenancy. We will not support amendments 9, 10 or 12.

I thank Fergus Ewing for withdrawing amendment 5 because that saves me from speaking against it. That trend will become more apparent, because of my reaction to his amendments, as the debate goes on. We welcome amendments 45 and 46 and the proposed provision of a cooling-off period. We will welcome almost all the measures that were proposed by the cross-industry stakeholders group, which worked so hard during the bill's earlier stages.

I declare an interest, which declaration I hope will see me through the rest of the day. I am involved in a limited partnership in a hill farm in south Ayrshire. Does the minister intend that all the provisions relating to the 1991 act that are covered by amendment 44 should apply not only to secure tenancies, but to any other form of tenancy under the 1991 act? I think that I am right in saying that the implication of the amendment is that the provisions would apply to grass parks. Murdo Fraser and the minister have referred to section 2 leases, but I think that the minister will find that grass parks and other arrangements are also affected. I find it hard to believe, and I know that most people in the industry find it impossible to believe that the Executive's intention is to extend the provisions of the bill to grass parks. I welcome his clarification of the issue. If I do not get it, I will have to oppose amendment 44.

I should say that it was not my own tactical brilliance that led me to the discovery. The matter was brought to my attention by one of the major stakeholders with whom the Executive has worked over the past months.

I would like to be able to take the minister's word on that, but I find it slightly  worrying that we have such a prolonged, pregnant pause at this stage. I have to ask whether that is not a consequence of the somewhat belated amendments that the Executive lodged last Friday, to which Fergus Ewing drew the chamber's attention. I am afraid that the uncertainty surrounding the provisions of amendment 44 means that I will have to oppose the amendment.

Further to that point of order, Presiding Officer. I hope that it is in order to say that, during stage 2, I as convener of the Rural Development Committee had more than once to ask the Executive to lodge amendments as timeously as possible. Once, the Executive lodged amendments after the deadline had passed, which put me in a fairly difficult position. I sought your guidance at the time and I think that we reached a happy conclusion. I appreciate that the Executive has worked with other groups to produce positive, consensual amendments, but consistent late lodging of amendments makes proper scrutiny by committees and the Parliament extremely difficult. [ Interruption. ] Labour members might groan and moan, but the Parliament and its committees are meant to undertake proper scrutiny. I hope that they agree about that.

I am delighted to hear Duncan McNeil suggesting that members should vote for the motion—which is obviously what he means if they are to vote against the amendment. That is an endorsement of what we are trying to put forward. I declare an interest as an ex-farmer and current landowner in south Ayrshire. The purpose of the debate is to determine whether this first Scottish Government has delivered for Scotland. It will probably surprise nobody who knows me that I wish to speak from a  rural perspective. As I have said many times before in the chamber, much of rural Scotland—certainly the South of Scotland, which I represent—was pretty sceptical about the very concept of the Parliament. Indeed, Dumfries and Galloway, the region within which I live, was the only region on mainland Scotland that voted against the Parliament having any tax-raising or tax-altering powers. Nonetheless, that scepticism was dumbed down and, to some extent, bought off by the impossible aspirations and unachievable visions that were advanced by all and sundry prior to the elections of 1999. Following those elections, considerable support was expressed for the creation of the embryonic department of rural affairs, rather than the old agriculture, forestry and fisheries department that existed before. Even when that metamorphosed into rural development, and finally emerged as the environment and rural affairs department, the concept seemed sound enough, so why now, nearly four years on, is there disappointment at the Government's mishandling of rural Scotland, which is so tangible that it is hard to encounter anything other than distrust, dislike and often sheer cynicism towards most of the Administration's output? The answer can best be summed up by highlighting the missed opportunities and mixed messages that have become the hallmark of Ross Finnie's ministry. It was glaringly obvious to most people involved in driving the rural economy that, following devolution, most of the important decisions governing rural policy would continue to be made either in Brussels or at Westminster. Therefore, the opportunity for a Scottish minister to alter radically the broad drift of policy was always going to be minimal at best. However, there existed a golden opportunity for Ross Finnie, or any other minister, to concentrate their energy on supporting and encouraging initiatives and policies downstream from primary production, to ensure that the high-quality products of all types for which rural Scotland is so well known did not leave rural Scotland until the last drop of added value had been extracted from them, thus genuinely encouraging rural development. That focus and that drive would have helped to bring about the economic regeneration that rural Scotland needed so badly four years ago, and which it is still in desperate need of today. Instead of any such focus, we have had nothing but mixed messages, as the Minister for Environment and Rural Development chose instead to concentrate his fire on obtaining the easy headlines that come with the politically correct policies to which David McLetchie referred.

I have four years of disaster to get into one more minute, so I am afraid that I cannot give way. The primary example of Ross Finnie getting his ministerial wires crossed is the access provisions in the Land Reform (Scotland) Bill, which I have always said would bring about confrontation when it did not have to. If members still do not believe me, they should study the recent verbal outpourings of the Ramblers Association. Basically, access is now available to all people on all land, yet only weeks after Parliament approved the bill, the minister issued his biosecurity code of practice to all farmers, one of the principal recommendations of which is to keep people away from livestock as much as possible. The Agricultural Holdings (Scotland) Bill, which is to be concluded next week, aims to reinvigorate the tenanted sector, which is something with which the Conservative party whole-heartedly agrees, yet the confusion and uncertainty that have been created over the right to buy, which the minister himself deplored only two years ago, will kill the sector stone dead. Jim Wallace berated me in the chamber for daring to question the Executive's commitment to rolling out broadband technology across rural Scotland. "Look at our pathfinder project," he roared in indignation. Well, I have been looking for its benefits ever since, and I cannot find them. What I have found is that information technology-based firms, which should be contributing so much to rural development, are having to move out of rural Scotland and back to the central belt to be able to compete on a level playing field. The examples go on and on, but I am running out of time. I finish by saying that this first Scottish Government will be remembered as one that promised too much and delivered too little. To deflect attention from its deficiencies, it has concentrated its fire on the soft targets of land reform and politically correct niceties, rather than the hard issues of the day, which so badly need the Parliament's attention. Rural Scotland is in disarray because of this Administration, and in seven weeks' time it will exact its revenge.

I accept what the minister is saying about the extension to 2009. However, if the supplements are not safe, why have they been given that extension?

Irene McGugan refers to the cures that such products provide. Does she accept that, if the directive were to be implemented in full and the products were to be withdrawn from the  market, we would put an even greater burden on the already overstretched national health service?

The legislation in question is said to be about food safety, but as Shona Robison has pointed out, the products are already fully regulated under current food safety laws, which is a far more stringent approach than the pharmaceutical-style regulations that are being introduced. It is statistically proven that someone is far more likely to be struck by lightning than they are to die from taking food supplements—unless we are talking about Murdo Fraser, in which case the lightning probably goes out. We should contrast that situation with that of pharmaceutical drugs, which result in a multitude of deaths and serious reactions in the UK. Indeed, those serious reactions put a weight on the NHS. Given that, I find the arguments pretty hard to follow. If the arguments are that the supplements are not safe, why has the EU and the Government  allowed them to continue to be sold to somewhere between 2005 and 2009? If the argument is not about food safety, we should try to find out what it is about. Margo MacDonald hit the nail on the head when she mentioned the word "harmonisation". Harmonisation within the EU will essentially bring the more liberal market in the UK and Holland down to a level playing field in line with other EU countries that have very different traditions, diets and health problems. We should also consider who would benefit from the legislation. It seems to me that the biggest beneficiaries will be large multinational companies that supply lowest common denominator, low-level products through the mass market. The pharmaceutical companies, which have already been mentioned, will also benefit. They are already losing market share and are suffering from declining consumer confidence in some of their products. Not only do we need to consider who would benefit, we should also think about who would lose out. First, there are the small specialist retailers that sell low-volume tailored products to a well-informed customer base with a specific health requirement. Secondly, professional nutritionists would lose their livelihood. Thirdly—and most important of all—the sick, the elderly and women would lose out. After all, 47 per cent of women use food supplements. That statistic is borne out even by the Food Standards Agency. As a result, the issue becomes one of freedom of choice and therefore one of basic human rights. People have the right to choose cigarettes and alcohol, but after 2005 they will not have the right to choose positively for what they see as their own health requirements. Many chronically ill people who have conditions such as cancer, multiple sclerosis and epilepsy, and parents of children with conditions such as autism, attention deficit disorder and—from personal experience—myalgic encephalomyelitis, believe that such products are vital to them. Frankly, it does not matter whether the medical profession, politicians or ill people believe that: the real question is whether the products are safe. The answer is an unequivocal yes, which leaves us with the question that I hope the minister can answer—why on earth is this being done?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer, of which I have given you written notice. At 12.26 this afternoon, according to my e-mail, the National Farmers Union of Scotland issued a press release saying that the Executive is to lodge a number of amendments to the Agricultural Holdings (Scotland) Bill that will "achieve radical changes which were not envisaged when this process began over three years ago." That suggests that others have been made privy to details of Executive amendments of which members of the Scottish Parliament have still not been made aware. I understand that the amendments will not be lodged until Friday at the earliest, which will leave precious little time for scrutiny of those amendments to that serious piece of legislation. Presiding Officer, I ask you whether you consider that to be in order.

Today we are debating—almost certainly for the last time in this Parliament—the second major disaster that has befallen rural Scotland during the past four years. The first was the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease. While I fully accept that the causes do not bear comparison—although one or two of my colleagues might think of the EU as a form of virus—the differences in approach to the crises certainly do. The most striking difference is that, before, during and after foot-and-mouth disease, the producers, through the National Farmers Union of Scotland, were involved in the decision-making process to such a degree that some people would claim that they were driving the process. The result of that involvement was that the scientific advice—which was by no means always unanimously agreed by the scientific community—was often tempered and enhanced by the practical aspects that the producers could input. Compare that to the impending disaster that faces the Scottish white-fish fleet today. The decisions that have led up to it have been made in offices in Brussels and Strasbourg, based only on scientific advice that is cloaked in doubt and is looked on with distrust by those who prosecute the industry, the fishermen themselves. Members do not have to take my word for that. In an excellent, evidence-taking meeting of the Rural Development Committee in Aberdeen on 11 February, the former head of the marine laboratory, Professor Tony Hawkins, said on behalf of the North Sea Commission Fisheries Partnership, which was set up specifically to deal with the conflict between fishermen and scientists: "The core problem is that fishermen are not sufficiently involved in management. The European Commission rarely listens to them, and they are in effect excluded from the process of deciding on management measures. In essence, the form of governance that we have in the EU is the authoritarian Commission, which has enormous powers and, above that, the political haggling that occurs every  December. Those strong draconian powers linked to the political haggling that occurs over a short time are an awful combination. The fish stocks in the North sea and the fishermen deserve something better than that."—[ Official Report , Rural Development Committee , 11 February 2003; c 4258-4259.] He goes on to say in response to a question from Alasdair Morrison: "The situation is fairly unusual. Few people who are involved in industry find that, every December, a group of scientists has given advice to the European Commission that will determine how those people will operate over the coming year, how much they will earn and the difficulties that they will be in. In a sense, such a system over-rates the ability of scientists, who are just normal human beings, like everybody else. It is a mistake for the Commission to rely so closely only on advice from scientists."—[ Official Report , Rural Development Committee , 11 February 2003; c 4263.] On top of that, a briefing paper from the Scottish Fishermen's Federation points out that "Of the four major crises in cod fisheries in the North Atlantic the only one that has failed to recover is the Grand Banks of Newfoundland", a fishery that was "subjected to total closure for three years to permit recovery of the stock." Ten years on, there is no sign of any such recovery, but total closure is the advisory committee on fisheries management's preferred prescription. Members should contrast that with the drastic action taken in the three other countries to which Stewart Stevenson referred—Norway, Iceland and the Faeroes. Those are fishing-dependent countries that have, in close conjunction with their fleets, turned to innovative measures and secured apparently sustainable futures for their white-fish fisheries.

I am in my last minute. I am sorry: I cannot give way. If nothing else comes out of the situation, there must be a new relationship between the EU the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, the Scottish Executive environment and rural affairs department, the scientists and, above all, the fishermen themselves. The answer lies in the Rural Development Committee's report, which was agreed unanimously, and the future role of the regional advisory councils, which should become far more than advisory councils only. They should have decision-making powers over how best to manage the available fish stocks to provide a sustainable industry for Scotland's fleet, which is what we should all be about.  I commend the Rural Development Committee's report to Parliament. I also commend the reasoned amendments that have been moved today, despite Richard Lochhead's somewhat liberal interpretation of the Rural Development Committee's findings.

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress was made on the issue of transportation of timber at the meeting on 8 January 2003 between it, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities' rural affairs committee and representatives of the forestry industry. (S1O-6403)

I am grateful to the minister for that update on the meeting that was instigated following my members' business debate in Aberdeen. Will he assure me that, following that meeting, he will no longer accept the position whereby a local authority can effectively cut off a mature forest from the market by placing closure orders—either temporary or permanent—on a road or a bridge, thus rendering a 40-year investment of public and private money virtually useless?

I will preface my speech as the rural affairs spokesman for the Scottish Conservatives with some sentences as convener of the Rural Development Committee. First, I echo Bruce Crawford and congratulate Robin Harper on having successfully shepherded his bill to this stage—it has already had a significant effect. Secondly, I thank our long-suffering and hard-working clerking team, who as ever have made the work of committee members much easier. I am sure that all members of the committee would like to record their thanks, too. I congratulate Robin Harper on his achievement, as the Scottish Conservatives have been categorical from the outset in saying that a debate on the organic sector has been long overdue. I remember when Robin Harper first approached me about the bill. I was instinctively supportive, simply on the grounds that the industry desperately needed the debate so that existing and prospective organic producers would know exactly where they stood. Gathering evidence for the committee report has allowed us to generate some of the debate, although I do not believe that it has yet ended—I will return to that point later. Passions are easily aroused about organic farming. Proponents and advocates of organic farming hail organic produce and say that it has great health benefits and that the production system is beneficial to the environment and animal welfare. Others are less generous. During the Linking Environment and Farming—LEAF—presentation, which I hosted last week, an adviser to that organisation, who described himself as an active environmentalist rather than environmental activist, said that if he had his way, he would forcibly prevent his children from eating organic produce on health grounds alone. Another person said that the only difference in treating an animal with chemicals or antibiotics was that, if the animal was organic, permission had to be requested first. We cannot therefore pretend that there is universal agreement on the environmental, health and animal welfare benefits of organic production.  However, few people would dispute that it meets many of the criteria that are set out in the Executive's document "A Forward Strategy for Scottish Agriculture"—the Executive acknowledges that fact in its introduction to the action plan that was conveniently published two days ago. I will say one thing about the Scottish Executive: it can certainly get a document published when it needs to. I wish that it would show a similar urgency in publishing the findings of the short-life action group on ME, which John McAllion and I are keen to see. We know that the report was signed off before Christmas and has not yet been published. I accept that I am digressing, Presiding Officer. We have always stated that our preference for the way forward for the organic sector is a robust and focused action plan that is agreed by stakeholders, and I welcome the publication of the plan. The Conservative party and I have never believed that legislative targets are the correct way forward for a sector that can and should be market led. That view was reinforced by the evidence to the committee from the past chairman of SOPA, to which Bruce Crawford drew attention.

I will come to that matter. Mr Harper is well aware that there is a separate organic aid scheme. The evidence that the past chairman of SOPA gave us and letters that I have received clearly show that the organic sector itself is not totally convinced about the arguments for legislative targets. I remain opposed to them. I return to the need for further debate. In evidence to the committee, David Finlay of Gatehouse of Fleet, who is the producer of the excellent Cream O'Galloway ice cream stated: "Money is being paid out of the public purse that gives non-organic competitors an unfair advantage. Professor Jules Pretty considered that matter and said that £130 to £140 per hectare of additional public money is made available to allow non-organic farmers to put their products on the shelf at a cheaper price. I have been in correspondence about the matter. If there are two farmers in the same area with the same type of stock and one is an organic farmer and the other is a non-organic farmer, the organic farmer will receive between £50 and £80 per hectare less in public support." That addresses one point. He continued: "If we took away all the subsidies and made the polluter pay, we would all be on an equal footing and we could compete."—[ Official Report , Rural Development Committee , 10 December 2002; c 3908.] That is why I contend that the debate is incomplete and deserves to continue. We need to  investigate whether the Executive is doing all that it can to achieve the level playing field to which Mr Finlay and, indeed, Karen Gillon referred. A continuing debate on the bill could help to achieve that and I will not seek to shorten that debate by opposing the bill at this stage.

The minister has just stated that the system is administered with the greatest possible sensitivity, yet almost every speaker has pointed out the lack of sensitivity in the system. Will the minister please respond to that?

I agree entirely with the salient points that have been made around the chamber but would like to add two or three more. Before I do, I declare an interest in that I am a registered landowner and a partner in a farming partnership. It is easy to tell that Euan Robson is an east-coast man because, on the west coast, when  sheep are tagged, there are severe problems with flies attacking their ears, which is an animal welfare problem. One of the great problems with any sheep identification tagging scheme is that tags often fall out. Furthermore, sheep can die. In the early 1990s, the industry fought hard against a similar scheme that was proposed. In the end, a powerful EU delegation was brought across to visit some of the more remote parts of northern Scotland to see how difficult it would be to administer a sheep tagging identification scheme. They went home with the firm impression that the scheme was totally unworkable and impractical. My view is that, if a scheme is unworkable and impractical, it should not be put into place. That applies to this scheme. There are many other and better ways of identifying sheep than this.

I was just about to remark that one of the severe consequences of the cattle-tagging scheme, particularly now that there is less labour available on farms, relates to health and safety. Like John Scott, I have not researched this issue fully, but I am quite sure that figures will show that general practitioners and hospitals are dealing with a far greater number of farming accidents—including deaths—than they did before the time restrictions were introduced. Anyone who has tagged a calf that is younger than one week old, outdoors, with its mother none too happy that someone is mucking about with its calf, will know how dangerous the situation can be. Ian Jenkins is quite right to draw members' attention to it. Only two weeks ago, I was approached by a constituent who is a middle-aged bachelor who looks after his two parents who are increasingly suffering from dementia. He used to have help on the farm but no longer has, due to economic circumstances. Just before lambing time, he made a tiny mistake in selling some cattle and failed to notify the department which, during a cross-checking process—and it is good to know that such processes are conducted—discovered the error. When the error was pointed out, rather than pretending that he had not seen the original letters or whatever, my constituent held up his hand and admitted that he had made a mistake. How we can call ourselves a just society when that farmer is penalised in exactly the same way as somebody who had done that on purpose, tried to bluff their way out of the situation and pretended that it was just an honest mistake? Can it be right  that the financial penalty is so severe? I do not doubt that that is correct in the case of fraud, but it is not right when a genuine mistake has been made. I hope that the minister can point the way to a little relaxation in the hardness with which SEERAD officials have to administer the rules.

I draw members' attention to my very recently acquired interest—which is in the process of being registered—as the beneficiary of an option agreement with a wind farm developer in South Ayrshire.

It was very recently acquired, and I should add that the true beneficiary was the solicitor who drew up the agreement, and who has nobbled 50 per cent of the sum that I received. I commend the committee for the way in which it approached what is a new procedure. It certainly came as a great surprise to me to see witnesses having to take an oath. Judging by the whispered comments of a potential witness who was sitting just behind me, it obviously came as quite a surprise to him as well. Perhaps it is just as well that his comments were not picked up by the staff of the official report. Although it may be true that the bill does not confer authority for the actual building of a wind farm or for the generation of electricity, and that the bill's purpose is simply to allow the developers to interfere with the public rights of navigation and fishing for the purposes of building and maintaining a wind farm, simply to rubber-stamp the bill's passage through the Parliament would be to mask the impact and the highly controversial nature of the project. Let me take a couple of minutes to highlight some of the issues. As Tom McCabe rightly explained, the proposal is to develop two wind farms of 30 turbines each, which would result, obviously, in 60 turbines—each potentially the height of Blackpool tower—being erected slap-bang in the middle of the Solway firth. The development would be the biggest of its type in Europe. Arguably, the nature of the location of the development is more inshore than offshore, despite what the bill's title suggests. Robin rigg is a large sandbank in the centre of the estuary. From a developer's point of view, the location is obviously highly economically attractive, because  of the comparative ease of creating the wind farm's foundations on what is essentially a submerged island. The site is also highly attractive in other ways. Viewed from the northern, or Scottish, side, the backdrop is the Lake district national park in Cumbria. Viewed from the southern shores, the backdrop is an area of the Dumfries and Galloway coastline that has been designated as a national scenic area. I have many arguments against the ever-increasing amount of land that is being designated for one reason or another, but surely those designations must mean something if they are to have a genuine impact. One farmer to whom I spoke, who farms on the coastline nearest to Robin rigg, was informed by the planners that he need not even think of applying for permission to develop a wind farm. He was told that, as his land was in the national scenic area, such a project would not even be considered. Therefore, it seems somewhat perverse to site 60 Blackpool towers exactly halfway between the national park and the national scenic area without the closest and most open of scrutiny. There is also a deal of misinformation regarding the economic benefit that would accrue to the Dumfries and Galloway region. Various financial carrots are being dangled by the promoter, by way of a so-called community fund, but it is quite clear that the impact of the Robin rigg proposal on jobs and on-going economic regeneration will be minimal at best and almost certainly nil. All the work, as well as the electricity itself, will be dealt with from the southern shore at Maryport. The recipient of the substantial benefit of the proposal will be Cumbria, not Dumfries and Galloway. Alasdair Morgan rightly drew attention to the jobs potential of renewable energy in Scotland, but that potential is not dependent on the approval of a specific proposal, as discussions with Vestas-Celtic Wind Technology Ltd and other companies have shown.

I do not believe so. The discussions that Peter Duncan—who is the MP for Alasdair Morgan's constituency—has held with Vestas and other companies tend to suggest that that is not the case. That is why I am keen to point out that the undoubted jobs potential of renewable energy does not depend on the Robin rigg proposal.

I would be happy to forward to Robin Harper further evidence that suggests that those images have been taken from some of the most advantageous points for showing the scenic impact of the turbines. All that I will say is that there is contention on that issue at present. In conclusion, beyond the bill, there are quite serious economic and environmental issues to be discussed if the project is to proceed. Given the fact that the local authorities on both sides of the Solway have rejected the application, I must use this opportunity to urge the Executive to call in the proposal and to subject it to the full scrutiny of a public inquiry, which Alasdair Morgan would reject but which any project of this scale and nature surely merits. Nothing less than that will satisfy the reservations that many people in Dumfries and Galloway hold about the proposal. My declared interest and my enthusiasm for another wind farm in Galloway, at Windy Standard, which is about to double in size, shows that I am not anti-wind farm per se. However, I share the reservations of many people in Galloway. Accordingly, I will vote against the bill today, as that is one of the few methods that is available to me to display my dissatisfaction with the proposal.

If that paragraph in the report is just a warning, why has the SNP rural affairs spokesman gone public with the fact that he will lodge an amendment at stage 2 to introduce an absolute right to buy?

Will the member take a brief intervention?

If what he says is the case, will the member tell the chamber why not one farm has been available for let since May this year?

While sympathising with the minister's hoarse voice, I must congratulate him on what I assume was an excellent rendition at the karaoke at last night's Labour party party. I draw members' attention to my entry in the register of interests: I am the owner of a farm that is run by a partnership in which I am the limited partner. Some would say that I am very limited. In January 1999, the land reform policy group suggested, among other things, that agricultural holdings legislation should be amended to provide more flexible tenancy arrangements, to permit more farm tenants to diversify, to allow tenants to plant woodland, to encourage tenants to indulge in good conservation practice, to provide greater protection for tenants, to strengthen a tenant's right to compensation, and to simplify and reduce the cost of dispute resolution. Accordingly, the bill tries to do that and, as the minister said, seeks to reinvigorate the tenanted sector. The Conservatives endorse those aims whole-heartedly. We agree entirely that, in some cases, there is room for considerable improvement in the relationship between lessor and lessee, but we strongly dispute that that relationship has turned sour at every instance, across the board, as some would argue. We must consider the bill in the realisation that the vast majority of landlord-tenant relationships are perfectly healthy and productive. I refer members to a letter that they received just a week ago from five tenants on five different estates. That letter says clearly: "as tenant farmers, we have benefited from the innovative enterprise of different estates. It is often not acknowledged just how much of the infrastructure of every farm on an estate has been provided by the landlord". Likewise, we should acknowledge that the majority of tenanted landholdings are not owned by the big estates that attract so much publicity, but are often single units and are sometimes owned by the widow of a former farmer or by a former farmer who has chosen to retire. There is a vast range in the size of ownership and of tenancy throughout Scotland. We would do well to realise that as we consider the bill's general principles.  In the light of that, and bearing in mind the bill's intentions to reinvigorate the sector, we very much welcome the provision for the new limited duration tenancies and the provisions that address diversification, compensation and dispute resolution. We look forward to scrutinising the amendments that the minister has promised to lodge on those issues at stage 2. We particularly welcome those provisions because, as the minister said, they have been brought about largely by agreement among all the relevant stakeholders. Essentially, they are the product of consensus. That is exactly as the situation should be on issues such as land reform. The problem arises when the Executive departs from the agreed stakeholder concerns and embraces antagonism, as it has done by introducing at a relatively late stage in the proceedings the section that will give secure tenants under the 1991 act a pre-emptive right to buy. The Executive did that in spite of the fact that Ross Finnie said in the Parliament in May 2000: "We are trying to move towards a situation of greater diversity, in which more leases will be offered. Neither the consultative group that existed before we took office nor that which was set up afterwards proved that instituting a tenant's right to buy would do anything other than dry up a limited supply. We were not persuaded that that was consistent with our aim of getting new tenants."— [ Official Report , 17 May 2000; Vol 6, c 695.]

That is a matter of legal contract. As a lawyer, Fergus Ewing should certainly know that. The sentiments that Ross Finnie expressed in May 2000 were right then and they are equally correct now. The available land has already dried up.

I fully support such sales where there is a willing buyer and a willing seller, but why on earth do we need legislation for that? As I said, available land is already starting to dry up. In the past five years, an average of two farms a month have been available for rent in The Scottish Farmer  magazine. Since last May, there has been none. The only reason for that is the justifiable fear that a pre-emptive right to buy may be extended to all tenancies at the whim of a future minister. Worse, the right to buy might be turned into an absolute right to buy.

It is true, Fergus. Such an absolute right to buy is a right to expropriation—a right that will ensure that even the new tenancies that the bill envisages never even get off the ground. I was recently contacted by a farmer who had tried to rent six neighbouring fields from three willing neighbours in order to maintain a sustainable number of sheep under the organic aid scheme. None of the neighbours was willing to enter into any arrangements other than a short-term grazing lease, because of their fears over the right to buy. At least St Paul had a heavenly experience before his biblical U-turn; the only experience that the minister seems to have had before his own volte-face was intensive lobbying from George Lyon—an experience that I would describe as anything but heavenly. Not one stakeholder group that gave evidence to the Rural Development Committee wanted an absolute right to buy, other than the Scottish Tenant Farmers Action Group, which does not even speak for the majority of Scotland's tenants. One columnist recently stated: "there is evidence that a Bill designed to stimulate the tenanted sector is in danger of killing it. That would be a notable triumph for the Parliament, would it not". The damage has already begun, and the very good parts of the bill have been hidden behind the disastrous smokescreen of the right to buy. We know that that right will have the opposite effect to that which the minister seeks to achieve. For that reason—and that reason alone—we are unable to give the bill the whole-hearted support that it should have deserved. I move amendment S1M-3396.1, to insert at end: "but, in doing so, regrets that the provision in the bill of a right to buy for some tenants has already led to a significant reduction in the amount of land let under medium- and long-term arrangements, and believes that the enactment of such a provision will minimise land available for rent, including holdings under the new tenancies proposed in the bill, confining tenancies to those of a very short-term nature with a resultant negative impact on the management of the tenanted sector."

In moving and speaking to the amendment, I seek only to draw Parliament's attention to the deep reservations that the Rural Development Committee continues to have on matters relating to the designation order for the Cairngorm national park. The wording of my amendment is an exact amalgamation—

I am happy to give that clarification. I seek to draw Parliament's attention to the reservations that the majority of the Rural Development Committee continues to hold. The wording of the amendment is an exact amalgamation of the two amendments that the committee debated last Tuesday. One of the amendments, lodged by John Farquhar Munro, was on the inclusion of a Gaelic name. That amendment was passed unanimously. The other amendment, in the name of Fergus Ewing, on the boundary issues, was agreed by nine votes to two. I would not have lodged this amendment had the Executive deliberated on our findings before lodging its motion. However, it chose to lodge its motion when the committee was deliberating. Given the degree and depth of the committee's concerns, I was left with no choice but to lodge this amendment, if the concerns are to be understood by the whole Parliament, as I believe that they should be. One of the most troubling aspects of the designation order is that the dissatisfaction surrounding the proposed boundaries of the national park has increased, rather than decreased, as time has gone on. That is the wrong way round. When the dissatisfaction is expressed by bodies as august and respected as the National Trust for Scotland and the North East Mountain Trust, as well as by the Executive's advisers,  Scottish Natural Heritage, it is right that we should sit up and listen. That is exactly what the committee did. We went to Kingussie to take further evidence on the subject, following which we sent our recommendations to the minister—at his request. Our recommendations were that his original proposals should be expanded to include the five local authority areas, as recommended by SNH, plus the parish of Laggan. At that time, that recommendation was unanimous. Had the minister stuck to his original proposals, he would no doubt have had plausible reasons for doing so, but he chose to put forward a halfway house solution by proposing a park boundary that takes in four local authorities plus the parish of Laggan, but excludes the areas of highland Perthshire, which are referred to in the amendment. That would be equally understandable if he could give a robust answer to the question why he chose to omit that area from his proposals. Sadly, despite repeated questioning on the issue at the Rural Development Committee meeting on Tuesday, he consistently failed to do so, which is why the committee voted by nine votes to two to express its regrets and why I want Parliament to do the same. The only reason that we were given for the decision was that it would make for better governance of the national park, although governance—good, bad or indifferent—is not one of the criteria for the establishment of a national park. That suggests to me and, I believe, to most of the committee members, that the decision is based not so much on practical or factual evidence, but on political expediency, which is no basis on which to establish Scotland's second national park. I move amendment S1M-3702.1, to insert at end: "but, in doing so, notes amendments S1M-3621.1 and S1M-3621.2 which were approved by the Rural Development Committee on 10 December 2002 and therefore regrets the exclusion from the boundaries of the Cairngorms National Park of those areas of Highland Perthshire and Drumochter, including the forest of Atholl, Beinn a 'Ghlo and Blair Atholl, all of which were recommended for inclusion within the park's boundary by Scottish Natural Heritage in its report, prepared for the Scottish Executive, on the proposal for a National Park in the Cairngorms, and is concerned that, if these areas remain excluded, the attainment by the park of World Heritage Status may be put in jeopardy, and further regrets that the Order does not include the Gaelic translation of Cairngorms National Park which is Pàirc Nàiseanta a' Chàirn Ghuirm."

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has for the future operation of livestock auction markets in the light of last year's outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease. (S1O-6021)

I endorse the minister's remarks. Does he agree that the livestock auction markets have a vital future role to play in ensuring that livestock changes hands in the safe, biosecure environment that they can provide? Does he also agree that, by setting a base price for most other forms of stock purchase, they form an irreplaceable part of Scotland's food price chain? Will he give his robust backing to the continuing operations of livestock marketing companies? They are still struggling to recover from last year's disease outbreak, which they were highly influential in helping to stamp out.

Does Alasdair Morgan accept that, if, as George Lyon suggested, markets were to become electronic or virtual, the biosecurity risk would be increased, particularly in the case of breeding stock, simply because farmers would be encouraged to travel from farm to farm inspecting stock before they purchased it, rather than taking stock to one place where biosecurity can be better addressed?

I must draw attention to the fact that the debate should have taken place two weeks ago. That it did not owes more to Margaret Beckett's desire to be first to the dispatch box on the issue than Ross Finnie's apparent inability to have the Executive's response published on time. However, even that does not explain why the debate was truncated to 90 minutes when three hours had originally been scheduled for it. It is difficult to believe that any reason is behind that decision other than the Executive's desire to put the lid on the issue as quickly as possible and to move forward. I have no difficulty with the desire to move forward. It is clear that everyone who was involved in last year's foot-and-mouth outbreak desires to do that.

I accept that, but I did not allege that the minister had anything to do with the debate's timing. I regretted the fact that the debate was truncated. Everyone who was involved in the outbreak  desires to move forward, but it is important that we do so in the knowledge that lessons have been learned and that a firm, robust strategy is in place to cope with a future outbreak. That strategy should be regularly revisited and updated and should not suffer the same fate as its 1968 predecessor, the Northumberland report. The Executive's response to the three inquiries is important, as it gives us a pointer as to how determined the Executive is that we improve our performance the next time round. On that basis, I welcome the debate—delayed and shortened though it is. Paragraphs 42 to 48 of the Executive's response concentrate on the state veterinary service. We welcome the devolution of responsibility through the creation of a chief veterinary officer for Scotland, who I hope will be able to act in a future outbreak without constant compulsory reference to the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs. However, I am somewhat unclear about the Executive's intentions on the recommendation of all three inquiries that a sort of Territorial Army of vets be established. The response waxes lyrical about local veterinary inspectors and temporary veterinary inspectors, but they already exist and were involved, as the response says. I recently spoke to a retired but active vet in Wigtownshire who offered his services last year. As he had been a practising vet during the 1967 outbreak, it would be expected that he would be highly valued. Instead, his offer and experience were dismissed as unwanted. A TA of vets would surely be invaluable in identifying such a resource. I hope that that will be given more substance in the minister's future considerations. We also welcome the decision to locate a serological laboratory in Dumfries, but suggest that an equal need might exist for a similar facility in the north of Scotland. The slowness of sample analysis must have played a large part in the decision to adopt slaughter on suspicion, which led to increasing public unease with the cull policy. Any moves to cut analysis time are therefore welcome, but we urge the minister to consider two facilities. The vexed compensation question is—rightly—addressed. It is quite right that compensation be paid to those who lose their livestock as part of a disease eradication programme. What is wrong is when our national Government uses that compensation as part of a farmer-bashing exercise only months after it vowed to stand four-square behind the agriculture industry. It is equally wrong that during the early part of last year's outbreak, compensation seemed to be based on a sliding scale that was almost dependent on the degree of resistance to the cull.  Much better use must be made of the practical expertise of members of the Institute of Auctioneers and Appraisers in Scotland, who seem to have been rewarded for their valiant efforts last year by having to go to court to try to obtain payment for their services at the agreed rate. The basis of the payment is being disputed by DEFRA even though it was agreed by the Scottish Executive environment and rural affairs department. I hope that the minister will do everything in his power to right that wrong. Much weight is given throughout the response to the biosecurity code of practice, to which all farmers are now encouraged to adhere and which is rightly aimed at all users of farmland. Its aims might be worthy, but I was somewhat alarmed to discover recently at the Rural Development Committee that no exercise was ever carried out to show how such a code would have impacted on the spread of foot-and-mouth last year. One can only speculate therefore that the benefits of the code are essentially aspirational and that, if it is to be fully effective, it will depend on 100 per cent take-up. Even with the best will in the world, I am not convinced that that is likely to happen. I suspect that the code may end up being treated with as much affection as the 20-day rule, which is another measure that is highlighted in the response. Although the minister has introduced greater flexibility over the rule than exists in England, in some cases over the past few months, the rule made it all but impossible to carry out normal farming practices. That led to a temptation to flout and ignore the regulation, but that is the inevitable consequence of placing too great a burden on the industry. If the regulation is flouted and ignored, it becomes worthless. I hope that the minister will find a way to revoke it in the new year once the findings of the various studies have been published. A senior member of one of the boards of inquiry told me only yesterday that he felt that the Executive was being devious on the policy behind vaccination. The Executive must not be devious on the issue. Its intentions must be clearly stated and defined so that everyone knows what will happen in the event of a future outbreak—given the rather pathetic efforts thus far of the UK Government to tighten up on illegal meat imports, such an outbreak is all the more likely. The Executive response should be such that it points towards another outbreak being snuffed out so quickly that vaccination is unnecessary. That is the goal towards which we must aim. I accept that the Executive's response is aimed in that direction, but it does not have enough impetus for the ball to hit the back of the net.  I move amendment 3602.1, to leave out from "and welcomes" to end and insert: "regrets the late publication of the Scottish Executive's response to the inquiries and the curtailment of the debate on the issue; considers the response to be vague and urges the Executive to clarify its position on key issues such as the future use of vaccinations; calls on the Executive to produce clear evidence that it is working urgently with Her Majesty's Government to reduce the risk of importing infectious diseases, and seeks reassurance that the outcome of the inquiries will form the basis for continuing vigilance and regular updated contingency arrangements in the event of a future outbreak."

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to monitor the progress of Eaga in delivering its remit in relation to the central heating installation programme. (S1O-5820)

I am grateful to the minister for that answer, but I understand that local partnership managers say that the average waiting time for the installation of central heating under the  programme is around six months. Does the minister agree that it is totally unacceptable that an applicant from the Stranraer area, who recently contacted me, has had to wait for central heating since 11 September 2001, when he made his application? Does he agree that many applicants are unable or unwilling to pursue their applications vigorously in the way that the applicant whom I mentioned has had to do and that the Executive's monitoring processes should be reviewed forthwith?

rose—

In opening this debate for the Scottish Conservatives, I want to state that I am disappointed that we are not debating the Executive's response to the foot-and-mouth report, as we should have been. I hope that, when the time comes for that debate, we will be given the full three hours that was scheduled for this morning. However, I expect to be disappointed in that regard. The one and only good thing to emerge from the decision to postpone that debate is that we have at last been given the opportunity to debate the subject of forestry in the chamber in Executive time. If it had not been for my members' business debate in Aberdeen, the industry, which employs 11,000 people, has an enormous effect on the local economy of several rural areas of Scotland, as well as on the national economy, and was described by no less a person than Sir Michael Strang Steel, the head of Alba Trees, as the third largest in Scotland—that is what my amendment refers to—would have gone virtually unmentioned until now. It would probably not have had an airing had it not been for the postponement of the debate on the foot-and-mouth response. I welcome this opportunity, because a great deal needs to be said. The debate is not helped by the incredibly laid back, self-satisfied and complacent tone of the Executive's motion. In essence, the motion states that everything is fine and that we should leave the industry to it. The Executive is saying that adding the word "Scottish" to a grant scheme or two and splitting the administrative structure of Forest Enterprise will achieve all the objectives that it set out in the two-year-old forest strategy. The strategy was launched by John Home Robertson, who I am pleased to see is here, published by Rhona Brankin, who clearly decided to leave before the subject came up, and studiously ignored by Allan Wilson. Forestry is not an industry in which all is well. It is on its knees and has been for some time. The industry is up against massive competition from imported timber from the Baltic states, not only because of currency differentials but because of cost differentials. It is an industry that has been created since the last war with a significant input of taxpayers' money and is now having its transport links cut off in some cases because of a lack of a little bit more. It has had to make huge changes, rightly, to address the environmental and social benefit issues, to which the minister referred, and some of those issues still prevail. However, the addressing of those issues has added tremendous cost increases to an industry that is ill-prepared to meet them. Forestry, however, is an industry that can be  environmentally friendly. It is highly sustainable and has a massive role to play in rural development. That should be right up the street of this Scottish Government, but what is the Government's response? It asks us to agree that Parliament "notes the report of the Interdepartmental Review Group on Forestry; welcomes the proposed changes to the administrative arrangements for forestry in Scotland contained in that report; notes the proposals by an industry wide steering group for a new Scottish Forestry Grants Scheme, and believes these changes will help achieve the objectives set out in the Scottish Forestry Strategy." We are being asked to believe that those changes will help the forestry industry to fulfil the aims of the forestry strategy. I do not believe that, neither does the rest of my party and nor, I believe, does the Scottish National Party. We believe that, whatever the merits of the changes—it would be churlish to suggest that there are none—they will do virtually nothing to further either the aims of the forestry strategy or the needs of the industry. I repeat that the industry is firmly on its knees and in need of assistance. Some of that assistance should take the form of firm targets. If the long-term wood supply forecasts are to be meaningfully addressed, why does the Scottish Executive not insist that the Forestry Commission remove the 40-hectare limit on unimproved land that can be planted under current grant schemes? I understand that SEERAD might be willing to increase that limit to 200 hectares, but that the commission is sitting on the fence and, in effect, preventing what would be an invaluable measure in addressing the forecast deficit of some 2.5 million metric tonnes by 2045 even if new plantings were to be doubled during the next 20 years, and a deficit of 4.5 million metric tonnes if there is no new planting. There is an industry-wide perception that the new Scottish forestry grant schemes farmland premium will foster new plantings only where there is deemed to be a social benefit requirement. There is a perception too that the criteria for successful applications under that scheme will fall under the same parameter as areas that have received challenge funding. Some of the minister's speech probably backed up that perception. Those are not necessarily the areas that will best benefit or enhance the industry. However, if that perception is strong, there is total conviction in the industry that the application process for the new schemes, which were meant to simplify the process, is considerably more complex and bureaucratic. That, in turn, will make the schemes more expensive to administer and processing the applications will simply require more Forestry Commission staff time. That is typical of what we get from the Executive: more bureaucracy, officials  and cost, and less money going to where it should be targeted. The new Scottish schemes, and the devolving of power under the new structure, are fine in as far as they go. I will not be overly critical of them, but unless they are backed up by the political will to drive the industry forward, they are as nothing. A recent example was brought to my attention in east Ayrshire, where an application to plant 145 hectares has been submitted. Not one of the statutory consultees raised objections, and there are few transport issues and only a couple of minor local objections, which are outwith the statutory consultation process. However, the decision on whether an environmental assessment is required is still not forthcoming after nine months of fruitless negotiation. How can any industry move forward properly under those circumstances? Where is the decisiveness and firm grip of management that any industry requires? The forestry strategy is a fine document, but without the robust political will and realistic support that I am calling for, it is a complete waste of time and effort. That leaves the big issue of transport, on which I know that many other members will contribute. In response to my members' debate in Aberdeen on 30 May, the minister kindly agreed to my request, as Fergus Ewing mentioned, to get round the table with COSLA's rural affairs committee and industry representatives to discuss the specific problem. The minister knows what the problem is—he has been to a meeting of the timber transport forum and was present at the launch of Dumfries and Galloway's agreed timber transport route plan at the highly successful international forest fest 2002 at Lockerbie. He is probably not aware that many of the industry representatives who had to sign up to that agreement felt that they did so with a local authority gun that was loaded, cocked and well and truly held at their foreheads. Many in the industry were grateful that the minister agreed to my request to set up the meeting, and I wrote to the minister on 17 June to ask who the industry representatives at the meeting would be. Showing his normal haste in response to the industry's interest, the minister wrote a reply on 31 October. I received it on 4 November, which was—amazingly—timed to coincide with the announcement of today's debate. I hope that I am not often thought of as a natural-born cynic, but if there are many more coincidences such as that, I will become one. Furthermore, when I learned that the meeting that was agreed to in Aberdeen on 30 May is now scheduled to take place on 8 January, some seven months later, I realised why there is a sense of despair in the Scottish forestry industry. That  lack of urgency signals a complete lack of interest, which is what the industry considers that it is getting from this Administration. The industry has a significant role in rural development and employment, but it is being held back—

I am in my final minute and winding up. The minister will be replying to the debate.

If the Presiding Officer is happy, I will give way.

If the minister tells me that, I will of course accept his word. Nonetheless, I think that the meeting could have been driven with more urgency than has obviously been the case. A request can always be denied, and I would have liked to think that the Executive would show more urgency. As I was saying, the industry has a significant role in rural development and employment and is being held back by a Scottish Government that is either unwilling or unable to support it in the way that it so desperately requires. It is met with tea and sympathy on the one hand, and inaction, as exemplified by the motion, on the other. The industry deserves a great deal better, and it would not take much resource to allow it to fulfil the potential that it undoubtedly holds. What is clear is that, under this Administration, it will not receive it. I move amendment S1M-3541.1, to leave out from "and believes" to end and insert: "but condemns the Scottish Executive's failure to address the practical problems which face the Scottish forestry industry, particularly with regard to transport; further notes that the Executive has failed to set and promote robust planting targets or to plan for the impending doubling of timber output over the next 10 to 15 years, and urges the Executive to give greater priority to the issues which so concern what is now the third biggest industry in Scotland."

Does the minister think that part of that strategy should be the land locking of blocks of timber by the closure of roads to forestry transport?

Does the minister agree that situations such as the one at West Freugh, which Alasdair Morgan described, and the closure of Chapelcross power station near Dumfries, which might lead to the loss of 600 jobs, have particularly devastating effects in areas such as Dumfries and Galloway, which have a particularly low-wage economy? Will he undertake to give such areas an especially high priority status when it comes to the redistribution of public sector jobs?

I declare an interest as the owner of some farmland in the south-west of Scotland, most of which could currently be classified as very wetland. It has become quite clear in this debate that there is certainly a consensus that the EU's water framework directive must be implemented, that the Executive has chosen to do so via the bill and that, on that matter at least, the Executive has no choice. That the EU has allowed a degree of flexibility in how the directive is implemented is also to be welcomed, so that localised conditions can be taken fully into account as the directive is transposed into Scottish law. However, in researching for today's debate, and despite the minister's earlier assurances, it has become equally clear that there are several issues over which there are very large question marks. Not the least of those concerns the financial costs and benefits of the bill. I learned with interest that the Executive-commissioned report puts the costs at between £141 million and £324 million. That is an enormous range and one that sends shudders up my spine when I recall that the original estimate for the Scottish Parliament building was between £10 million and £40 million. Similarly, the financial benefits assessment is clouded in uncertainty. Although I accept that a certain number of the estimates can be only subjective at this stage, a great deal more objectivity will need to be brought to the fore if current uncertainties are to be addressed, as they must be if the bill is to progress satisfactorily. A further uncertainty seems to lie in the direction and degree of consultation that took place prior to the publication of the bill, as no draft bill was issued. That may be the reason why the National Farmers Union of Scotland did not feel it necessary to give evidence to the committee at stage 1. That is a decision that I feel might well be reversed if and when the true financial and practical consequences of the directive for the agriculture industry are fully out in the open. Even the implications as they are currently known give me cause for considerable concern. In a letter last month to the convener of the Transport and the Environment Committee, the Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development stated that farms employing best practice will face medium-term capital investment of £12 million to £18 million and long-term recurring costs of some £12 million per annum. Other farms will require long-term recurring costs of a further £12 million per annum, placing a long-term annual recurring  cost of £24 million on an industry that the minister well knows is not exactly ideally placed to take on extra costs. Furthermore, the river basin management plans are bound to look seriously at providing flood relief for areas that are currently liable to flood by creating flood relief areas higher up, on land that currently does not flood. The creation of more wetlands might be greatly welcomed by some lobbies, but it would be grossly unfair to impose those areas on inevitably higher valued—agriculturally rather than financially—and better-quality land on those upriver farms, without having a robust agri-environmental scheme to compensate for the loss of productive capacity. I do not suggest that that cannot or should not be done, but I strongly suggest that, before long, the whole issue will need much more thought. I will add a note of caution in respect of SEPA's role as both policy maker and enforcer. The combination is not happy and there are already too many question marks over SEPA's ability to carry out its existing remit without our adding to it. Time does not allow me to develop that theme, but I will write to the minister shortly about the issue. I cannot conclude without mentioning the vital importance of making progress on part 2 of the bill. Communities that I represent throughout the south of Scotland, such as Wigtown—which is Scotland's national book town—currently have a virtual moratorium on development placed on them by Scottish Water. If rural development is to mean anything, that problem must be addressed with the highest priority so that expanding communities can connect to water and sewerage services. I have no desire to hinder or oppose the bill at stage 1, but I sincerely hope that some of those bones get more flesh on them in the coming weeks and months or the consensus that prevails in the chamber today may not be so obvious at stage 3.

Will the minister join me in congratulating the volunteer founders of the "you are not alone" family support group, which was launched on a shoestring budget two weeks ago in Stranraer? It is a telephone helpline service for addicts and their dependants. Will he undertake to issue guidelines  to local and area drug action teams so that they will actively support and encourage such groups and initiatives?

The minister has just hit on the nub of the problem. The Executive does not make any distinction between urban and rural Scotland. That attitude is behind today's motion. Does the minister accept that there is a need to differentiate between the two? The situation is not one in which one answer suits all. We need  differentiation of policy to address the problems of rural Scotland.

Will the member give way?

Will Mr Lyon take an intervention?

Can George Lyon tell me of one rural businessman, farmer or land manager who was operating five years ago who would rather be where they are now than where they were then?

I draw members' attention to my declaration of interests as registered. It is good to see that a debate on rural issues first thing on a Thursday morning can still pack them in. I am grateful to those members who have turned up, particularly from other parties, to hear a little bit of common sense spoken on the subject. That was not meant to be a joke, but I shall now get down to serious matters. Four years ago, Scotland was beginning to buzz with anticipation at the prospect of life with a new Parliament after almost 300 years without one. Although it should be noted that that anticipation was accompanied by varying degrees of eagerness, it was remorselessly led by the proponents of the new constitutional arrangements as being the panacea for all ills, the very greenest of grass on the other side of the political fence, and indeed the answer to all Scotland's problems. That it could never be mattered not a bit, as the electorate was lulled into believing that the new politics that would be on offer would solve issues one at a time in a mature, consensual manner befitting the 21 st century and the new political era that devolution would bring. It is therefore perfectly fitting that, as the build-up to the general election begins, we should reflect on whether those overfed aspirations have been met and on whether the new politics—which, as we all know now, turned out to be exactly the same as the old politics except that it is perpetuated as such by the power-crazed ambitions of the Liberal Democrats—has delivered. The short answer is, of course, that it has not and that fact was even admitted recently by our First Minister. It has not delivered because the hype was over the top, the aspirations were  never based on reality and the promises were never deliverable. As I have said on many occasions, nowhere is that disillusionment more keenly felt than in rural Scotland. Rural Scotland was always more sceptical about this Parliament and it has remained so about the achievements of its first Executive. The reasons for that are not hard to come by and are what lie behind our motion this morning. Our traditional rural industries—fishing, forestry and farming—continue to face real problems. Although we all accept that times change and that economic forces must change with them, we cannot underestimate the value of those industries to our rural economy. They are still the bedrock and will remain so for some time to come. To those great industries we can now add tourism. My colleagues David Davidson and Jamie McGrigor will expand on tourism and fisheries in their contributions.

I am only sorry that Mr Home Robertson beat me to it, because I would not dream of congratulating the SNP on anything, and I certainly cannot do so now, as SNP members do not even know the difference between a town and a city. Last Thursday, together with John Scott and Jamie McGrigor, I joined a third of Scotland's dairy farmers, who were gathered at Asda's Grangemouth distribution centre to protest at the pitiful share of the end price for milk that they receive. I spoke to three relatively young men from north Ayrshire, who spoke with great clarity but also with great bitterness about what the Executive was, or was not, doing for them. One of them, whose farm borders a town and who has traditionally had a generally good relationship with the residents of that town, who walk on his farm both at his direction and with his blessing, said that no one now bothers asking him. He told me, "They walk all over the farm with two fingers pointing in my direction." That is before the Land Reform (Scotland) Bill is even enacted. His question, which is echoed by many including myself, is why, given all the problems that he faces as a farmer, the Government has concentrated on the social engineering that lies behind the Land Reform (Scotland) Bill, the Agricultural Holdings (Scotland) Bill and the Protection of Wild Mammals (Scotland) Act 2002. It does not make any difference how easy it is to  sell those bills to the urban majority. In most of rural Scotland they are seen as irrelevant, damaging and driven by political dogma rather than practical reality. Even where the Minister for Environment and Rural Development has turned his hand to practical measures, they have usually ended in shambolic failure. For proof of that shambles, one need only look at the agricultural business improvement scheme, the rural stewardship scheme, the less favoured areas support scheme in any of its various guises or the 121 farmers caught up in the double payment of sheep annual premium. Farming, whether the Executive recognises it or not, feels let down and unwanted and the blame for that lies squarely in the hands of the Executive.

Yet the problems continue every year. The situation has continued to decline on an annual basis, and it is probably one of the longest sustained depressions that agriculture in Scotland has known for some considerable time. I shall give some figures later that will address Mr Rumbles's point.

Mr Lochhead knows as well as I do that the problems with capping do not come from this Parliament or from Westminster, but from Europe. That is something that can be addressed only at European level. I want to move on to forestry, if I may.

I shall come back later to figures that will address Mike Rumbles's problems. Yesterday marked the opening of International Forest Fest 2002 at Lockerbie. It is a magnificent celebration that receives worldwide recognition of which I hope all Scotland can be proud. I believe that the Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development will be there tomorrow in the company of the Princess Royal—probably counting his blessings that it is not her brother.  That event is a worthy recognition of a vital industry which, as I highlighted in my members' business debate in Aberdeen, is in some peril and will remain so if the Executive does not engage with the industry to solve the transport problems that currently beset it. Given that the industry was founded with considerable help and assistance from the taxpayer, it is surely criminal that the same industry should now be almost paralysed in some areas by the lack of public funding in its transport infrastructure. Following my members' business debate in Aberdeen, at which the deputy minister agreed to join the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and representatives of the industry to discuss those problems, I wrote to him in early July requesting further details. I only hope that he has implemented his meeting rather more urgently than he has treated my letter, as I have yet to receive a reply. Over the past three and a half years, we have constantly been told that, as traditional industries decline in overall importance, new industries and businesses will take their place in the rural economy. It would be lovely and wonderful to think that they had, but the truth is that they have not. That is why my motion "notes that rural business start-ups remain at an unacceptably low level". Although I welcome the significant successes that occur in the Highlands and Islands Enterprise and Scottish Enterprise areas, there are just not enough of them. Despite the upbeat report given to us two weeks ago by Dr Jim Hunter of HIE, there were fewer business start-ups in the Highlands and Islands during the first five years of this Labour Government than in the last four years of the previous Conservative one. Mr Rumbles will be interested to note that there were 350 business start-ups per annum under the Conservative Government, but that figure has been reduced to 275 under Labour. Why is that? It is quite simply because the Administration has no understanding of business and no sympathy with business needs, and has led this country to the pitiful situation in which we have seen a decline in company creation from 10 per cent to 1.7 per cent in just one year. That is unsustainable and must be addressed. The way to address the problem is through infrastructure, both for transport, which is the subject of our next debate, and for information technology. Only when some meaningful Executive attention is paid to those matters will we be able to address the fact that rural Scotland has to play what the chief executive of Dumfries and Galloway Council recently referred to as catch-up in the jobs market. Only then will we be able to unleash the potential to which the SNP's new snappy little  slogan refers, but which the only policy on which all its members agree, independence, will hold back and stifle—not unlike the new SNP colour scheme. Only when the Executive realises that it must differentiate between urban and rural transport, schools and health issues and in all other service provision will rural Scotland again begin to prosper. Almost four years, 328 agricultural publications, 100 fisheries documents and 816 environment and natural resources papers have passed, yet rural Scotland has little to show for that other than an increase in the number of shelves that are required to hold 1,244 reports, strategies, leaflets, reviews and studies with which our Government has busied itself. The problems remain, the fires continue to burn and the Government continues to fiddle. Last weekend, more than 400,000 people took to the streets of London to show their displeasure. The people of Scotland will undoubtedly show equal displeasure at the ballot box next May. I move, That the Parliament deplores the failure of the Scottish Executive to arrest the decline of our rural industries; notes that rural business start-ups remain at an unacceptably low level; regrets and deplores the Executive's continued lack of investment in rural transport and information technology infrastructure and the over-regulation which has resulted in barriers to the regeneration of the rural economy, and calls on the Executive to devolve decision-making powers to a local level while reversing policies which are damaging to rural communities in Scotland.

When debating SNP motions, I often find that I can agree with approximately two thirds of it. Their preambles are usually quite acceptable, sometimes reasonable and occasionally sensible. However, their conclusions are only occasionally acceptable, and are rarely reasonable or sensible. This motion proves no exception to that rule. As soon as the motion begins to talk about "targets" and "mature, serious and open-minded debate", it begins to lose touch with economic reality. After all, targets and debates are only words. Because actions speak so much louder than words, the debate needs largely to focus on the actions of the Scottish Executive. We have all seen the figures and the headlines. Indeed, one of the starkest headlines appeared in last Monday's Business a.m. It read: "Growth in Scottish company start-ups down by 80%". The article explained that, with start-up growth  down from 10.2 per cent to 1.7 per cent, we could face a fall in the number of companies created in Scotland next year. Although that is a terrifying prospect, it is also a stark and probably accurate pointer to an economy in decline. Nowhere is that situation shown more clearly than in rural Scotland, and particularly in the South of Scotland region that I represent. Incidentally, that area is now suffering depopulation as a direct result of Scottish Executive policies. According to the Executive's amendment, the answers to those very real problems lie in "providing resources for first-class public services and a more socially just and sustainable Scotland", supporting "the work undertaken to improve" our "long-term performance" and noting "the progress in implementing measures to help businesses grow". However, the answers do not lie there. Quite simply, in rural Scotland at least, they lie with the need to make meaningful and rapid improvements to two aspects of infrastructure and, as Annabel Goldie so ably argued, with a return to a level playing field on business rates. During its recent round of evidence-gathering meetings throughout Scotland, the Rural Development Committee found that, alongside planning restrictions, one of the most strongly perceived barriers to rural development was the roads infrastructure. Nothing would do more for business development and new start-ups than for the Executive to recognise that fact and to take some practical action to do something about it. I suspect that, instead, we will be fed the usual mealy-mouthed soft soap about the Executive's investment in a properly integrated sustainable rural public transport system. Although I concede that that investment has done something for rural employment by creating the need for more bus drivers, it has done nothing to get more passengers on to those buses. Although I hope that the announcement that will be made later today will prove me wrong, I am not optimistic. I have said many times before that we simply cannot replace the car in rural Scotland. It is time that the Executive realised that by implementing a comprehensive road improvement programme that will not only allow people to access the workplace more easily but, more important, help rural business to get their primary or processed products to the marketplace.

I am sorry—I am in my last minute. The information technology infrastructure is in  much need of attention and access to it is paramount in diversifying rural Scotland's industrial base. Last year, when I mentioned the lack of access to IT in rural Scotland, Jim Wallace suggested that I must be living on a different planet if I could not recognise the significant benefits of the pathfinder project in the south of Scotland. If he were here, I would say to him that I do not because there is none. Successful small and medium enterprises are having to move from rural Scotland to more urban areas in order to access better IT facilities. I contend that the Executive's policies are failing because they are the wrong policies. They will continue to fail until ministers realise that they must differentiate between rural and urban policies. Despite the failure of those policies, however, I can think of no policies that would cause business confidence and start-ups to collapse more quickly than that called for in the SNP motion this morning. The thought of an SNP-led Executive four years ago caused several companies to move their headquarters south of the border in total panic. Independence—the SNP's answer to everything—is the answer to nothing. I am sure that on 2 May next year, we will discover that the vast majority of people in Scotland will decisively reject it once again. If the Parliament is serious about taking proactive measures to improve Scotland's economy, it will follow my example and support Annabel Goldie's amendment.

Presiding Officer, I thought for one delightful moment that you might let Alex Neil go on for so long that you might not have time for my speech. I noticed that, at the start of the debate, you asked for those members who wished to take part in the debate to press their request-to-speak buttons. You did not say what those of us who have been pressed upon to participate should do. Nonetheless, I pressed my button and I am pleased to contribute to the debate. I will do so as convener of the Rural Development Committee, whose report has already elicited some praise from the convener of the Finance Committee. The Rural Development Committee acknowledged strongly the clearer presentation of the budget proposals this year. Despite the continuing complexity of the proposals, that presentation has undoubtedly made it easier for the Rural Development Committee to scrutinise them at stage 1. We have pressed for clearer presentation for the past two years. I am sure that that has been significant in allowing us to produce the excellent report that Des McNulty acknowledged. I had always wondered what it would take to bring out the true Des McNulty—the emotion behind the cool exterior. Obviously, it is a well-worded stage 1 committee report on the budget. How sad. Nevertheless, an awful lot still needs to be done to identify outcomes and review cross-cutting expenditure in rural areas. The Rural Development Committee supports the Minister for Environment and Rural Development in his concern about the relatively poor evidence base that affects his ability to pursue those matters. We also highlighted the overall expenditure in rural areas as being ripe for cross-cutting review by the Finance Committee. The rural development budget is interdependent with European policy. The Rural Development Committee was able to examine it in the context of continuing debate on the possible mid-term reform of the common agricultural policy. We were anxious to identify and consider areas in which national discretion could allow the use of European moneys to be tailored in support of Scottish strategic priorities for agriculture. With that background, the Rural Development Committee drew five main conclusions for the Finance Committee's consideration. First, we sought clarification on the implications for Scotland  should the Curry commission's proposals on increasing modulation be implemented in England. A debate is needed on whether the devolved Administrations can implement such a policy differently from the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs. Secondly, the committee invited the minister to assess the costs and impacts of introducing enhanced rates of modulation in Scotland, with progressive and discriminatory rates of modulation and with the proceeds matched by UK funds and applied as part of a revised rural development plan through land management contracts or whole farm support and development schemes as envisaged in "A Forward Strategy for Scottish Agriculture". Thirdly, the committee sought clarification from the minister in his objectives in allocating additional funds to the less-favoured areas support scheme rather than to other rural development measures. The reason is that the figures suggest that the minister has allocated more money to the LFASS than is strictly required by European match funding rules. He therefore appears to have made a policy decision to put extra money into that scheme. Fourthly, the committee welcomes the minister's commitment to review the crofters grants and loans scheme and has asked to be kept informed of the progress on that matter. In evidence, issues arose about whether the levels of grant available were suitable to secure adequate provision of housing in remote rural areas. We were keen that that issue should be addressed. Lastly, the committee seeks clarification of the minister's priorities for the expenditure of the Scottish Executive environment and rural affairs department on the agricultural and biological research group programme. Evidence suggested that only 2 per cent of SEERAD expenditure on the programme is devoted to socioeconomic research pertaining to rural economies and communities. The committee also identified one or two options for the use of increased funding, should that become available following the comprehensive spending review. As Des McNulty indicated, we suggested that the rural partnership fund might be prioritised for enhanced funding. As I hinted earlier, we also suggested that funding an improved evidence base for rural communities and development would be another suitable priority. We recommended that the minister give serious consideration to three proposals that the Scottish Fishermen's Federation has made. The federation proposes, first, that the Executive should make adequate budgetary provision to attract the proposed European centre for fisheries research and management to Scotland. Secondly, it argues  that a continuation of the programme of research cruises jointly managed by fishermen and scientists would be extremely beneficial and would provide work for underemployed vessels. Lastly, it proposes the establishment of an executive body such as a specialist enterprise company to manage inshore fisheries and related marine resources—to manage and oversee the contribution of the inshore fisheries industry to the general health of the coastal community and economy. I was very pleased by the way in which the Finance Committee received our report. I record formally my thanks both to the clerks and to Professor Mark Shucksmith, our adviser, who guided us ably through the intricacies and complexities of the budget process. This is a good report and has been acknowledged as such. However, as Alex Neil said, the report will be no use unless it is acted on. I hope that in his summing-up the minister will assure us that that will happen.

The minister accepts that that money has been wisely spent, but does she accept that it was part of a planned three-year programme of identification of markets and that it must be followed up or else the £1.6 million that was spent last year will be good money down the drain?

As previous speakers have already graphically explained, this time last year Dumfries and Galloway was a virtual wasteland. A region that was famed for its livestock was almost denuded of it, as the aftermath of foot-and-mouth revealed its stark legacy. I described the area at the time as resembling a green desert, and that is almost exactly what it was: mile upon mile of empty fields  where normally sheep and dairy and beef cattle roam in abundance. The area even seemed to be emptied of people, as the hundreds—if not thousands—who had come to assist in the cull left, but were not replaced by the holidaymakers who normally come at this time of year. In other words, those who did not usually come went, and those who usually came did not. At the time, there was a strange, eerie feeling, and it was a strange, eerie place to live in. Even during those darkest of hours, the talk was of recovery. Farmers whose livestock had been culled planned restocking programmes; those whose livestock had not been culled had to plan a survival strategy, as, in many ways, they may have been the financial victims of foot-and-mouth. The tourism industry, which is so vital to that region and to the Borders—to which Ian Jenkins rightly drew attention—wondered how it could survive a season that might never happen. In fact, it was a non-season, during which the industry's only lifelines were the offer of £5,000 interest-free loans from the enterprise company and a nine-month rates relief package from the council. The latter was a genuinely meaningful measure, but the former was a measure that was grasped because of desperation. Even as I speak, businesses are having to repay those loans, although some of them are still struggling to survive, never mind repay loans. All the while, the message from the chamber, in countless ministerial speeches, was that Dumfries and Galloway would be treated as a special case. The then First Minister once bravely mentioned consequential compensation before those words were expunged from his dictionary. The message came across loud and clear: if people planned their strategies, the Executive would help them. To be fair, I do not doubt that some £25 million left the Executive's coffers in the direction of foot-and-mouth recovery. It is a tragedy that so little of that money reached the coalface, but that is the subject of another debate. True to the modern ideal of working in partnership, the local council, the enterprise company, the tourist board and the Federation of Small Businesses produced a three-year recovery plan. Part of that plan involved a three-year tourism recovery strategy that was carefully designed to target the domestic short-break market in the hope of bringing about an autumn recovery last year, to be followed by a further two years of specifically targeted marketing. The amount of money involved was hardly huge. At the time, we described the situation as one in which tourism in Dumfries and Galloway had 90 per cent of the foot-and-mouth problem, but received only 10 per cent of the funding. Nonetheless, the three-year plan was put in place and it is important to  note that the plan was approved and agreed by VisitScotland.

The member is absolutely correct. I do not doubt that that argument is fundamental to the debate and to the motion. The fact that the plan was approved and agreed is important. The plan was a great success, in that for every £1 spent on the campaign, £6.50 was brought back into the local economy. Alasdair Morgan rightly touched on that point. All those in the industry began to be buoyed up by the thought that perhaps they had the future that, at one time, they believed might not exist. The obvious response by VisitScotland would surely have been to increase the funding in the wake of such success. The funding was a pitiful £280,000 for this year. However, VisitScotland's reaction was not to increase the funding. The funding was not cut by 10 or 15 per cent; it was cut off altogether. Is it any wonder that local reaction to that is one of utter devastation, that the talk is of betrayal and distrust and that the thinking is that this most rural of regions has been let down yet again by urban decision makers? VisitScotland says that it can spend the money better, but can it prove a return of six and a half to one on its centralised schemes? VisitScotland will blame the Executive for cutting funding from £12 million to £4 million. The Executive will say, no doubt, that the distribution of VisitScotland's funding is a matter for that organisation. I inform members that the tourist operators of Dumfries and Galloway, and probably the Borders, do not care who is to blame or about the political niceties of the situation. They want the £280,000 that they were promised—I use that word advisedly—only last year in the wake of the greatest economic disaster that the region has ever seen. The local tourist board once used a slogan that suggested that Dumfries and Galloway was Scotland's forgotten region. It is time that VisitScotland's short memory was reawakened by the Executive and that its promise was kept. I hope that the minister can tell us that the Executive will undertake here and now to ensure that VisitScotland honours its promise and that Dumfries and Galloway region is remembered  again as the special case that it undoubtedly deserves to be. I support the motion.

Until the minister started to speak. [ Laughter. ]

Does Robin Harper acknowledge that the industry has been proactive in offering to councils that have a problem to minimise load sizes, to reduce axle weights and to undertake a limited number of journeys a day, as a way of getting over that problem?

I begin by saying how very pleased I am that this motion has been picked for the pinnacle of our short sojourn here in the city of Aberdeen. I take the opportunity, as others have done, to thank all those involved in making our stay such a successful and enjoyable experience. To be picked to complete the proceedings is indeed a privilege. I hope that I make a rather better job of speaking to this motion than I did of writing an article on the subject in "Holyrood Magazine" a couple of weeks ago. I scribbled an 800-word article at the very last minute and I did not even have time to proof read it. Even so, I was somewhat astonished when I picked up a copy of the magazine and read the following words in my name: "I started farming in 1971, the beginnings of a decade which was to see a massive increase in the number of Scotland's hills". In my slightly indecent haste I had omitted to add the words "which came under afforestation". Nonetheless, few of us who have lived in rural Scotland during the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s, particularly in the Borders, Dumfries and Galloway, Ayrshire, Argyll and here in the north-east, will forget the almost breathtaking speed at which many of our hills and uplands became engulfed in an ever-growing, all-enveloping tide of Sitka spruce, as blanket afforestation—the order of the day—continued apace. At that time, many of us did not like what we saw, such as the vertical open drains, which ensured the rapid run-off of rainfall in a way that nature never intended and which has altered some of our rivers to their eternal detriment. We did not like the planting of  those ubiquitous evergreen trees to the edge of every road, which obliterated the stunning views that lay beyond them, and the locked gates at the end of every forest road, which prevented access by the public, whose taxes were funding the plantations. I am more than happy to say that many of those difficulties have now been overcome. Plantations are now planned within aesthetically more pleasing parameters; drainage techniques have altered, slowing down run-off while still allowing the young trees to be planted in dry, upturned soil; and access has been greatly increased by forestry authorities that proactively seek out and develop the leisure opportunities that many plantations now offer. So much has improved, yet there is one problem that is increasing and is showing few signs of being overcome: the transportation of the 10 million tonnes annually of mature timber that is now ready for harvesting from the plantations that were created in the 1960s and 1970s. Let us not forget that the timber from the 1980s and 1990s is still to come. That will lead to a 100 per cent increase in mature timber over the next 10 to 15 years, doubling the transportation problem that we face today. Whichever way we look at it there is one indubitable fact: every timber load starts its journey to the sawmill on a road. That is the case and it will remain the case. It is also true to say that such roads are often minor B roads or roads that are entirely unclassified. Local authorities, which have the responsibility for the upkeep and maintenance of such roads have been increasingly reluctant to accept that timber lorries constitute a legitimate use of public roads. In some areas, such as Polbae in Dumfries and Galloway, the council has imposed temporary weight restrictions on bridges—an act that, in effect, landlocks the now mature timber. In the specific case of Polbae, a bridge on the unclassified U111W has had a temporary weight restriction placed on it, which the council is now seeking to extend. Twenty objections to the extension have been received and the matter is to go to a public hearing. Scottish Woodlands, the managing agent, has been advised that it could take 18 months to two years before the Executive even appoints a reporter. I will not go into too much detail, but somewhere in the minister's mailbag is a letter from me on the issue and no doubt he will get round to answering it one of these weeks. The end result is that, at Polbae, 150,000 tonnes of mature timber, which has been produced at no small expense to the taxpayer, is stuck and has been left to rot, because of the reluctance of local and central Government to allow its release by ensuring that the roads infrastructure is up to the job.  Until recently, one could have justifiably accused the timber industry of doing little to sort out its own problems. However, that is no longer the case. Timber transport groups have been formed with all stakeholders and preferred route maps are being negotiated, although the possibility of a fourth category of road in addition to the currently agreed three is giving rise to considerable concern. The use of internal forest roads is being maximised, although surely the use of publicly funded Forestry Commission roads for private timber transportation should be more acceptable. The use of rail and sea modes of transport is being extended. However, I say again that every timber load begins on a road. Until a few years ago, Dumfries and Galloway Council received more than £2 million per year from European sources. It was able to put that money into minor roads improvement. The council no longer receives that funding. The stress on the council's other budgets means that it underspent on roads by almost £2.4 million last year. There is no doubt that that situation is mirrored in other local authorities. At least in Dumfries and Galloway, deflectograph tests and surveys are being carried out in order to come up with an accurate picture of how much those minor roads can stand. Few other local authorities are matching that initiative. The Executive cannot escape its role in this issue and that is the purpose of my motion today. Vast amounts of public money have gone into the building of an industry that now employs 11,000 people in the Scottish growing and primary processing sectors. The forestry cluster industries provide 44,000 jobs. The industry is worth £800 million per year to the Scottish economy, has invested £100 million over the past 10 years, and has become an integral driver of the rural economy alongside farming, fishing and tourism. Its margins have never been tighter, and yet never has it felt more isolated. Timber is a crop whose harvest is beginning to peak. That harvest must get to market, and yet it is prevented from doing so. The Executive must get a grip on the situation and do its bit. It must ensure that gulfs are being bridged rather than bridges being closed. That cannot be a solution and I call on the Executive to play its part in maximising the value that timber can add to Scotland's rural economy by ensuring that that timber has a trouble-free journey from forest to sawmill.

The debate has been dominated by a degree of discomfort. The SNP's discomfort is plain for all to see. Its motion is not derived from any great position of principle, but from an almost embarrassing desire to play populist party politics with an issue that deserves something better. The minister's discomfort stems from the Executive's back benches, the Labour members of which do not understand the issue, as it is a rural one, and, in particular, the Liberal members, who will no doubt support their minister, even though their party membership opposed the field-scale trials by a 2:1 majority. It therefore comes as no surprise that the only sensible position in the debate is that which has been taken by the Scottish Conservatives. Since the horrendous days of BSE, when the then Government acted according to the best scientific evidence available, as Mr Finnie claims to be doing now, the public have not been prepared to accept ministerial assurances—

Certainly not from a Liberal, who will not even listen to his minister on the issue. The public are no longer prepared to accept  ministerial assurances that all is well. I cannot say that I blame them. The public need to be doubly reassured on GM field trials, but that is not possible when the minister himself has told the Sunday Herald that "there's clearly a majority view which says that you can't continue simply to do small plot-scale trials because they're not actually going to find the results". That statement implies two things: first, that there are still many unanswered questions; secondly, that a substantial minority of scientific opinion believes that answers can be obtained from small-scale plot trials. Given the fact that the scientists are in disagreement, no wonder there is such huge public concern. I agree with John Home Robertson that we must pay great tribute to all the scientists who are involved on both sides of the argument. In particular, I want to pay tribute to the work of Professor Hillman and the SCRI, to which John Home Robertson referred. My colleague John Scott has eloquently outlined our environmental concerns, but I want to touch briefly on the possible effects on human health. I echo the warnings that have been given by Dr Charles Saunders, who is the chair of the public health committee of the BMA, which has said that "any adverse effects from GMOs are likely to be irreversible." That is worth thinking about seriously. Despite Ross Finnie's speech, in which he attempted to lay those fears to rest, those concerns are worth a bit of caution. They are worth the extra precaution that is proposed in today's Conservative amendment. Why is the impact of GMOs on public health not being monitored or evaluated? Why will the minister not undertake to provide the public reassurance that such monitoring would bring? If he were to do that, the 92 per cent of residents in the Munlochy area who oppose the trials might even support them. Like us, those residents recognise the tremendous advantages that GM could bring across the world. Like us, they want a greater degree of reassurance than is available. Until such a reassurance is given, neither they nor we will condone the field-scale trials with which Ross Finnie is blindly pushing ahead. The minister has turned a deaf ear to all concerns and has said nothing new in the debate. Blind, deaf and effectively dumb—that is the Executive's position on GM crops. It will not be easily forgiven. I support John Scott's amendment.

I welcome the readiness of the new Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care and the First Minister to engage in serious debate on ME. Given the answers that they have both given today, can the First Minister deny any longer the overwhelming need for a clinic of excellence for ME to be established under the auspices of the national health service? Does he accept that, following the massive increases in funding in the NHS that he has promised, there is no longer any financial hurdle to the establishment of such a clinic? Does he realise that, by taking such a step, Scotland could lead the world in clinical research and curative measures to defeat ME, which costs the national economy more and more with every passing year's inactivity?

I draw members' attention to my entry in the register of interests and I dissociate myself entirely from the remarks that Alasdair Morrison made. We are at the end of another debate in which members of the Government parties warmly congratulate themselves on a job well done and tell us that all will be well, as long as we leave everything to them. Sadly, that is not the case with fisheries, just as it is not the case with many other issues. Although, as our amendment suggests, the consultation paper contains much that is to be applauded, it has many holes in it—as many as  are in a poacher's net—and in some areas it is as crafty as the poacher. For example, page 5 promises: "The new Rural Stewardship Scheme offers payments to farmers and crofters to support the creation, management and protection of a number of aquatic, riparian and wetland habitats." It does not forecast that the funding that was available for the rural stewardship scheme would have to be spread so thinly that the minister would have to shift the goalposts for the scheme by removing altogether the scheme's capital spending elements, thus negating almost all the beneficial effects that it might have had on freshwater fisheries—however spurious they might have been in the first place. As Jamie McGrigor pointed out, the extraordinary statement on page 2 is far worse. It boldly declares: "the Scottish Executive's policy is not to intervene in willing buyer/willing seller arrangements." On that basis, I assume that part 3 of the Land Reform (Scotland) Bill will be withdrawn, as that part removes the willing seller concept altogether. I am well aware that the Conservative party is the only party that is opposed to part 3 of the bill. Our opposition is based on a genuine concern about the future well-being of our freshwater fisheries. In answer to Ross Finnie's intervention during Jamie McGrigor's speech, we have consistently warned that the Land Reform (Scotland) Bill will lead to—and, indeed, has already led to—the cessation of considerable inward investment by fishery owners. If that investment is to continue following the implementation of the community right to buy, it can come only from the state. Given that the Executive has chosen to fund the land reform proposals through the lottery, how can we have faith that proper investment will continue to be put into fisheries when the sum available from the Community Fund has dropped from £700 million at its peak to £270 million per annum now? I was made vividly aware of the issue last night at the multiple sclerosis reception. I was told that charities are reeling from the Government's hijacking of lottery funds for political purposes. In many ways, the fact that the public is unaware that those policies are to be funded at the expense of charitable good causes is nothing short of disingenuous. That is our principal concern. The Executive's grandiose and grandstanding position in part 3 of the Land Reform (Scotland) Bill cannot be delivered financially. The result of that will be the exact reversal of the aims set out in the green paper, which we generally support.

I have not got time; I am sorry. I turn to another aspect, which Alasdair Morgan mentioned, which relates specifically to my region of the South of Scotland: acidification of rivers and lochs. Scant attention is given to that issue in the paper and yet it is the major problem in the south-west. The submission of the West Galloway Fisheries Trust brought proper attention to the matter. The passing mention of it in the paper is not enough. Until the Executive is prepared to take a firm grip on such major issues, the paper is fine as far as it goes, but I believe that there are many in the industry who would argue that it does not go far enough. It is disingenuous to say that some of its main recommendations will require legislation, but that the time cannot be found for that legislation, as Brian Adam intimated. There is a fear that the outcome will be to remove fisheries management from local, knowledgeable hands and pass it to the centre and the Executive. If that was not so, why did the Executive reject my amendment 13 to the Salmon Conservation (Scotland) Bill, which would have made it mandatory to consult district salmon fisheries boards? We will firmly resist such a move to the centre but we are content to support the overall aims of the consultation paper, despite the differing messages that the Executive continues to give out in different pieces of legislation.

I am a member of the Rural Development Committee, as is Mr Rumbles. Does he suggest that the people who, in evidence to the committee, told us plainly that investment would dry up and that jobs would be lost were not telling the truth?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it will announce the findings of the Mouchel study on the A75 trunk road. (S1O-5064) I stress that that is Mouchel, rather than "Mouchet", as appeared in the business bulletin.

The £30 million that has been earmarked for the route action plan has yet to be detailed; the demand from Stena Sealink for an Executive commitment to improvements has yet to be addressed; and the Executive has still to reply to a letter on the issue sent in December by Dumfries and Galloway Council. Given those facts, will the minister at least clarify that any funding that is required to implement the findings of the Mouchel study will be new funding, rather than funds diverted from the costs of already proposed improvement schemes?

It was a mistake, Presiding Officer.

Seeing the difficulty that the minister has in rising from his chair, I offer him both my sympathy and the telephone number of my wife—but only because she is an accomplished physiotherapist. [Laughter.] I mean that to be a helpful offer. In terms of commercial activity, will the minister undertake to ensure that the Land Reform (Scotland) Bill will protect the interests of the Historic Houses Association, the commercial activities of which—mainly charging for access—are important ingredients in being able to maintain and preserve ancient buildings that are vital to Scotland's heritage?

Speaking from a rural perspective, I can say unequivocally that the most important parts of the motion are the plea "that public funding of enterprise programmes should be focused on infrastructure improvements" and the subsequent call "for a fundamental review of the role and functions of the enterprise network". Nowadays, infrastructure falls into two categories: the traditional infrastructure of roads, railways and public transport and the new information and communications technology infrastructure of broadband and the information superhighway. To illustrate my point, I would like to examine both those categories as they currently exist—or rather do not exist—in the south-west of Scotland. The problems with the A75, which is a recognised trans-European network route, have already been well aired in the chamber, not least during the previous debate but, sadly, to little avail.  The problems with the A77 and A76 are less well publicised but equally pressing. Those three roads represent the main arteries into and out of south-west Scotland. As long there are only tenuous rail links, commuting possibilities are unrealistic. The public transport system is rendered virtually useless by the rurality of the region, and the end result is an area from which people have to move if they cannot find work within it. That explains why Dumfries and Galloway is the only region of Scotland with a declining population, which is surely a graphic enough statistic to explain why something must be done. Despite Jim Wallace's reassurances during the 9 January debate on the Executive's priorities that the pathfinder project in the south of Scotland provides the be-all and end-all of information technology provision in rural Scotland, the information superhighway remains a dream for most individuals, businesses and employers in the south of Scotland. Why else would both the chief executive of Dumfries and Galloway Council and the chief executive of the local enterprise company agree that, unless something is urgently done to bring broadband technology to their region, it will continue to have to play catch-up with the central belt when it comes to attracting jobs into the area.

If George Lyon had been present at the previous debate, he would have heard exactly the answer to that question, so I suggest that he read the Official Report . The equation is quite simple, as people will follow good roads, and jobs will follow people. It does not matter whether those good roads are the traditional vehicular highways or the new technological superhighways; the result is the same. Of course, the Executive understands all that; why else would it include among its principal aims in the glossy document "Rural Scotland: A New Approach" the aim to "invest in our young people by bringing childcare, education, training and employment opportunities to where they live and work. Getting on need not mean going away"? That aim rings pretty hollow with the people of Dumfries and Galloway, and with most people in rural Scotland. Far from "bringing ... education ... to where they live and work", Dumfries and Galloway Council is having to consider closing 39 primary schools and three secondary schools. Far from employment opportunities being brought to the people of Dumfries and Galloway, the population is steadily declining. Access to services is so pathetic that  one young graduate who gave evidence to the Rural Development Committee last week said that he could find work up in Ayrshire but not the public transport to get there. For the community, expansion and business development are almost things of the past, as West of Scotland Water claims that its services can take no more strain and that therefore it cannot condone further developments. That is not a pretty picture. If we superimpose the effect of the Executive's legislative impositions on rural Scotland, the picture becomes even less pretty. Never mind the rights and wrongs of a ban on hunting; no matter the muddled thinking behind the land reform proposals; no matter the continued inability of the Executive to support and foster the primary products of our different regions—the result of the eventual legislation will be further deterioration in the jobs and economic prospects of rural Scotland. The Executive's answer to that mess is limply to condone the introduction of the aggregates tax on 1 April—what a suitable date! The Confederation of British Industry says that that tax is causing chaos and confusion throughout the country. Chaos, confusion and muddled thinking sums up the efforts of the Executive on rural enterprise. The time to refocus on what are very real problems is long overdue. I totally support the motion.

I hope to be very brief. I had better declare an interest. I am probably the only member who received his further education at Auchincruive. [Interruption.] I am sorry about my mobile phone, Presiding Officer. I am the proud possessor of the letters ONDA, which follow my name. I do not often use them because although NDA stands for national diploma in agriculture, sadly the O stands for ordinary. The course did not last particularly long. I hope that some members agree that one has only to look at me to recognise the quality of the education that Auchincruive provides, to which Adam Ingram referred. I congratulate Adam Ingram and John Scott on their role in introducing the issue in the Parliament. I am sure that Cathy Jamieson would have done the same if she had not been prevented from doing so by her ministerial responsibilities. Auchincruive provides a unique setting—it offers on-farm education within an estate. When I was at Auchincruive, I had had the benefit of two years away from school before going there. For a lot of the students, it was their first experience of being out of school and away from home. It is important to realise that Auchincruive offers a homely setting to its very young students, in which they can grow  up while they continue their education. We all learnt a great deal at Auchincruive—some of it was even about agriculture. It is important that that type of growing-up experience can take place in an ambience such as exists at Auchincruive. I believe that Auchincruive is unique, but I recognise that my feelings about it are entirely emotional and should not come into the argument. A number of questions have not been answered properly. Where in the overall financial structure of the SAC is the financial justification for the proposed decision? There has not been enough financial to detail to show that closing Auchincruive would provide the answer that is needed. Secondly, why has the SAC gone so far down this route without consulting the Minister for Environment and Rural Development? If the closure of Auchincruive is not a question of rural development, I am not sure that I know what is. I find it extraordinary that the SAC has not, as I understand it, provided further detail. The SAC may be losing £2.5 million a year, but surely the answer is not simply to close a unique institution. Auchincruive was gifted by John Hannah—whose grandson is, I believe, in the public gallery today—for the purpose for which it is used. Closing Auchincruive is certainly not the answer if better justification cannot be given than that which has been evidenced so far.

I am sure that, like me, Michael Matheson has met members of Disabled Ramblers. Does he agree that the only meaningful way in which to address their concerns is—as I  said in my speech—to provide a properly funded core path network, so that they, too, can have proper access to the countryside?

I, too, draw members' attention to my entry in the register of interests. I might well be in Andy Wightman's book too, but I do not know. The bill seeks to give a right of responsible access 24 hours a day to land and inland water—so straight away the Executive will be in trouble in trying to deliver section 1. Responsible access can only mean managed access, and managed access can only mean a properly funded core path network over enclosed land, as agreed by the access forums. Why, in that case, has the Scottish Executive shied away from including such a provision in the bill? The bill says only that local authorities must come up with a plan within two years. There is no clarification of who will pay for the implementation of any such plan. Estimates vary between £30 million and £300 million for the meaningful implementation of such a path network, so the inevitable truth is that the money will not come from the Executive, which sees rural Scotland as a means of grabbing maximum headlines for minimum input. The result is that the access proposals are, to be frank, nothing short of a shambles. Proposals could have been implemented with consensus, but the Executive has instead chosen the path of confrontation. The Executive has obviously not read the submission from the Cree Valley community council in Wigtownshire, a member of which rang me last week to tell me that he spends his entire life arranging access for scouts, guides and other similar groups, that he passionately believes that the status quo has the balance exactly right and that the voluntary approach achieves access without confrontation. He begs the Executive, in that official submission, to think again. The balance of section 1 of the bill is deeply flawed. The issue of liability must be re-examined  and I was encouraged when the minister said that he might reconsider it. Land managers must also be allowed to restrict access temporarily—for safety reasons, if for no other reasons. Why should sanctions against landowners be found only in the bill, whereas sanctions against access takers are found only in the accompanying code? Where is the balance in that?

I do not have time. I am sorry, because I would like to give way. We come to curtilage. How is any access taker—responsible or otherwise—to know what is and is not curtilage? Many houses have gardens that are some distance from them. People have written to me about that. The bill contains a host of anomalies that can be mapped and defined until the cows come home, but unless the access taker is aware of the definitions, it will not make a blind bit of difference. Are we now to encourage mile upon mile of signposts that say, "Curtilage—Keep Out", as householders try to cling to a semblance of privacy? What about businesses that depend on privacy to attract customers and others—businesses such as members of the Historic Houses Association in Scotland, whose vital commercial operations will be in jeopardy if the bill is left unamended? Where are their rights? During my farming life, I always took great pride in being able to tell visitors who asked whether they could walk on my land that, in Scotland, they were always free to do so as long as they did not cause wilful damage. That is a tradition that Scotland should be proud of; it is a tradition that has worked remarkably well for a long time. The bill will jeopardise good will when it does not have to. It will create tension when it does not have to and it might well place people in dangerous situations when it does not have to. The Scottish Conservative party is not against access, but it is against forced imposition of access, as envisaged in the bill.

I am sure that, during the Justice 2 Committee's evidence-taking sessions, Pauline McNeill heard—as I heard on the Rural Development Committee—that £2.8 million of investment has already been withheld. Does she not believe her witnesses?

Given the extensive time that it has taken to get to this stage, as the minister points out, is it right that the committees that were asked to look at the bill were given only three weeks to take evidence? Was that sufficient time for the committees to do justice to the task? Is there any way in which that situation could be put right?

Will the minister tell us for the benefit of all members?

I hope that the minister is already aware of the considerable scientific and medical expertise that exists throughout Scotland in this field, in the form of such eminent practitioners as Dr Vance Spence, Dr Abhijit Chaudhuri and others. Will he ensure that those experts are included in his working group in their own right and not just as representative voices of wider organisations?

Presiding Officer, please accept my apologies for the discourtesy that I displayed in not being here at the start of the debate. I extend that apology to the whole chamber. Like other members, I have little to say at this stage as nothing has changed since the stage 1 debate. This will therefore be the shortest speech I have ever made in this chamber. [MEMBERS: "Hear, hear."] As at stage 1, the Executive has not made a good case on welfare grounds. From that point of view, I am unhappy about the bill. As I said before, if there were one fur farm in Scotland, I would vote against the bill. However, as there are no fur farms—and as the Conservatives will have a free vote on the subject—I will abstain.

I am in my last few seconds, but of course I will.

I believe that what Mr Morgan says is true, but I am not absolutely convinced of the case for the abolition of fur farming. However, as there are no fur farms in Scotland at the moment, I am not prepared to oppose the bill. If there were any, I would oppose it. I have nothing further to add and will abstain in the vote.

Mr Lochhead is fond of supporting the economic miracle that is southern Ireland. Does he disagree with the Irish Government, which encourages hunting as the centre point of a successful equestrian industry?

Many members will wish to speak, so I hope not to use up my time allocation. There are so many reasons not to pass the bill that time will not permit me to address them all. The general public will be stunned that we are sitting here late to debate this subject when our  interest in health, housing, education and transport apparently ends at 5 pm. If there was ever an indication that we have warped priorities, this is it. The phrase "warped priorities" sums up the bill exactly. We seem to be hellbent on passing a bill that by no means absolves the hill packs, gamekeepers, land managers, farmers and farm tenants whose livelihoods depend on vermin control. I say to Bristow Muldoon that we seem to be intent on passing a bill that bans hare coursing and fox baiting, despite the fact that fox baiting is already illegal. I am far from certain that the bill will ban mounted fox hunting. As long as the clear intent of hunters becomes to shoot or kill by lawful means any member of a pest species that is flushed by hounds, they will be pursuing a legal activity under the bill. The bill should not be passed as it will not even properly ban its principal target—mounted hunting. As my amendment suggests, the bill does not offer adequate provision for compensation. The figure of £150,000 that Karen Gillon mentioned is nothing short of pathetic. It may be the price of the Liberal Democrat vote, but it is still nothing short of pathetic. Without that provision, the possibility of a robust challenge under the European convention on human rights is inevitable. Those who will lose their jobs and houses—if they are to do so—will have had little understanding of the niceties of the Executive-led amendment in Karen Gillon's name. The amendment would have compensated a few landowners, but would have done nothing for the honest, hard-working—I did not use the phrase "working class"—and decent law-abiding people who will be most affected by this hopeless bill. I urge members to have regard to the good name of the Parliament. If we pass the bill tonight, we will be passing a bill that is so badly put together and so unclear as to intention that it will be challenged in every court in this land and probably in Europe as well. Are we really in the business of giving the legal profession a more secure future than they already enjoy? I have always said that if Lord Watson's bill had simply declared that it would ban mounted fox hunting and hare coursing it would have been passed 18 months ago without any difficulty, but it was not that simple. If it was a mess of a bill at stage 1 it remained one throughout stage 2, despite the best endeavours of the Rural Development Committee to narrow it down to address the will of this Parliament as stated in the stage 1 debate. If the committee did not succeed in doing that, the weakness is with the bill, not with the committee. I think that the bill remains a mess, despite the  107 amendments that have been debated today. If members wish to be responsible for the Parliament putting its name to an unworkable mess, they should go ahead and vote for Bristow Muldoon's motion. I have to say that if Bristow Muldoon and all the other members who spoke on his side of the argument today had come and argued their corner at the Rural Development Committee, I might have had a deal more sympathy with them, but I am afraid that they did not do so and I have little sympathy with them. None of the members who put their names to any of the last-minute amendments had the decency to do so. They are guilty of playing political games with people's livelihoods and they are in danger of dragging the name of this Parliament into the mire of unworkable and unenforceable legislation, of which this bill is a prime example. I appeal to every member in the chamber—never mind about the toffs and never even mind about the Tories—to do this Parliament the best favour they possibly can and prove to an ever more sceptical public that we MSPs can make a sensible and right decision. Support my amendment and drop the bill. I move amendment S1M-2726.1, to leave out from "agrees" to end and insert: "does not agree that the Protection of Wild Mammals (Scotland) Bill be passed because the compensation provisions are inadequate."

I hope that you can hear me all right, Presiding Officer. During the recent debate on the Fur Farming (Prohibition) (Scotland) Bill, two weeks ago, I drew the Parliament's attention to the mean-mindedness of the Executive in offering compensation in that bill when none would be sought and refusing it in the Protection of Wild Mammals (Scotland) Bill although real and devastating loss will be felt by hundreds of real  and devastated people. Those people are not the so-called toffs, against whom I understand that this bill is aimed, but real, down-to-earth, honest-to-goodness working people. Naive and innocent politician that I am, I had reckoned without an unseen and previously unheralded arm of the Scottish Executive—certainly unseen at the Rural Development Committee for the past two years—in the shape of Karen Gillon, who suddenly, belatedly and with what I think is called the technical assistance of the Executive, whacked in an amendment, more or less at the last minute. I believe, as do most members, that amendment 84 is an Executive amendment in all but name. Even if it is not, it seems to have received the blessing of the First Minister, which as good as makes it an Executive amendment.  I suppose we are meant to applaud amendment 84's effort to address the subject of compensation, but I cannot do so. Close inspection of amendment 84 shows beyond a doubt that only those who cease to carry on an activity under section 1 that was carried on before, and ended because of, the enactment of section 1 could apply for compensation. Under amendment 84, therefore, only a landowner or the master of hounds—as far as I can see—would be able to apply for compensation. In addition, amendment 84 states only that such an application "may" receive attention from the minister. How would amendment 84 compensate Wendy Turnbull—a groom from the Borders—who chooses her low-paid way of life out of love for her job and for the house that goes with it? How would they compensate Paul Allison—a self-employed farrier whom many members will have met—who depends on hunters for 60 per cent of his business every year? How would amendment 84 compensate Ian Forsyth, who is a haulier whose business is irrevocably bound up with the world of mounted fox hunting? How would it compensate anyone, other than the couple of toffs against whom the bill is apparently aimed? The simple answer is that amendment 84 would not compensate anyone, because the Executive and those who support Karen Gillon's unamended amendment 84 do not want it to. Amendment 84 is nothing less than a thinly veiled attempt to pay lip service to compensation. Frankly, it is not worth the paper on which it is written. The only meaningful way to put a compensation package into the bill is to support amendment 33. It is interesting that amendment 33 has also had the technical assistance of the Executive, because—except for a minor change of wording—it provides for exactly the same  compensatory package as the Executive put into the Fur Farming (Prohibition) (Scotland) Bill. If the wording of amendment 33 was good enough for that bill, surely it is good enough for the Protection of Wild Mammals (Scotland) Bill. I argue that amendment 33 is an Executive amendment. It offers meaningful compensation, which a bill that removes a person's right to earn a living surely has a moral obligation to offer. I beg members to support amendment 33, which is the only amendment that is meaningful and worthy of support.

Amendment 100 aims to provide an important degree of flexibility so that orphaned fox cubs can be dispatched as quickly as possible. To deny a gamekeeper or any other pest control operative the right to finish off an unpleasant task as quickly as possible would increase cruelty—a subject that Mike Watson once declared to be the central point of the bill—and would force the operative to act in a way that was against his or her nature. I have often said that there is no pleasant or nice way to die. Let us ensure that orphaned cubs get as quick and humane a death as possible by supporting amendment 68.

The lack of time perhaps explains our opposition to the timetabling motion. Amendment 63 is vital for animal welfare—as, indeed, is the whole of section 1F. My arguments in support of amendment 55 apply also to amendment 63. I do not need to rehearse them again. Indeed, as half the chamber seems to be leaving, there is not much point. The argument is simple. There are occasions when the use of more than one dog provides the quickest and most efficient means of dispatching a verminous animal. To deny that fact is to deny the reality of pest control as it operates in Scotland today. In its stage 1 report, the Rural Development Committee agreed unanimously that "The principle of this Bill is focussed on the use of dogs which, while well intentioned, misses the point that dogs can be used in both a cruel and a humane way." Voting against amendment 63 and deleting section 1F would prevent dogs from being used humanely. There is a saying that goes, "You sometimes have  to be cruel to be kind." This is not one of those instances; this is about the humane dispatch of recognised vermin. I urge members to ensure the continuance of humane dispatch by accepting amendment 63 and so ensuring, crucially, that section 1F remains in the bill. I move amendment 63.

On line 10 of page 2, the bill seeks to ensure that when a wild mammal of a recognised pest species is flushed from its cover above or below ground, it is shot as soon as possible. That is a reasonable and sensible provision. However, there are many situations in which shooting is unsafe and others in which it is downright dangerous. Those include situations in which the animal is in or near buildings, near livestock, on roads and pathways and in plantations in which visibility is restricted. In such circumstances it is vital for the sake of animal welfare that more than one dog can be used to track, flush and dispatch recognised pests or vermin. Amendment 55 would allow for that. Agreement to amendment 56 would be an absolute disaster. It would show a lack of understanding of how pest control is carried out with dogs in rural Scotland. Pest control protects people and livestock; without it, life for many farmers, land managers and gamekeepers would become almost impossible. I move amendment 55.

Presiding Officer, you will be pleased to hear that I will be extremely brief. Amendments 8, 9 and 10 are designed solely to tighten up the drafting of section 1A to ensure that legitimate vermin control, which the Parliament has consistently said it does not wish to alter—though I fear for its future after the previous debate—can continue without the risk of malicious prosecutions. That will protect the hill packs and the gamekeepers. The bill shows a considerable lack of sympathy with, and understanding of, pest control activities as they are carried out on the ground or the practical considerations of those who carry out those perfectly legitimate activities. Amendments 8, 9 and 10 do not seek to alter the substance of section 1A, but will give added protection to those people who are engaged in pest control activities which, I repeat, the Parliament stated at stage 1 it wished to exempt. Amendments 40, 49 and 50 would similarly tighten up the wording of the bill, and would provide similar protection to those who undertake perfectly legitimate activities. I move amendment 8.

As Fergus Ewing made clear, and as I tried to explain, the amendments are not intended to dilute anything. They are designed to tighten up the wording of the bill. It is sad that no one listened to what Fergus Ewing or I said. If they had done so, they might have realised what the amendments are about. There is nothing more to be said. Fergus Ewing said it very well and I said it more briefly but—I think—equally well. The minister has announced his intention to support amendment 8 and—I think—to support amendments 49 and 50. I commend the amendments to the chamber. For the sake of keeping to time, I have nothing further to add other than recommending to members that they listen to the Executive on this issue.

I will be very brief. I point out to Elaine Smith that if an amendment was not accepted by the committee, it is because it failed to gain majority support—I have a funny feeling that that is called democracy. I support strongly the position taken by John Swinney and Fergus Ewing. If the situation in relation to mounted fox hunting is not clear, amendment 94 will help to address it. It has been made obvious by the august and respected bodies that have been mentioned that amendment 94 is essential to their future survival. I urge members to agree to amendment 94.

Is not amendment 93 consequential to the minister's amendment 39, which he has not moved? Given the Executive's position on that, I do not intend to move amendments 93 and 95 to 97.  Amendment 93 not moved.

I have no comment to make on the other amendments in the group. I will keep my remarks on amendment 18 brief. The amendment seeks to make an insertion at section 5 on proceedings and penalties. It is a simple amendment, which is self-explanatory and requires little to be said about it. Amendment 18 will ensure that innocent landowners are not prosecuted during the course of proceedings under the legislation. The whole chamber could agree that it would be wholly unfair for a landowner—let us not forget that the Scottish Executive is a landowner, as is the National Trust for Scotland—to be prosecuted in connection with an offence that a tenant committed by allowing the tenanted land to be used for hunting or coursing. If amendment 18 is not accepted, landowners could be placed in the impossible, and surely undesirable, position of having to police their tenants in a rather unsatisfactory manner, and indeed of having to prove that they themselves did not knowingly permit an offence to take place. That reverses the normal burden of proof, which is surely not the intention of the bill.

Will the member give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I am quite aware that as convener of the Rural Development Committee, and as an MSP, I am open to criticism for my actions. However, given that Miss Marwick, I assume, does not know which amendments were or were not refused by me at stage 2, is it right that aspersions should be cast on the clerks of the Rural Development Committee, on whose advice the convener relied? That is what Tricia Marwick is doing.

It is accepted that a number of people will lose their jobs if the Protection of Wild Mammals (Scotland) Bill is passed as it stands at present. Does the member accept that the legal niceties to which he referred will mean very little to those who will, it appears, receive no compensation when they lose their jobs?

Some months ago, I received an elaborate and expensively produced form from the Inland Revenue. Having got over the slight palpitations that such forms inevitably produce, I was reduced to a state of sheer incredulity when I discovered that it was a demand—complete with a tear-off slip that was to be returned, I was informed, without the aid of paper clips or other enclosures—for a cheque for the princely sum of £0.00. I cannot think of a much better example of over-elaborate Government machinery being swung  into action to achieve an end result of absolutely nothing. Today's debate on the Fur Farming (Prohibition) (Scotland) Bill is another fine example of that. A full Government bill, with all the weight of a parliamentary committee report behind it, has been introduced to ban an activity that does not even exist in Scotland. As the minister pointed out, there have been no fur farms in Scotland since 1993.

I welcome the fact that Elaine Smith has been restored to full health—we have not seen her in the chamber for some time. I totally understand the reasons why the bill was introduced and I will deal with them presently. There are two reasons why there have been no fur farms in Scotland since 1993: first, the economic circumstances for their successful continuation did not exist; and, secondly, public opinion—reinforced rather too often by illegal action—was firmly against them. The Conservatives would prefer that to remain the case and believe that market and social forces should be the factors that govern whether fur farms exist. We are not entirely persuaded by the Executive's arguments that the legislation is necessary. The matter would have been more simply dealt with by means of a Sewel motion, which would have been entirely acceptable in this instance and would have allowed us to debate something more meaningful today.

I am delighted to hear the minister agreeing with that. We are not persuaded that the arguments on welfare or moral grounds stack up in any overwhelming way. It is generally accepted by anyone other than the most prejudiced that if animals are not cared for in a welfare-friendly way, they will not produce the required product. That is every bit as true for animals farmed for their fur as it is for animals farmed for meat, wool or milk—there is no distinction. I suspect that even the Scottish Executive would agree with that. Therefore, the argument becomes a moral one. It seems to me that the Executive is indulging in cherry picking. It appears to be saying, "Okay, even though there is no fur farming, we'll ban it because we don't like it, but we're quite happy for other countries, even EU countries, to carry on with what we believe to be a morally outrageous practice." I have genuine difficulty in accepting the  justification for a ban on moral grounds and find myself agreeing—not for the first time—with the Labour peer, Baroness Mallalieu, who said: "Ultimately, what is the moral difference between rearing an animal to eat it or to wear it? Mr Morley says that there is one, but to the animal there is none."—[ Official Report , House of Lords , 19 July 2000; Vol 615, c 1138.] I cannot accept a welfare need for the bill and I have difficulty accepting a moral need for it. It is surely worth noting that, in Denmark—a country that I understand to be perfectly moral and welfare-friendly—fur is the third largest agricultural export and provides considerable rural employment. European fur farms provide a market for 365,000 tonnes of fish by-product, much of which comes from Scotland. As always, I like to give the Scottish Executive credit where it is due and I compliment it warmly on its generous agreement to compensate the non-existent Scottish fur farmers for the loss of their non-existent businesses. What magnanimity the Executive is able to show when the bill that it will receive for compensation will be exactly the same as my recent income tax demand—absolutely nothing. That is in sad contrast to the mean-minded decision of the Executive to oppose an amendment to the Protection of Wild Mammals (Scotland) Bill that would have compensated those who will lose their jobs and houses as a direct result of that bill's being passed. What is the difference? It is simple: no one in rural Scotland will be directly affected by banning non-existent fur farms; many in rural Scotland will be affected by the Protection of Wild Mammals (Scotland) Bill. Real people will lose their income and accommodation, but they, apparently, neither need nor deserve compensation. The Fur Farming (Prohibition) (Scotland) Bill is a typically unnecessary piece of banning legislation. "If we don't like it, we'll ban it," seems to be the motto of the Executive. The Conservative party does not think that the Executive has presented its case for the bill with any degree of conviction. Had even one fur farm still been operating in Scotland, the Conservatives would have opposed the bill, but the truth is that there is no such fur farm. Therefore, I will abstain at this stage of the bill's consideration and will neither oppose nor support the bill, because I consider it to be unnecessary on welfare and moral grounds and because the result of the bill could and should have been achieved by a Sewel motion.

Now that I have milked the praise of every member of Parliament for securing the debate, I have to point out that the motion was lodged in the name of the cross-party group and on behalf of ME sufferers throughout the country. It has nothing to do with me; it is the work of that group.

I will do my best to overcome the background noise. Diseases whose main symptom is disabling fatigue have been around for hundreds of years. Indeed, there is evidence that both Florence Nightingale and Charles Darwin suffered from such a condition. It was not until the 1950s that the term myalgic encephalomyelitis began to be used for a specific syndrome. Some did not like the term ME and preferred to call the condition post-viral fatigue syndrome. In 1998, the two names were subsumed under the official designation chronic fatigue syndrome, or CFS. The names post-viral fatigue syndrome and chronic fatigue syndrome have caused untold damage. In the eyes of a sceptical general public, any name that involves the word "fatigue" simply translates to mean "I am tired." Phrases such as yuppie flu became commonplace. Some even referred to ME as an acronym for malingerer's excuse. In turn, that led to a general scepticism about a condition that was and is increasing at a rate that is so alarming that we should be greatly concerned. In April 1994, UNUM—one of the largest disability insurers in the United States of America—reported that, from 1989 to 1993, claims for disability due to CFS for men increased by 360 per cent and claims for women increased by a staggering 557 per cent. No other disease category surpassed those rates of increase. In Australia, researchers found that patients with the disorder have more dysfunction than patients  with multiple sclerosis; that the degree of impairment is more extreme than in end-stage renal and heart disease; and that only in terminally ill cancer and stroke patients is the sickness impact profile greater than it is with ME. In America, research found that chronic fatigue and immune dysfunction syndrome—as ME is sometimes known there—particularly and uniquely disrupts the quality of life. All sufferers related profound and multiple losses—including loss of job, loss of relationship, loss of financial security and loss of future plans, daily routines, hobbies, stamina and spontaneity. Any of us in the chamber who has met constituents with ME will acknowledge the dreadful truth of that statement. To that list, I would add the loss of one's house. Some sufferers' houses are repossessed because they are refused access to the benefits to which they should, in any truly caring society, have almost automatic access on being diagnosed. Other members will speak about this aspect of the disease, but I cannot stress enough how important it is to re-educate—if members will forgive the term—those who assess ME sufferers when they apply for benefits. It is not enough to say that benefits are a reserved issue. The assessors are appointed by the Scottish Executive. The Executive can and must take immediate action in that field. Further research has unveiled the intolerable facts that 77 per cent of sufferers experience acute pain; 80 per cent feel suicidal at some stage as a result of their illness; 70 per cent are either never able to, or are often too unwell to, attend general practitioners' clinics; 65 per cent have received no advice from their GP; and 80 per cent of sufferers who are currently bedridden have been refused a home visit. In the face of all those facts, the public remain sceptical and the medical establishment has, until now, considered the problem to be, in essence, a psychiatric one that can be dealt with by a solid dose of cognitive behavioural therapy with, possibly, a dash of graded exercise thrown in for good measure. Nowhere is that line of thinking more obvious, and sometimes more damaging, than when we consider the growing number of cases of children with ME. Here I must declare an interest. My youngest son Christopher, aged 15, having shown signs of a lack of energy for some years, especially when something extra occurred on top of his normal routine, virtually collapsed on 29 December 2000. He became acutely light-sensitive; his sleep pattern altered alarmingly; his physical energy almost disappeared; and his mental energy did disappear. This was a boy who loved school, who was doing very well academically and who, two summers ago, was on the verge of playing cricket for Scotland at under-  15 level. Today, he would have trouble holding a bat aloft for more than a few seconds and although he might manage to walk the length of a cricket pitch, he certainly could not run it. Medical opinion suggested that we give it six months to see whether the condition would clear up and also suggested a visit to the psychiatrist. Those are two phrases with which people in the public gallery who suffer will be all too familiar. [ Applause. ]

I thank you for your tolerance, Presiding Officer. Fortunately, we were put in touch with a remarkable doctor—Dr Nigel Speight in Durham—who has long fought the causes of children with ME against strong opposition from within the NHS. He instantly diagnosed Chris as a classic case of ME, allowing us to react accordingly. My wife and I consider ourselves lucky. We have the resources and the back-up to allow us to follow up contacts and leads that may help our son to recover, but there are hundreds and possibly thousands of parents out there who are much less fortunate than we are. I draw members' attention to a recent case involving a child with ME who was forcibly removed from home by social workers, who arrived unannounced and accompanied by police officers, and took the child into care. Children can be and are being forced into totally unsuitable psychiatric treatment, which can be the worst possible treatment for their condition. Therein lies the crux of the problem. In some cases, such treatment works—different cures help different cases in adults and children. However, confusion and argument exist where there desperately needs to be harmony and agreement. Great work is being done in the field of ME by very few people, and I specifically mention Dr David Mason Brown, Dr Vance Spence, Dr Darrel Ho-Yen and Dr Abhijit Chaudhuri. Those doctors have been a great help to the cross-party group in the Parliament on ME. I also mention the work on ME in young people that is being carried out by the Tymes Trust. Others are doing research despite the desperate difficulty of acquiring funding for such research. That is the point of the motion. I should say also that the motion has taken on a whole new relevance since the publication two weeks ago of the report of the chief medical officer in England. I  believe that Scotland can and should take the lead on the issue. We have the expertise; we certainly have the patience. We now need only the political will to bring everything together. The best—and I would suggest the only—way to accomplish that is for the Scottish Executive to establish a centre of excellence for research into the causes of and cures for ME. If I may say so, the cost would be a fraction of the cost of establishing a football tournament in Scotland, which we have just been talking about. Even the most willing GP—and they are growing in number all the time—needs a simple diagnostic test for ME and other related syndromes. Such tests do exist, but they need the official recognition for which the CMO's report calls. The brave people in the gallery tonight, nearly all of whom are sufferers, deserve no less. They have put up with far too much, or perhaps I should say too little, for far too long, to receive any less. I am proud to debate the motion tonight.

Will the minister agree to consider in a new review of less favoured area support the drift of such support away from the south of Scotland, which has been brought about by the change from headage to acreage-based payments? Does he agree that that drift is only exacerbated by the late payments of integrated administration and control system support and farm woodland premium scheme support this year, some of which are over three months late and for which his department is entirely responsible?

I think that the correct words are "formally moved", Presiding Officer.  Motion moved,  That the Parliament calls on the Scottish Executive to instigate a full open public inquiry, either under its aegis or preferably as a distinct part of a full UK inquiry, into the impact of, preparations for and handling of the foot-and-mouth disease outbreak in Scotland, and the economic recovery measures put in place by the Executive and Her Majesty's Government, in order to ensure that lessons are learnt about the appropriate response to any future outbreak.— [Alex Fergusson.]

Will the Deputy First Minister give way?

I draw members' attention to my entry in the register of interests because I want to concentrate on the Scottish Executive's priorities from a rural  perspective. Despite George Lyon's almost unbelievably complacent assertions, rural Scotland is currently in a state almost of shock. Its traditional industries are under enormous simultaneous pressures. The agricultural industry, which for so long has been the mainstay of the rural economy, was already devastated by BSE. It has now been decimated by foot-and-mouth disease. The tourism industry, which was already showing a worrying decline in rural Scotland, has been hammered by that same disease. The forestry industry, which is increasing its output every year as it approaches what will be its peak production in about 15 years' time, is facing its lowest ever returns. And I need remind no one in this chamber that the fishing industry is under immense pressures, with serious consequences for jobs onshore and offshore. In other words, the four traditional pillars of the rural economy—farming, fishing, forestry and tourism—are rapidly crumbling. They will need assistance as they have never done before if they are to continue, as I believe they must, as the bedrock industries of the rural economy. Over the years, the Executive has produced expansive, expensive and extensive strategy documents for each of those industries. Normally, those documents contain a set of aspirations and objectives with which it is difficult to disagree. I would cite "A Forward Strategy for Scottish Agriculture" as an example. However, I know of no one who is involved in any of those industries who genuinely believes that they feature among the Executive's top priorities. It is not difficult to see why when we study the Executive's record of trying to do something. Let us consider the recently introduced rural stewardship scheme—

Certainly.

The short answer is no. I do not agree with that. The benefits that have been accrued ever since the Fontainebleu agreement are well known and amount to considerably more than would have been to the benefit to any of those industries in the meantime. The rural stewardship scheme was introduced with a great flourish on 14 December 2000 but was launched in virtual secrecy, three months after the promised date, on 17 December 2001, in a form that was barely recognisable as the original. Any benefit to the wider rural economy  had been summarily removed from the scheme. That is but one example of the Executive's fine aspirations and promises being backed up by muddle and confusion. The last two and a half years have been littered with similar examples.

I invite Helen Eadie to the part of the world where I live, the south-west of Scotland, or even to the Borders and most other parts of rural Scotland, where she will find that an integrated transport strategy does not exactly excite the locals because it does not exist. How can rural Scotland feel that its needs are being prioritised by an Executive that refuses to realise that one cannot replace the car as the only practical method of transport in rural areas and that appears unable to accept that it costs more to deliver education in rural villages, thus forcing local authorities to consider closing schools in many such villages? The Executive makes brave noises about the new industries leading the way in rural Scotland, but does virtually nothing to help roll out the information technology infrastructure that would allow rural Scotland to compete for those industries on a level playing field with the central belt. How can rural Scotland feel that its needs are being prioritised by an Executive that appoints as its Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport an MSP who is regarded by many as the scourge of rural Scotland and who appears to believe that the answers to the problems of rural Scotland lie in the Land Reform (Scotland) Bill, which has been only half thought through?

I am sorry, but I am in the final minute of my speech. The Land Reform (Scotland) Bill is confrontational in the extreme, although it need not be. In parts it is more akin to social engineering than genuine land reform. It is policy made on the hoof to be delivered on the cheap and worry about the consequences later. How can rural Scotland feel that its needs are being prioritised when it does not even feature in the Executive motion? It took Rhona Brankin's—rather cheeky, if I may say so—planted intervention to try to put that right.

The tragic message that rural Scotland will take from today's debate is that, as far as the Scottish Executive is concerned, despite the First Minister's belated assurances, rural Scotland does not matter.

Does the First Minister agree that the attempt by the Scottish Executive, through Scottish Enterprise Dumfries and Galloway, to reinvigorate and improve the rural economy of that region post-foot-and-mouth, by giving businesses access to interest-free loans of £5,000, displayed absolutely none of the flexibility and innovation for which members from all sides of the chamber asked? Given the continued parlous state of the economy of that region, will the First Minister ask the Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning to explore fully the possibility of turning those loans into grants, so that true economic improvement can take place in the region?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I regret to say that I have two short points of order. First, I wonder whether you can offer me guidance on whether you have received any intimation of which member of the Parliament will be speaking for the Protection of Wild Mammals (Scotland) Bill at stage 3. Secondly—and this is slightly connected—will you confirm the view of The Scotsman newspaper yesterday, which stated that it would be highly unusual for an amendment that had been rejected at stage 2 to be resubmitted and accepted for debate at stage 3?

Is the minister aware that the Executive owns considerable areas of land in Dumfries and Galloway as a result of the customary foresight of the previous Conservative Government, which purchased the land for its continued road improvement programme, which it would have undertaken had it had the chance? Will the minister audit that land with the aim of reviewing the Executive's road improvement programme to find out whether the programme could be hastened by first developing the land that the Executive owns?

In any review of the Executive's spending priorities, will the First Minister take into account Stena Sealink's recent decision to drop one ferry from its Stranraer to Belfast route, with a loss of 92 badly needed jobs? Should that company consider relocating outside Stranraer? Will the First Minister  ask the Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning to announce a significant upgrading of the A75 and the A77 to ensure that company's future at the Loch Ryan ferry port—if she can find the time?

I take part in the debate with great personal pleasure. That is partly because, as I am now on the wrong side of 50, I am keen to ensure that as much as possible is free for the elderly. It is also partly because it gives me an opportunity to warmly welcome the minister and his deputies to their new posts. They will not need me to remind them of the importance of their task. I am sure that all members wish them well for the future. I take part in the debate with pleasure particularly because, however hard Nicola Sturgeon may find it to accept, I have always been uncomfortable with the notion that, if someone works hard all their life, saves what they can, perhaps manages to buy their own home and to put something aside to leave to their family, all their efforts may be negated should they be unfortunate enough to be in need of long-term care in their old age. That becomes all the more perverse when we realise that someone who has been profligate all their life, never saved a penny or even thought about retirement has their long-term care costs met in full by the state. That seems to me to be utterly wrong. In effect, hard work is being penalised and profligacy is being rewarded. That completely undermines the ethic of personal responsibility on which any free society rests and, in reality, provides people with a huge disincentive to make sensible provision for their future. I was delighted when we as a party accepted the principle proposed by the Sutherland commission that personal care—let us be clear that we are talking about the cost of personal care only, not the hotel costs of board and lodging—should be provided free at the point of delivery by the NHS. That is right and proper and the Scottish Conservative party will play its full part in bringing  it about. I will spend a short time on annexe B of the Health and Community Care Committee's report. My point concerns an item of supplementary written evidence from Age Concern Scotland that concentrates on the vexed question of notional capital—a suggestive and condemnatory phrase—which determines whether someone has disposed of capital specifically to avoid any charges for their care. The case studies that are listed by Age Concern Scotland—no doubt most members have been made aware of similar cases in our regions and constituencies—show that the concept of notional capital has led to appalling cases of apparent injustice that take a considerable time to solve and undoubtedly cause a great deal of added stress to someone who is already ill. In our view, that is an untenable situation that I hope can be corrected during the passage of the bill. The south of Scotland region, which I represent, and the region of Dumfries and Galloway, in which I am lucky enough to live, have a very high age profile. There is a disproportionate number of the elderly in those regions. I suspect that that situation applies to rural Scotland in general. Many people choose, after all, to retire to the country for the peace and tranquillity that the countryside offers. The bill is of great importance to rural Scotland. Rumours have circulated from time to time that the provision of free care for the elderly will somehow bring hordes of pensioners from south of the border to live in the sort of free-care havens that might be offered in rural Scotland. We utterly reject that theory. If teachers have not been tempted north by the McCrone settlement—and evidence shows categorically that they have not—there is no reason to suggest that pensioners would be similarly tempted to live in a part of the United Kingdom with which they are unfamiliar and in which they would, therefore, feel somewhat uncomfortable. We greatly welcome the provision of free personal and nursing care, but we have always made it clear that that should be looked upon as a solution for the short to medium term only. Much more work needs to be done to find the best long-term solution, which should encourage people to make more provision for themselves in a way that would benefit the thrifty without rewarding the profligate. Such a solution might well include encouraging people to make provision during their working lives not only for their pensions but for care costs. For that to succeed, assets that people build up during their working lives must be protected. People need incentives; they respond to them. Without incentives, people will not bother to make provision for care. Forcing people to sell their  assets to pay for care is no incentive, so the current situation must be addressed. I look forward to following the passage of this bill through Parliament, and I warmly welcome its publication.

I hope that the member will accept that no one has questioned the minister's actions. We want to know whether a minister could be better informed in the event of another outbreak, which is how we could successfully defeat it.

For that very reason, Mr Lyon, and bearing it in mind that the Labour Government set up the Phillips inquiry, can you think of any justifiable reason why the Labour Government should not set up an open public inquiry into foot-and-mouth disease?

I will take that as a no.

I warmly welcome the RSE's inquiry and hope that it is successful. However, does the member accept that that inquiry is constrained by budget, as the RSE admitted?

The minister was right to say that there is little that divides us on most of the issues. Does he accept that, unless the inquiries to which he refers are held with open doors and are completely accountable to the press and other agencies, there will always be a question mark among the people who have been most affected by the disaster?

I begin by drawing members' attention to my entry in the register of interests—an entry that to some extent hides the fact that I am no longer involved in active or day-to-day farming. That is something for which I have been profoundly grateful over the past eight months, during which Scotland's farming industry in particular, and its rural economy in general, have been devastated by foot-and-mouth disease. When it was announced on 20 February that the disease had been discovered in an abattoir in Essex, we all had a glimmer of hope that we in Scotland would be unaffected. However, as soon as the link to Longtown market was established, the introduction of the virus to Scotland became a sure-fire certainty. That was confirmed on 1 March, when the first cases were discovered in Lockerbie and Canonbie in Dumfriesshire. From there on, the statistics tell some of the story: 187 confirmed cases in Dumfries and Galloway and the Borders affected 1,493 separate farm premises, and 746,479 head of stock were destroyed, burned or buried, comprising 6 per cent of Scotland's beef herd, 12 per cent of its dairy herd, more than 7 per cent of the national sheep flock and 0.5 per cent of Scotland's pig herd. Many of those animals did not have foot-and-mouth disease and were sacrificed with great dignity for the greater good of pinning down and eradicating the virus. The sheer scale of those figures alone surely justifies today's debate. It is the easiest thing in the world for Opposition politicians to jump up and down and call for a public inquiry into every disaster—major or minor—that occurs. However, I sincerely believe that there is an incontrovertible need for just such an inquiry in this instance, preferably on a UK basis, but failing that, as the motion suggests, in  Scotland alone. The Trading Standards Institute also believes in the need for an inquiry, as do the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons, the National Farmers Union, Advocates for Animals and virtually every organisation with any involvement in rural Britain. There is no need—in Scotland at any rate—for such an inquiry to seek to lay blame or to make accusations. However, I believe strongly that, if we are ever to learn the lessons that must have been learned when the next epidemic of foot-and-mouth disease reaches our shores, there is a crucial need to identify where things could have been done better and whether assistance could have been delivered more effectively. I am sure that the authors of the Northumberland report thought the same in 1968, when they drew up a list of recommendations based on the 1967 outbreak. We need to update that in the light of this year's epidemic and ensure that, unlike the Northumberland report, our report does not lie on a shelf, being studiously ignored until well over halfway into the disaster. We need a concise 10-point or 12-point action plan, to be reread and updated annually, so that we are ready for action next time and do not have to play catch-up. One of the first questions that we have to answer is where the virus originated. Despite the accusatory finger of Government being pointed at Heddon-on-the-Wall, conclusive evidence has not yet been produced to nail that theory down and rumours persist of the disease having been present in sheep some weeks prior to 20 February, of Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food inquiries about the availability of timber and coal stocks, and of a phial of pan-Asian O virus missing from Porton Down. Until conclusive evidence is produced openly to indicate otherwise, those conspiracy theories will not go away. Surely the first action point to minimise the risk of a future outbreak is to pinpoint the source of this one. I accept that hindsight is a great thing, but we need to ascertain whether preparations in Scotland were sufficient to minimise the spread of the disease. As I have said previously in the chamber, if the manpower resources that were involved at the end of the outbreak had been available from the start, I suspect that the disease could have been contained even more tightly than it was. Was the eight-day warning period in Scotland, between the first discovery in Essex and our first case in Lockerbie, used to the fullest effect? Was too much left to and expected of Dumfries and Galloway Council in the early days of the epidemic, despite the justifiable praise that the council has received for its reactions at the time? After the 3km-firebreak cull was announced on 15  March, did it have to take almost a fortnight before the cull started? That meant that the 3km culls had to cover a vastly greater area than they would have had to if the policy was implemented straight away. What happened following the postponement of the general election that suddenly led to most suspect cases being culled through slaughter on suspicion? That criterion did not trigger the 3km cull until a positive blood test was returned, when previously almost every suspect case was culled under the clinical confirmation criterion, which instantly triggered a 3km cull without the need for a positive blood test. Why did almost 80 per cent of the blood tests done in Dumfries and Galloway return negative? That fact left many farmers wondering whether their animals had foot-and-mouth disease at all. Of course, it was not just farmers who were affected. The tourist industry, at a time when its income should have been beginning to flow, had its livelihood taken away just as surely as did any farmer whose stock had been culled. Everyone in the chamber would agree that we have learned that, in rural Scotland and the rural economy, farming, tourism and community economics—by which I mean the prosperity of the local shop, pub and post office, which are at the centre of village life—are inextricably bound together. Those non-farming but nevertheless equally devastated businesses must have been encouraged by the First Minister's answer to a question from John Swinney on 22 March. The First Minister said: "We are working on every front. Over the next few weeks, we hope to be able to develop consequential compensation."— [ Official Report , 22 March 2001; Vol 8, c 877.]  That hope was well and truly dashed, because that was the last time that the First Minister or any other minister mentioned the words "consequential compensation". There have been too many businesses and self-employed individuals whose livelihoods have been dashed along with the First Minister's hope. I do not doubt for a minute that £25-odd million has left the Executive's coffers in an effort to alleviate hardship. However, a long hard look must be taken at that money's effectiveness. As I have before, I assure the Executive that very little of that £25 million has reached the individuals and businesses that needed it. Serious questions need to be asked about the best method of delivery of such aid. What use is an information technology training grant to the self-employed molecatcher in Kirkcudbright who could not earn a penny for four months and was not able to receive any benefits because he had some modest savings? A £5,000 interest-free loan is of little use to small rural  businesses coming out of the winter months when their financial borrowing requirements are already at their maximum limit. A lack of flexibility has been displayed and I am sorry to say that a great deal of the Executive's money has been wasted. We must consider the measures that have been put in place and those that are suggested for the future. The 21-day rule prevents for 21 days any movement from a farm on to which stock has been brought. That rule is strangling the recovery of the industry and could surely be applied only to purchased stock, which could be kept in isolation and carefully monitored. I do not altogether agree with the arguments that are being made against the live auction market system. We should not forget that, although the markets provided the conduit for the spread of the disease, they did not cause it and so should not become the scapegoats for it. It is bad enough that they are still owed hundreds of thousands of pounds by the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs for the exhaustive evaluations that they carried out, without which no cull could have proceeded. That is a disgrace. I hope that the minister will take this opportunity to make it clear to members that he will have nothing to do with any Scottish version of the Animal Health Bill that has been introduced in England and Wales. That bill will effectively remove an individual's right to appeal against a Government decision to cull a farmer's stock, for example. Despite the fact that such an appeal might delay that one cull, the right of appeal is one of the most basic rights in any democracy and any erosion of that right is to be abhorred. There are myriad other issues that time does not allow me to address, including research into vaccination and the size of the state veterinary service. My colleagues will expand on some of those points as the debate progresses. As I have said, it is easy to ask for a public inquiry. In this instance, however, for all the reasons that I have outlined, and perhaps most of all so that those farmers, businessmen and individuals who have seen their life's work destroyed before their eyes can be satisfied that their sacrifice will lead to a better understanding of a future outbreak, I believe that a call for such an inquiry is totally justified. I move, That the Parliament calls on the Scottish Executive to instigate a full open public inquiry, either under its aegis or preferably as a distinct part of a full UK inquiry, into the impact of, preparations for and handling of the foot-and-mouth disease outbreak in Scotland, and the economic recovery measures put in place by the Executive and Her Majesty's Government, in order to ensure that lessons are learnt about the appropriate response to any future outbreak.

I attended two seminars at Scotland week in Brussels.

Yes, I did. One seminar was on fisheries and was attended by a large number of delegates from other European member states. The second seminar was on the future strategy for Scottish agriculture, which the chamber recently endorsed.

I could not help but notice that every delegate, bar two speakers, came from Scotland. We could have held the same seminar in Edinburgh at considerable saving to the Scottish taxpayer. How can ministers ensure that, at future seminars, a wider European audience is procured and thus that the objectives for the week are met?

Will the minister give way?

rose—

I do not blame Mr Hamilton for that. The position is simple. The SNP's position and amendment are aimed at rejecting the strategy. We have no desire to reject the strategy. We wish to improve it.

In rising to propose the Conservatives' amendment to the Executive's motion, I draw members' attention to my entry in the register of interests, which suggests that I still maintain an active farming interest. That is not the case, and it must be some measure of the state of Scottish agriculture today that my instant reaction to no longer being involved in daily farming after almost 30 years is profound relief. The truth of the matter is that, out there in the real world, the morale of farmers and the profitability of farming are at an all-time low. Is it any wonder that morale is at rock bottom when, at the height of the greatest foot-and-mouth epidemic that this country has ever faced, a Prime Minister tells farming leaders that the Government stands four-square behind the agricultural industry and then, in the next breath, tells the wider electorate that farming does not even feature in his top priorities? Is it any wonder that that morale is so low when, prior to the general election in June, the Government pledged that it would discuss a recovery package for the agriculture industry in the wake of foot-and-mouth disease only to express, following the election, no intention even to consider—never mind discuss—such a package? That package could easily have included such initiatives as an outgoers scheme for those who want or need to leave farming. In 1997, Lord Sewel, who was then the minister with responsibility for agriculture at the former Scottish Office, set out his new rural policy for Scotland. He said: "I want to signal a new approach to rural development policy in Scotland, one based on sustainable development, and one which places the rural citizen at the heart of the  process." Four years on, we are still talking and consulting on the same theme. Never have farmers and farming been left so long without any clear direction as to what the Government expects of them. Farmers have always and will always respond to what the Government expects of them. As they receive significant sums of public money, it is right that that should be so; it is equally right that the recipients of that money should have a clear idea of what they should do with it. The minister will argue—as he has argued—that the forward strategy sets out a clear framework for the future of Scottish agriculture. In the long term, that may well prove to be correct. However, we cannot address the long-term situation without considering the current situation and the short-term problems that require action now. Foremost among those must be the need to continue into the second year the 90 per cent safety net for the LFA support scheme. I remind members that 85 per cent of Scotland is classified as LFA, and most of those who farm in that area have been net losers under that hastily introduced and ill-thought-out scheme. The minister has recently made all the right noises on maintaining the safety net of 90 per cent. However, given the tight time schedule for European approval of such a move, perhaps he could enlighten us later on what progress has been made in that direction.

As I explained, we cannot consider the future of agriculture—which is what the strategy is doing—without considering the short-term problems. The motion is on the strategy for agriculture and our amendment is to the motion. If Mr Hamilton waits until I am further into my speech, he will hear me explain my position. Because of foot-and-mouth disease, no sheepmeat has been exported this year from Scotland, England or Wales. That has led to a significant increase in prices for lamb throughout Europe, which in turn has led to an estimated drop in the sheep annual premium of 38 per cent to £6.68 per head. National top-up of sheep annual premium is permitted under European Union regulations, and there has surely never been a more pressing time for such a top-up. I hope to hear from the Executive later that that option is being vigorously pursued. Agrimonetary compensation for cereal farmers, continued funding for milk promotion and a foot- and-mouth disease recovery package, which I mentioned earlier, are some of the short-term measures that desperately need to be considered before we turn our full attention to the long-term strategy. If those issues are not addressed promptly, there is a real danger that there will not be much agriculture left for which a forward strategy will be necessary. From my history lessons, I recall that Emperor Nero fiddled while Rome burned. I hope that, in 20 years' time, we will not look back and say that Emperor Finnie consulted while Scottish agriculture was destroyed—not by fire, but by political neglect.

I have no problem whatsoever in accepting that, minister, although I make no apology for repeating some points made by the NFUS. I do not disagree with what the minister says but, as I have pointed out, until the important short-term problems are addressed, it is difficult to consider the long-term strategy seriously. It is impossible to disagree with a motion such as that moved by the Executive today—unless, like the Scottish National Party, we turn to pure negativity. As ever, that is useful to no one other than to those who produce the SNP's press releases. In lodging our amendment, Conservatives do not seek to disagree with the motion; rather we seek to secure the place of profitable agriculture at the heart of a successful rural economy. Conservatives have long maintained that it is not possible to have one without the other. I am delighted that the new shadow cabinet at Westminster includes a minister specifically for agriculture. That is a clear recognition of the fact that Conservatives continue to recognise—even when some other parties do not—the vital role that agriculture plays in the rural economy. The Executive's strategy document acknowledges that precept. Its first headline issue on page 3 states that "a healthy rural economy needs a healthy farming industry."  Our amendment seeks merely to highlight that importance in a way that the motion does not. I am delighted to hear that the Executive is able to agree with it. As has been said, the Rural Development Committee recently spent a day taking evidence on the strategy. At the end of that day, the consensus was that, although the strategy document provides a useful starting point for discussions, much fleshing-out of the detail is needed. I think that the minister acknowledged that earlier. I presume that the next group that he sets up will do that fleshing-out. One or two elements of the strategy are dangerously misleading, if not simply wrong. By way of example, I draw members' attention to "Action 11", which states that, following the foot-and-mouth epidemic, the Executive will "develop a framework for livestock movements in Scotland which substantially reduces the risk of disease". To me, that implies that the current system of livestock marketing caused the disease; it appears to blur the fact that we imported the disease. Part of the answer must be a clear labelling system and proper control of imports. Like the strategy itself, such things have been talked about for too long when decisive action could have led to their being initiated.

I have no difficulty in answering that. I support the strategy and Conservatives will support the strategy today, especially as the importance of profitable agriculture has now been accepted by the Executive. It is possible to accept something but still criticise parts of it. I do not see any difficulty with that. If one could not do that, one could not have much of a debate.

I am extremely sorry. I am going to run out of time. The strategy talks at length about reducing bureaucracy and red tape and about simplifying procedures for farmers. Then, at "Action 29", we read the dreaded words: "Local Enterprise Companies, local authorities, the Executive and other local agencies must identify and develop the economic potential from better links between  farming businesses and other rural businesses in their area." That is fine as far as it goes but, Presiding Officer, anyone who has been involved—as Dumfries and Galloway and the Borders begin the slow process of recovering from foot-and-mouth disease—will tell us clearly that the involvement of many of the aforementioned bodies virtually guarantees a significant increase in bureaucracy and red tape, rather than the decrease that is undoubtedly preferred. The full economic potential of agricultural businesses and farms must, of course, be unlocked, but let us be very wary of drowning that potential in a sea of consultants and bureaucrats who will simply stifle the innovation and initiative that already exist in rural Scotland. As others have said, the biggest talking point to come out of this strategy is, without doubt, the concept of land management contracts—a system of whole-farm support to which, I can now acknowledge, all farmers will be able to apply equally and without discrimination. That being the case, I welcome the principle of those contracts as a reversal of the trend of current schemes—such as the rural stewardship scheme, which is funded by all farmers via modulation but benefits only a few, and the LFA support scheme, which I have already described as hurried and ill-thought-out. The result of both those schemes is the transfer of considerable amounts of money from some geographical areas to others, which I have long believed to be detrimental. It is a trend that shows signs of increasing rather than decreasing. On that basis, I give land management contracts a cautious welcome, although there remains a niggling doubt in my mind that the end result may well be to lessen overall support for agriculture. I hope that I am wrong on that point, although I suspect that I may not be. If the strategy is to have relevance in Scotland and as part of the future reform as the CAP, as the minister has indicated, vital short-term issues have to be addressed now for the agriculture industry to survive. If it can survive, the strategy may well have a significant part to play. I make a final effort to bring a more cheerful note to the speech. I could not help but notice when reading the strategy the beauty of many of the pictures and the impressive case studies of various entrepreneurs and enterprises throughout Scotland. They suggest strongly that not all is bad in Scottish farming and that not all of it needs fixing. We must take care not to try to put right those areas that already work very well. Many examples of businesses from which much can be learned already exist. If the strategy is to be the success that Scottish agriculture so desperately needs, it must include the appropriate lessons.  I repeat my pleasure that the Executive accepts the amendment in my name, which in turn allows us to support the motion fully. I move amendment S1M-2278.2, to insert at end: "while recognising that a profitable farming industry is fundamental to a successful rural economy."

rose—

Although the debate over whether there should be a ceiling on such grant schemes is for another occasion, does Fergus Ewing accept the principle that no scheme should be ruled by the size of the business that is  applying under it? It is not always the case that very large applicants should be ruled out, because very often such applicants employ a large number of people in an area where employment is often hard to come by.

Will land management contracts, as envisaged in the document, be open to all farms and all farm businesses, regardless of size?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

I withdraw my point of order.

Des McNulty talked about the committee being honest. Would not it have been easier for the committee if the bill had been honest enough in the first place to seek simply to ban fox hunting and hare coursing?

Will the member give way?

In lodging the amendment on behalf of the majority of the Rural Development Committee—therefore, in any democratic world, on behalf of the committee—it is right and proper that I should extend thanks to officials and others who have played a significant part in the process that has led us to today's debate. In particular, I thank the clerking staff who, while never at full strength, worked long and hard to ensure that the committee kept on track during what, in anybody's language, has been a long and arduous stage 1 procedure.

Yes, but this is the only one that I will take.

No, I will not. The vote on the amendment was not won by the casting vote of the convener. The casting vote was used in relation to the question whether the committee wanted to support Elaine Murray's amendment. If my recollection is wrong, I am sorry. Nevertheless I have, in any democratic process, the right to speak to the amendment on behalf of the Rural Development Committee. As I say, I want to thank the staff—

I am sorry that this discussion has taken us away from the thanks that are due from every member of the Parliament to the Parliament's staff. They have done a magnificent job, as did my predecessor as convener of the Rural Development Committee, Alex Johnstone. I will leave it to others to determine whether he and I have acted in a proper manner. Alex Johnstone did a magnificent job of chairing the committee in such a fashion that everybody involved—members and witnesses—felt that they were able to have their say, make their points and get a fair hearing as the committee went about its business. That business began about 17 months ago—although it seems longer—when Mike Watson appeared before the committee on 4 April 2000 to present his Protection of Wild Mammals (Scotland) Bill. We realised the problems that awaited us when the promoter of the bill, in his opening statement to the committee, drew attention to changes that he wanted to introduce at stage 2. It seems to me now—as it seemed to me then—that for the promoter of the bill to talk about the changes that he wished to make before he had introduced the bill to the lead committee was tantamount to a tacit admission that the bill was flawed in that it did not address the proposal, which was the perfectly laudable aim of ending cruelty to wild mammals. That is an aim with which not one member of the committee would disagree.

I would like to, but I do not have time. It is on that apparent admission that the committee has met with difficulty and that is why the stage 1 process has been arduous. The bill focuses on the use of dogs and therefore equates the use of dogs to cruelty. However, the committee agreed unanimously that the use of dogs cannot be a common factor in determining cruelty. That agreement is at the root of the committee's eventual majority decision, following all the evidence that it took, to recommend that the general principles of the bill should not be agreed to. I would like to dwell on that evidence, because there is a considerable amount of it. Twenty organisations provided written evidence. Many of them were also later asked to give oral evidence. As Mike Watson said, more than 4,615 individuals felt concerned enough to take the trouble to write to the committee uninvited—about 60 per cent of those individuals were against the bill. From that vast bulk of evidence, the committee had to determine a way forward. On 14 November 2000, Mike Watson stated to the committee that  "cruelty is the issue in this bill"—[ Official Report , Rural Affairs Committee , 14 November 2000; c 1349.] Given that, the committee sought to define cruelty and had no difficulty in agreeing with the Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals' definition that cruelty means "the infliction of unnecessary suffering". However, the committee was also forced to conclude that there is no absolute measure of suffering and that it can be considered only on a comparative scale of whether some activities appear to cause more suffering than others. In other words, suffering is a matter of individual judgment. I argue that something that is agreed to be a matter of individual judgment is not a matter for legislation. The committee also took evidence on the economic impact that the bill would have if passed and considered studies that were carried out by the Borders Foundation for Rural Sustainability, the Macaulay Institute and Dr Sean Rickard. We were struck by the similarity of those reports, which gave an average projected job loss of 142 jobs, excluding gamekeepers, if the bill is passed and enacted. When the Rural Development Committee met in Dumfries, it met informally with a group of tradespeople from the Borders. They included an hotelier, a farrier, a groom, a veterinary surgeon, a haulier and a stable owner. We would have had to be pretty hard-hearted not to have been struck by the genuine and heartfelt anguish that they displayed to us—the potential enablers of legislation that would take away their jobs or destroy their businesses. Under the bill as introduced, they would receive no compensation for that loss. The loss of 142 jobs might not seem to be a lot to members who live in the central belt, but in rural Scotland, it is every bit as devastating as the closure of Motorola or any other major industrial plant. I mentioned that the economic impact studies did not reflect on gamekeeping. We cannot consider the bill without examining its impact on that profession. The committee had to conclude that the bill is fundamentally flawed in that respect. Despite Mike Watson's stated intention to amend his proposals, he has said that he will not amend the ban on the use of terriers underground that the bill would bring about. The result of that would be, as evidence forcefully told us, that the so-called Protection of Wild Mammals (Scotland) Bill would actually remove protection for many wild mammals. Foxes are regularly shot as part of a pest control programme. Following the shooting of a vixen, the cubs are flushed from the den by terriers to be dispatched as humanely as possible.  I should point out that the SSPCA accepts—albeit reluctantly—the need for that activity. If that activity were banned, the keeper would have to dig down to the cubs or simply leave them to starve to death. Members will not be surprised to hear that most of Scotland's hills and uplands simply cannot be dug up because they are granite. Everyone agrees that fox control is an integral part of maintaining the biodiversity of the uplands and mountains, the protection of which is now enshrined in the National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000. I am not being overly dramatic in suggesting that, if the bill as introduced were enacted, it would be in direct contravention of the National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000, which the Parliament passed so proudly in June 2000. The Rural Development Committee considered the activities that would be affected by the bill, principally mounted hunting and hare coursing, which most people acknowledge are the real targets of the bill. Although a majority of the committee felt that coursing was cruel, we were unanimous in saying that mounted hunting might cause cruelty. That statement implies equally that it might not cause cruelty, as recognised in paragraph 101 of the stage 1 report, which states that the evidence is "so inconclusive, that a moral stance has been adopted." Again, that is a matter of individual judgement, which I have already suggested should never be the subject of legislation. Members will be aware of the story of the tourist who got lost in the countryside and asked a local worthy how best to get to his destination. "Well," replied the local, "if you want to go there, I don't think you should start from here." That is precisely what the committee is saying in its report. In paragraph 72, to which the amendment in my name refers, the report asks the Executive to revisit existing legislation so that examples of cruelty about which all members would agree could be successfully prosecuted. That would provide a measure of protection to wild animals, but the bill will not. Even if the bill is passed, foxes will continue to be shot and snared. Neither of those activities necessarily affords a quicker and cleaner death than being hunted and caught by hounds. As a representative of the South of Scotland, I would be failing in my duty if I did not remind members of the utter devastation that foot-and-mouth disease has brought to that region.

I would be failing in my duty if I did not remind members of the utter devastation that foot-and-mouth disease has brought to the south of Scotland. I have said previously that, had the bill been honest enough simply to propose a ban on hunting and coursing, it would have been passed a year ago, but it is not honest enough. If ever there was an example of the wrong bill in the wrong place at the wrong time, the Protection of Wild Mammals (Scotland) Bill is a strong contender. It is worth asking whether, if banning were really the right route to take, four previous chairmen of the League Against Cruel Sports would have changed their minds in recent years. In closing, I offer a quote from the Official Report . Are we to tell "the people of Scotland that although they fought long and hard to have this Parliament, we, the first generation of its politicians, are not prepared to let them continue to have the rights that they currently have. That would be wrong."—[ Official Report , 13 January 2001; Vol 4, c 72.] That was a quote from Wendy Alexander—albeit on a different subject—but she was absolutely right and the quote is equally relevant to the debate today. I am proud to be a member of a Parliament that was hailed as being tolerant and inclusive. Those are two qualities to which I believe we all aspire. However, the bill is exactly the opposite of those worthy aspirations and I urge members to reject it. I move amendment S1M-2078.2, to leave out from "agrees" to end and insert: "does not agree to the general principles of the Protection of Wild Mammals (Scotland) Bill for the reasons set out in the stage 1 report of the Rural Development Committee; and because it considers that, as an alternative, the Executive should examine the issues identified in the report, in particular paragraph 72 thereof, in order to address whether the existing law against fox baiting provides adequate protection against cruelty to wild mammals."

Will the member give way?

I intervene because I may be able to help Mike Watson on this point. I hope that he will take my word that I was assured by a committee member that, on the day when the vote in question took place, he or she—I am not prepared to say which—would not have allowed the committee not to have made a recommendation. Therefore, the situation to which he refers—that this debate might have taken place differently—does not apply.

On the same point, Presiding Officer. The Rural Development Committee has taken no decision, in private or otherwise. I speak safely on behalf of the committee on that score.

That answer may satisfy Ian Jenkins, but how can the minister reassure the rest of the people of Scotland, never mind his colleagues in Westminster and—perhaps more important—in Europe, on biosecurity measures when the Executive appears to condone the movement of veterinarily unexpected casualty carcases from Cumbria into the south of Scotland for incineration and when the police routinely inspect multiple numbers of loaded livestock transports in the same lay-bys at the same time with no biosecurity measures at all?

I draw members' attention to my entry in the register of members' interests. Like all other members who have spoken, I congratulate Elaine Murray on securing this important debate. I have never felt my existence as an MSP to be more justified than it has been over the past eight or nine weeks. While I have often felt more like a social worker than a politician, I am sure that I share with Elaine Murray, Alasdair Morgan and David Mundell the feelings of despair, frustration, anger, sorrow, bitterness and humility that have epitomised the hundreds of telephone calls that we have all received over the past weeks and months. We have experienced the resigned acceptance of long-time family farmers that the stock that they have built up over many generations is to be lost, often without the farmers knowing whether their animals had the disease. We have experienced the fury and wrath of others who believe that the policy was wrong from the outset. That debate is for another time, but I pray, honestly and earnestly, that this outbreak of foot- and-mouth disease is as good as over and that the sacrifice of those in the south of Scotland will have prevented the spread of the virus to so many others. We cannot be certain, but I am touching every wooden surface that I find, with my fingers firmly crossed, in the hope that we have seen the back of foot-and-mouth disease. Looking back to the early days, which seem so long ago, I am afraid that I must bring a touch of criticism into the debate. With, I admit, the benefit of hindsight, I am not convinced that the eight-day interval between the first case at Heddon-on-the-Wall and the first case in Scotland was used as wisely as it might have been. As soon as Longtown market was mentioned, anyone who knew anything about sheep farming in Scotland knew that foot-and-mouth was headed for Scotland. That gap gave us an opportunity to prepare, but it appears to have been spurned as we sat back and hoped that the inevitable would not happen. Even when cases of the disease were confirmed north of the border, too much was left to the local authority. Right from the start, the council did its very best in increasingly difficult circumstances, until the Executive intervened, almost at the 11 th hour, and responded with the massive input of resources that appears to have begun to have the desired effect. I know that hindsight is a great thing but, for future reference, we must ask whether application of the eventual resource from the start might have hastened the extinction of the disease and lessened its geographic spread. However, we are where we are. I thank the minister for his great willingness to have meetings and discuss the various problems that have been brought to members. In particular, I thank him for allowing me to hijack him in his office early on the morning of his announcement that the contiguous cull of cattle was to cease. The fact that he shared his statement with me some four hours before he was due to make it helped calm a situation in Wigtownshire that could have become ugly. I know that that saved at least two herds of cattle from an unnecessary cull. I hope that we can now turn to the future. Even if we have got rid of foot-and-mouth disease, the problems will remain with us for some time. Two things are needed: the first is urgency, in addressing how farmers can begin to go about their business again; flexibility must be the watchword. For example, most farmers will need to make silage in two to three weeks' time, but no farm has yet passed the disinfection criteria. There must be a fast-track system to allow normal farming operations to go ahead wherever possible. Farmers also need to be told when they will be  able to restock and over how long a period that can take place. If everyone must restock this autumn, we will create a false market value and more disease will be spread than has already been exterminated. Farmers need information. I know a farmer who culled five weeks ago and has not heard from any official since, although he received a call 10 days ago to ask whether a Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food vet could inspect his sheep. That is not good enough. He and others need information desperately and they need it now. Secondly, we need imagination. I have a suggestion as to how imagination could help. Many farmers will consider restructuring their farms and might consider planting woodland. I urge the minister to consider extending the challenge fund scheme, which operates successfully in Grampian, and the farm woodland premium scheme to cover Dumfries and Galloway. I believe that the imaginative extension of existing schemes points the way ahead for the Executive to deliver the special-case funding that it has promised for Dumfries and Galloway and towards which today's announcement is—I hope—a welcome first step.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to recognise and promote ME awareness week. (S1O-3382)

I assure the minister that invitations will be forthcoming shortly. I regret the fact that the Executive cannot give recognition to such events; however, I have been pleased with the press coverage that this horrible illness has received over the past few days. Does the minister agree that, whatever the outcome of the chief medical officer in England and Wales's report, there is an urgent need for research in Scotland into the causes and cures for ME, and that the best agency to foster and encourage such research is the national health service? Will she join me in welcoming the launch last Tuesday of MERGE, a Perth-based charity that is dedicated to funding research into ME?

Will the member give way?

Some years ago, I wrote an article for a local newspaper entitled, "What Do You Do With an Empty Countryside?" It was not intended to be prophetic, but if one drove from Stranraer to Gretna tomorrow, a virtually empty countryside is  what one would find. The land is almost denuded of livestock and, in empty field after empty field, there is mile after mile of lush grass that no one is yet quite sure what they will do with. Just as most of Dumfries and Galloway has lost much of its livestock, so it has lost most of its tourism industry, which is every bit as important to its prosperity as is agriculture, if not more so. One of the stark lessons that has come out of the dreadful outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease is how inextricably linked in rural Scotland are the agriculture and the tourism industries. As we begin to see beyond the immediate impact of the foot-and-mouth outbreak, we must not overlook the inescapable fact that our rural tourism industry was facing severe problems before the cataclysmic virus struck and that those problems will remain after it has gone. While Dumfries and Galloway breathed a collective sigh of relief that its Easter trade was only 20 per cent below last Easter's average—although that is a strange definition of relief—we must remember that the base numbers were already in decline. That decline is hitting the whole of rural Scotland and needs to be addressed across the whole of rural Scotland. There is much that we need to do. We need to examine the structure, remit and effectiveness of visitscotland. For the benefit of Mr Lyon, I stress that I am not using visitscotland as a political football when I say that; the need for an examination of those elements is a fact. It is unacceptable and unbelievable that the visitscotland board contains not one representative from the south of Scotland. Ministers will no doubt reply that the quality of the individual is much more important than the question of where they come from. However, that is tantamount to an accusation that no one in the south of Scotland is good enough to serve on the board, which is blatant rubbish. Perhaps the current shambles from which the board is trying to extricate itself will provide an opportunity to correct that discriminatory omission from its make-up. We also need to examine the role of the local tourist board—we should not be frightened to do so. A recent survey that my colleague David Mundell and I carried out showed that the tourist board in Dumfries and Galloway does not enjoy the level of confidence among its members to which it no doubt aspires. I blame not the individuals involved, but the remit of the board, which has to become more promotional and less police-like. It is no coincidence that many communities seem to be bypassing their local tourist boards by setting up their own websites and promoting their own areas. Examples of such initiatives can be found in Sanquhar and Glenluce. That development points to a failure in the system from  which valuable lessons can and should be learned. Those within the industry need constantly to monitor their standards. Top-quality service does not have to be expensive. A smile costs nothing, yet it can make a stranger's day. We have much to learn from our continental neighbours about the delivery of service. Service means simply giving our visitors what they want and expect, rather than what we think that they should have. We all agree that we have to rebuild an industry that is facing a disastrous year through no fault of its own. That must be an opportunity as much as it is a challenge and we have the advantage of the perfect base from which to start: Scotland itself. It will be harder to rebuild the industry in the south of Scotland because of the foot-and-mouth outbreak, but I have no doubt that that challenge will be met. I broadly welcome the measures that the Executive has intimated to the convener of Dumfries and Galloway Council this morning but I stress that they must be a first step. On their own, they are not enough. I am glad that the minister accepts that point. As a resident of Dumfries and Galloway, I am somewhat disturbed by recent ministerial statements that seem to suggest that the current coterminous status that is shared by agencies such as the local tourist board and the local enterprise company in Dumfries and Galloway could be altered. I strongly reject such a move as being unhelpful in the extreme. I suggest that those agencies require considerable support under the current circumstances. There is a need to have their remits made more flexible, but they do not need to be either amalgamated or disbanded. By giving the tourism industry that support and flexibility, we will discover what can be done with an empty countryside as the phoenix of our tourism industry rises from the ashes of foot-and-mouth disease.

Not far enough.

Will the minister give way?

Although I accept what the minister says about talking the situation up or down, does she accept that—as Irene McGugan pointed out—the report's truth lies in its reflection of the situation that we found on the ground and at the public meetings we attended?

As a member of the Rural Affairs Committee—as it was when we began the inquiry—I would like to join members in thanking everyone who helped us to draw up the report. As everyone realises, since the report was published the situation in rural Scotland has changed beyond recognition, most dramatically in the south-west. On its publication, the report painted a fairly gloomy picture; that gloom has turned into an outright crisis from which it will take many years to recover. The last eight or nine weeks have highlighted the precarious and interdependent nature of our rural communities. Let us make no mistake—many of those rural communities are under genuine threat. The report highlights the facts. Employment in many rural sectors is in decline. The traditional rural industries of farming, fishing and forestry face particular challenges. Transport costs are almost unbearable given the low-wage economy in rural Scotland and—most worrying of all—rural poverty is on the increase. For those reasons and many others, many of our communities are under threat. We must ask ourselves if and why that matters. Those communities are as diverse as the countryside in which they exist. One of the things that struck me most about the two fact-finding visits that the committee undertook—one was to Newtown St Boswells and the other to Newton Stewart—was that one could not have come across a more stark example of differing social, physical and mental attitudes to what are, in essence, the same problems. Those communities matter—not just because they look pretty and attract tourists, but because they are a vital part of Scotland's social make up. Such communities foster and preserve some of our most precious and, in some cases, almost forgotten traditions, such as language and the arts. If those communities are allowed to decline further, our country is in danger of losing something that cannot be replaced. That is why the Executive must work to help private and smaller projects, such as the Museum of Lead Mining at Wanlockhead, as well as the better- known and bigger national institutions. We owe it to the future to ensure that we preserve the past. However, that approach must go hand in hand with modernising the rural economy. If not, the whole of rural Scotland will simply become one huge museum. We must determine the best way to revitalise the rural economy and create jobs. We will not do that by throwing more money at the problem through the enterprise network—I am sure that the minister will be pleased to hear me say that. We must reconsider the way in which the local enterprise companies and Scottish Enterprise operate to benefit rural Scotland. We must reconsider how the Scottish Tourist Board—or visitscotland or whatever it will be called next week—operates to benefit rural Scotland. Most important, we must take a long hard look at whether the current planning regulations best serve rural Scotland. We must improve the road infrastructure. One of the most quoted phrases in the Parliament is that, in rural Scotland, the motor car is not a luxury, but a necessity. That is absolutely correct and must be recognised by the Executive with a genuine effort to examine and address the problem of fuel prices. That subject was hailed as the No 1 hurdle in the path to rural prosperity at every public meeting we held and by almost everyone who gave evidence. We must improve access to information technology. I am sure that every member who represents a rural area will have tales to tell of businesses that have not become established because of the lack of access to up-to-date technology. I would be amazed if my colleague, David Mundell, did not address that point when he sums up the debate. The Scottish Conservatives welcome the report as a genuine effort to establish a starting point from which to begin the regeneration of our rural economy—a phrase that has become all the more poignant in recent weeks. Sadly, it is typical of the Executive to see the report as negative and unhelpful. I would expect nothing less of an Executive that has fully lived up to the expectations of much of rural Scotland—it is an urban-based Administration with little understanding of how rural Scotland works. Perhaps if the Executive were to take the report more seriously, it might begin to correct that image. The Scottish Conservatives support the motion.

I draw members' attention to my entry in the register of members' interests. To ask the First Minister whether the foot-and-mouth disease outbreak in the south of Scotland is under control. (S1F-1015)

I am sure that the chamber will share the degree of pleasure that I take in the First Minister's confidence, and my fervent hope that that confidence is borne out by events to come. Given the glimpse of optimism to which the First Minister referred, would he agree to turn his attention, and that of the relevant ministers in his Cabinet, to the urgent need of small businesses throughout Dumfries and Galloway and, increasingly, in the Borders, for access to a survival fund? Such access has often been hinted at, but the idea has never been progressed. Does the First Minister agree that that is the only way to give some of the businesses concerned, particularly those involved in agriculture, a similar glimpse of optimism: that they might be able to survive until the recovery plan, which the First Minister received recently from Dumfries and Galloway Council, kicks in?

I will start by making plain the position of the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party. We totally support the overall policy that has been implemented by—

Perhaps Mr Rumbles will allow me to continue, please. We support the policy as carried out by the Executive, which was mentioned by my colleague,  Alex Johnstone. We have considerable and legitimate concerns about the implementation of that policy, as referred to by another colleague, David McLetchie, in the chamber last week. [Interruption.]

Is the minister aware of the considerable confusion that still exists in Dumfries and Galloway? It has been caused largely by the poor and mixed quality of the information that has emanated from his department. Does he agree with the convener of Dumfries and Galloway Council that the Executive originally offered insufficient support and displayed a lack of leadership, and that the spread of the virus has been exacerbated by the considerable time lapse between suspicion and carcase disposal? Does the minister accept that the five weeks that it has taken to get the cull into full operation has led to an unnecessary spread of disease into the west, which could and should have been contained much sooner? Were those the mistakes to which he referred in his statement?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Since the Minister for Environment and Rural Development gave his previous statement to the Parliament on foot-and-mouth disease, an enormous amount has changed, both on the ground in Dumfries and Galloway and in relation to national policy. Given that tomorrow's discussion on the Education (Graduate Endowment and Student Support) (Scotland) (No 2) Bill is liable to fall short of its time, is it in order to ask the minister to give a full statement to the Parliament on the foot-and-mouth crisis?

Before I make my speech, I declare that I have an interest in this debate. I want to make it absolutely clear that the Conservative and Unionist Party welcomes the Scottish Executive's commitment to the eradication of this loathsome disease. I go further and acknowledge the part of the SNP amendment that recognises that that commitment comes not only from the Scottish Executive but from the Scottish Parliament. I should say, however, that it would have been helpful if the Executive's motion had referred to the goal of eradication of the disease.  Two major areas of this tragedy cause great concern and need to see considerable improvement if public sympathy with the policy of eradication is to continue. The silence at last week's announcement of a cull would have been even greater if we had realised that, one week further down the line, the cull would scarcely have begun. That delay, and the delay between the first suspicion of an outbreak and the slaughter and eventual disposal of livestock following confirmation of disease, verges on the unacceptable. One or two incidents have crossed that line and verge on the intolerable. If the minister—or anybody else—doubts what I am saying, I can assure him that the people of Ruthwell in Dumfriesshire were distinctly unimpressed by a pile of rotting carcases of sheep that were slaughtered last Sunday and the absence yesterday afternoon of any sign of wood with which to build the funeral pyre. That is not good enough. The Executive has the power to improve the situation. It must do so if political support for the process is to be maintained. The second area of concern is best expressed by a farmer who lives close to me, at Parton in Galloway. Because of a contact with Longtown, he will lose his commercial flock and may well lose one of the most important pedigree flocks of blue-faced Leicester sheep in the country. He purchased 30 ewes in Longtown on 21 February. They have since been isolated. I quote from today's Galloway News , in which he says: "All they say is I have been in an infected market ... The really annoying thing is that they have never come to test the sheep from Longtown. They sent two girls who looked at them." Perhaps every cloud has a silver lining. He continued: "They never made any inquiries about them to see if there was the right number ... they just asked where they were. The whole thing stinks - it's been handled terribly". The stark message from that is that the Minister for Environment and Rural Development's department has got its communications wrong. Communication and information are slow, mixed and unproductive, although they are one of the key elements in this entirely unpalatable process.

I am not suggesting that for a minute. I am suggesting that the good words that  come from the Executive are not always being translated into action on the ground and that the people involved are not being informed of exactly what is facing them in the fastest possible way, as should be the case. I do not aim criticism only at SERAD because, as we have heard today, the whole business world is in a state of confusion. The most obvious examples come from the tourism industry, where some contradictory messages are rapidly becoming the stuff of folklore. All businesses in the south of Scotland, particularly in the south-west of Scotland, are suffering. Countless businesses are on the verge of closure. Many in Dumfries and Galloway will never reopen. They are by no means confined to tourism-related businesses. Urgent, revolutionary thinking is required, above and beyond the welcome announcements that have been made today. I urge the Minister for Environment and Rural Development, the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning and the Minister for Finance and Local Government to get their thinking caps on, to cut out the bureaucracy and red tape and to come to the assistance of rural Scotland in general—and of Dumfries and Galloway in particular. Rural people do not easily ask for help, but they have never needed it more. We cannot support a motion that congratulates the Executive on future action. It smacks of an arrogance that, frankly, we have come to expect from the Executive. Nor can we fully condone the actions of an Executive that gave rise to a telephone call to me in which a farmer's wife complained, "They talk about taking out 200,000 sheep. On my neighbour's farm, they've made a mess of taking out 25." We support the aim of eradicating the disease, but unless the Executive takes on board our constructive criticisms, there may not be much of a rural Scotland left to support. I commend the amendment in the name of my colleague, Alex Johnstone.

Does Elaine Murray agree with the view of many tourism businesses in Dumfries and Galloway, that whereas they would normally expect their season to kick off at Easter—in a month's time—the reality that they face is that the season will not begin until Easter 2002?

I accept what the minister says on the subject of having a policy in Scotland different from that south of the border. However, does he accept the position, as stated earlier by my colleague David Mundell, that it is important to have a certain amount of collaboration with Cumbria, given the joint geography?

On a point of order.

It is, but I apologise to you and to the minister for making it at the start of the debate. Given the delay that we have had in starting the debate, which is of national importance, is it possible for you to ensure that we get the full 90 minutes for the debate?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to alleviate any consequential losses to rural businesses as a result of the current outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease. (S1O-3101)

I am sure that the minister will agree that, although foot-and-mouth appears to be  confined to a relatively small geographic area of Scotland—we all hope that the situation stays that way—the economic effects are being felt nationwide. Will he undertake to explore with colleagues at Westminster the possibilities of Government agencies such as Customs and Excise and the Inland Revenue deferring demands for payments and of the local authorities deferring their rates demands until the rural community is back to something approaching normal? Will he assure the chamber that the Executive will look with sympathy and generosity on the inevitable demands that will come from agencies—particularly those in Dumfries and Galloway—for extra funding to kick-start the local economy once this appalling outbreak is over?

Members have used the word "stunned", and it is  absolutely the right word. This is the time of year that, as a sheep farmer, I always enjoyed. It is almost lambing time and although lambing was extremely hard work, it was extraordinarily rewarding to help to bring next year's product to life amongst the fields. This will be an extraordinarily emotive time for the people involved as, in the time scale that the minister envisages, we will be slaughtering sheep slap in the middle of their lambing season—shooting stock as it lies down to lamb. I do not wish to overemphasise that point, but it is vital. I urge the minister to indulge in joined-up thinking with other departments to ensure that all agencies that look after the mental welfare of those involved are brought into full play. Will the minister confirm whether the 3km distance will start from the centre of the farm or, if it will not, exactly how it will be measured? That may sound a strange question, but there are some large farming units and the method of measurement will have a serious effect on the number of farms that are taken into account. Will the minister also tell the chamber whether the measure is to be UK wide? Given the proximity of Dumfries to Cumbria, what will happen across the border? Members need to know that.

Does the member accept that neither my motion nor any of the speeches in the chamber have said that the other schemes are better or different? Indeed, they have not even been referred to. It has been accepted all round that Scotland has a special part to play in LFA support, because so much of the country has been seriously disadvantaged by the scheme.

Will George Lyon give way?

I confess to a slight feeling of guilt at obtaining the debate during the foot-and-mouth crisis, which we discussed this morning. However, I feel that we must look to the future and to a time when we are not gripped by the current catastrophe. Therefore, the debate is relevant. I declare an interest that is relevant to the debate, but I no longer engage in the business of farming and will not receive any agricultural subsidies in the foreseeable future. I come to the debate as a member who represents the south of Scotland. I accept that the deeply held concerns about the LFA support system know no geographic boundaries, but as other members will raise their local concerns, I will speak from an unashamedly southern perspective. In early 1998, it became apparent that the European Commission was intent on reforming support for livestock production in LFAs by making payments on the basis of the area that was farmed, rather than on the number of livestock that was held on each holding. On the whole, that was a commendable desire that had the potential to bring alternative land uses, such as deer farming, within the supported agricultural framework. If the reform had been negotiated and handled properly, it would have produced a scheme that had the backing of the vast majority of Scotland's farmers. Instead, the minister has introduced a scheme that has fostered widespread and growing despair as its implications have been fully realised. When the scheme was announced, it raised only the somewhat choked response from the president of the National Farmers Union of Scotland that it was the best of a bad deal, which bought Scotland's farmers some time that had to be used to redress the imbalance that will exist from 2003.  I must ask what went wrong. What went wrong between the EU declaring its intention in 1998 and the STAR committee's hurried acceptance in October 2000 of a scheme that would allow the first payments to be made in 2001? What went so wrong that the Scottish Landowners Federation became so worried by the then Scottish Office's lack of any progress in 1999—a year after the intention was declared—that it felt compelled to conduct its own research in conjunction with the Macaulay Land Use Research Institute? They proposed a mechanism that would offer area-based support that would minimise the redistributional impact of the policy change. Sadly, that proposal received little more than lip service from the minister and his department as the consultation proceeded. In a briefing paper that the NFUS issued on 14 February this year, it felt obliged to state that when the Scottish Office first consulted it in March 1999—a year after the intention was stated—it proposed three basic and understandable viewpoints. First, there should be no large-scale geographic redistribution of moneys that were received under any new scheme. Secondly, the basis for compensation should continue to be natural physical handicaps. Lastly, new payments should permit producers to stay in business. The briefing paper concluded that those concerns are as valid now as they were nearly two years ago. What went so wrong that the eventual scheme that was submitted by SERAD—as the department had by then happily become known—was summarily rejected by Europe? That resulted in the hasty and somewhat undignified scramble to negotiate the introduction of emergency legislation that allowed transitional arrangements for one year only. What went so wrong that the scheme that was finally approved was dependent on land classification criteria that were some 50 years old, were felt by many to be over-simplistic and were originally intended for an entirely different purpose altogether? Finally, what has gone so wrong that, despite the minister's assurances that his scheme will put £7.5 million more into the LFA budget over the first three years of the scheme, I have yet to find any person in the south of Scotland who will admit to being a winner under the scheme? Any extra funding that is claimed for the scheme appears to be disappearing into increased bureaucracy and administration costs—as ever. The minister will point to the safety net arrangements as being particularly significant. Indeed, that mechanism has bought the little time to which I referred.  However the matter is examined, neither the minister nor I would take very kindly to the prospect of being told, "Your pay is about to be cut, but we will ensure that a significant portion of that pay will be cut by only 20 per cent this year, 30 per cent next year and 50 per cent the following year." Given the well-documented disastrous decline in farm income figures over the past few years, that is the ultimate slap in the face that will be impossible for some to bear. The minister will also claim that he will use the time that he has bought to come up with an adjusted scheme. I trust that he can tell us today what time scale and changes are envisaged and how he will reverse the catastrophic transfer of funding away from the small and medium family- run farms that predominate in the south of Scotland. Not for one second do I begrudge any extra penny that the Highlands and Islands or the north of Scotland can attract. However, when such extra money entails a significant financial penalty on the region that I have the honour to represent—a region that has a huge dependence on agriculture, which is one of the mainstays of its rural economy—I cannot, in all conscience, support it. It is no secret that the EU will look at the area-based model for all future subsidy schemes. If the current model were adopted, the minister would be able to change his title yet again—though not, this time, his department's initials—from the Minister for Rural Development to the Minister for Rural Disintegration. The Scottish Landowners Federation's recent submission to the Rural Development Committee states that, unless a modified scheme is found in the next 12 months, the SLF believes that livestock farming in much of rural Scotland will prove to be untenable. The National Farmers Union of Scotland and the Scottish Crofters Union have repeated those sentiments. They are sentiments—I really hope that they are not forecasts—with which I can only agree.

I bow to Dr Ewing's greater knowledge. I repeat that I am from the south of Scotland. I accept what she says, but I believe that there are crofters—and, indeed, other farmers—who will benefit greatly from the scheme. I will leave it to the minister to sum up Dr Ewing's valid point, which I thank her for making. I hope that the minister will be able to answer my questions in his summing-up. If he cannot, I genuinely fear for the future of livestock farming as  we know it in Scotland.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. There seems to be some confusion about which amendment amended the motion that we are voting on.

I have been paying attention, Presiding Officer.

Mr Canavan and the minister referred to the current outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease. Given that the disease has the countryside in its grip—I use the word advisedly, because we heard in this morning's debate about the terror with which that disease is gripping the countryside—would the minister consider extending for a limited period the consultation period for the draft bill.

I agree with all of Dr Murray's comments. Does she agree that a certain amount of misinformation is going out, especially in the south-west of Scotland, from agencies such as the tourist board? Does she further agree that it would therefore be helpful for the Minister for Rural Development to get together with the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning and the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning and Gaelic, who has responsibility for tourism, to ensure that rather than information being posted on the internet, to which not everyone has access, a consistent, single message is sent directly to those involved?

I will make three brief points.  First, will the minister ensure that the media play their full part in informing the public of the role that they can play in helping to limit the spread of this disease? Last Saturday morning, I was horrified to hear an announcement on BBC Radio Scotland that the public would be welcome to walk anywhere in Scotland's rural areas. Secondly, given the minister's understandable desire, which is absolutely correct, to postpone the launch of the forward strategy for agriculture, will the Executive consider postponing its access consultation proposals until the full lessons have been learned from the appalling situation that we are in? Thirdly, will the minister consider allowing farmers to protect, by putting down disinfected straw, those unfenced areas of their farms that are crossed by minor roads? I gather that the police do not allow that to take place, but it would be helpful.

I draw the minister's attention to the front page of last Wednesday's edition of the Dumfries &   Galloway Standard . The main story mentioned the possibility that some 33 rural schools throughout Dumfries and Galloway may face closure. How does that lie with the Executive's policy on social inclusion in rural communities?

The contents of this excellent report show quite categorically that the well-being of our citizens and the health of our nation can come before party politics or in-built dogma. I commend the committee on the depth of the report, on the consensus achieved in drawing up the report and on making community care a priority for the Scottish Parliament. The public perception is that the report is purely about Sutherland, as has been stated, and it is perfectly easy to understand why. Last year, at the height of the fuel crisis, I had the privilege of addressing more than 1,000 pensioners who had struggled to get to Edinburgh and had marched to their rallying point at the National Gallery. I said to them that the full implementation of Sutherland had less to do with health and care than it had to do with dignity, and that dignity was not an issue over which any pensioner should have to demonstrate. I congratulate the committee on its recommendation that the dignity of care of the elderly be restored. Sadly, I remain unconvinced of the Executive's resolve to implement that section of the committee's report. That feeling is only strengthened by the nature of the amendment that the Executive has chosen to lodge. As others have said, however, the report is not purely about Sutherland. I have particular sympathy for the recommendation that the budgets for health and for social services should  be amalgamated into a single budget. That single budget, if properly administered, would provide clear accountability, remove artificial distinctions between health and social work and ensure that the services work in a unified way to provide what is best for the patient at the time it is required. Ensuring such a unified service as opposed to the fragmented and disjointed one that exists all too often today would speed up both assessment and service provision as well as ending disputes over which agency pays for different aspects of the patient's treatment. In other words, that should provide a better service at a better value. It would also excise the practice of bedblocking, which has resulted in some 3,000 patients being kept in NHS beds when they should be in community care. That is double the number that there was three years ago and takes up almost 8 per cent of the average number of available staff beds in our hospitals. Bedblocking is ludicrously expensive and any initiative to end it should be grasped with both hands. As a member of the Rural Development Committee, I am particularly pleased that the report pays considerable attention to the mentally ill, the disabled and those with learning difficulties because, in rural Scotland, those people face even greater problems than do their peers in urban areas. I am particularly concerned about such situations as one in Dumfries and Galloway that was recently brought to my attention. There, residential facilities are being closed and patients are being placed into often unsuitable housing in surrounding communities. Although I understand the intentions behind such moves, I am not convinced that the policy has been properly thought through. Residential facilities have previously been a training ground for people's eventual return to the community, with appropriate support. The worst-affected patients remain in the residence, which becomes their home and, in a sense, their family. To close that home without putting the savings back into increased support services seems to be utter folly. We are surely past the days when financial savings come before patients' interests. If policy is properly thought out, the two can go together. All that is required is a little joined-up thinking. The committee's report encourages just that. Still on Dumfries and Galloway, I cannot miss the opportunity of mentioning the consequences of that council's policy of externalising its care homes. Within two years, that policy led to a 68 per cent decrease in the number of patients referred to private nursing homes—from 186 in 1999 to only 60 last year. It has affected costs in the externalised homes, which enjoy a guaranteed 100 per cent occupancy rate and about £420 per patient per week, as opposed to approximately £260 per patient per week in a private home. In  short, it has led to discrimination against private care homes. I believe that the minister needs to ask serious questions to get to the bottom of that inequality. The Executive must not think that this debate on the Health and Community Care Committee's excellent report is the end. I hope that it is only the beginning, and that the Parliament will take every opportunity to ensure that the Executive puts into practice the committee's recommendations.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to increase awareness and treatment of conditions such as chronic fatigue syndrome and myalgic encephalomyelitis—or ME—particularly among young people. (S1O-2935)

Is the minister aware that CFS and ME officially do not exist among young people, particularly on the east coast of Scotland, as general practitioners and consultants seem reluctant to recognise the conditions? As thousands of schoolchildren are incapacitated to varying degrees by CFS and ME, will the minister look into providing a specialist NHS unit in Scotland to investigate those debilitating conditions? That would bring not only hope to the many sufferers, but considerable savings to the NHS.

Will Mike Rumbles give way?

The minister will be aware that I wrote to him recently on exactly this subject—or perhaps he is not aware, as the answers that I received in his letter bore absolutely no relation to the questions that I had asked. Is he aware that most teachers would tell him that there is considerably greater educational benefit in taking their class to visit the mining museum at Wanlockhead than there is in visits to many other museums, including some of those to which he has given funding? Will he undertake to visit the museum at Wanlockhead and to review his funding strategy so that Wanlockhead does not have to rely on generous donations, such as the £20,000 that it received recently, to allow it to survive?

I will do my best. If one were to take a map of Scotland, draw a line from Ayr to Carlisle, and cut off the section that lies to the south and west of that line, one would have an understanding of how people and agencies who live and work in that part of Scotland feel. As has been said, there is a feeling of being cut off, remote and somewhat neglected by Government at both the UK and the Scottish level. Feeling cut off and neglected is one thing, but feeling cut off and neglected when one lives and works within touching distance of the rather grandly named trans-European road network is another thing altogether. In April 1998, Henry McLeish, our First Minister, said: "The A75 performs a vital role in the economy of South West Scotland and is also a key artery of the trans-European Road Network to Ireland." Sadly, that 100-mile section of the thousands of miles that make up the trans-European network is the blockage in the arterial system. When one has a blocked artery, one requires surgery.  This has been a good debate and I welcome its tone, but it has also been a necessary debate. In answer to Elaine Murray, I cannot think of a more timely opportunity to have such a debate, given that the Minister for Transport is considering further funding. The debate is necessary because the subject is of national importance. As Mike Russell pointed out, the route serves Britain's second-busiest port. That fact alone makes it all the more unsustainable that the convoys of freight vehicles—I use the word "convoys" advisedly—face a two-hour journey to the east on the A75 or a one-hour journey to the north on the A77 before they can access a road that is truly worthy of serving the second-busiest port in the nation. Therein lie some of the difficulties facing south-west Scotland: there is a geographic disadvantage, which in turn creates an economic disadvantage. In his members' business debate last week, Euan Robson drew attention to the labour shortage in the Borders, which is exacerbated by the proximity of that part of Scotland to Edinburgh and the central belt. The south-west does not have that advantage. The nearest city to Stranraer is Belfast, not Glasgow, which brings problems of its own. I learned only yesterday, to my horror, that Stranraer has an annual turnover of social workers of 85 per cent. It is becoming increasingly difficult to recruit doctors, nurses, teachers and others on whom any community depends. The reason is simple: the transport infrastructure is, for all the reasons that we have heard in this excellent debate, inadequate and unacceptable. If these unique problems—the word "unique" is relevant, because there is a uniqueness about that part of Scotland and that road—are to be overcome, the transport infrastructure must be looked at considerably more robustly than is currently envisaged in the Executive's route action plan. Quite simply, that plan is not good enough, which is why the motion calls for it to be revisited, reworked and refunded. This debate is necessary not simply for local reasons, vital though they are, which is why our motion also stresses the importance of the international links of which this route is such an integral part. As Alasdair Morgan mentioned, those links have an important part to play in the economic regeneration of Northern Ireland and in the economic miracle that is the Republic of Ireland. Surely it is right that Scotland should play its full part in the international economic expansion that surrounds us. That is why the motion applauds the efforts of Dumfries and Galloway Council and the north channel partnership to highlight the strategic importance of the route; without due recognition of that strategic importance, Scotland will not fulfil her proper role in the international marketplace.  That situation was recognised by the Conference of Peripheral Maritime Regions of Europe, which recently urged the Scottish Executive to stop stalling and to complete the high-priority upgrade of the Euro-route from Gretna to Stranraer. This debate has made it crystal clear that, without a firm commitment to such an upgrade, Scotland's role in international trade will be severely diminished and those of us who live and work in that beautiful part of our country will feel increasingly cut off from the rest of it. The Executive's amendment encapsulates the complacency that this debate has shown to be completely unacceptable. I commend the motion to the chamber.

In accordance with your previous instructions,  Presiding Officer, I shall be brief. However, I ask your indulgence for one moment, as I should have declared an interest earlier in today's proceedings. I own a short stretch of a very unproductive river, and I hope that members will forgive me for not having said that earlier. In previous debates and committee meetings, I have always been scrupulous in declaring that interest. I should also put in a word of defence for my colleague Jamie McGrigor against Mr Rumbles's completely unwarranted personal attack. My colleague is too decent to say so himself but, as the Conservative fisheries spokesman, he was present at every meeting of the Rural Affairs Committee at which the bill was discussed. Mr Rumbles would do himself more favours—

He would do himself more favours if he stuck to the facts and left off the rather unpleasant personal attacks.

Of course I shall give way—if only Mr Rumbles had the grace to wait until I had finished my sentence.

I shall not labour it any further at all, Presiding Officer. I found the passage of the bill, both through the Rural Affairs Committee and through the Parliament, somewhat disturbing. It was introduced as a non-controversial bill that all of Scotland would welcome. However, controversy has increased as the bill has progressed. I find that worrying. That alone should set alarm bells ringing, but the bells should be all the louder when we are told, as I have been told increasingly, that the bill will do little for conservation and is really an attempt to transfer slightly increased power from the local river boards to the Scottish Executive. The Scottish Executive has tried its hardest to consolidate that power by resisting all attempts to make local consultation mandatory. In short, the bill is more about powers of river management than about conservation. At stage 1, the Conservatives gave a cautious welcome to the bill. Our caution has been absolutely justified. It is to my great sorrow that we are unable to lend our support to the bill any longer. It is generally agreed that the Scottish salmon strategy task force report of 1995  contained many of the answers required to address salmon conservation effectively. The bill does not contain enough of that report's recommendations to persuade us that it is anything other than an inadequate piece of legislation, somewhat hurried through the Parliament, which seeks to empower the Executive, without expense, in a way that will do virtually nothing for the conservation of salmon in Scotland. This party will not lend its name to poor and ineffective legislation. Because of that, sadly, we will not support the bill.

We have all heard that the conservation of salmon is a national issue. However, as we have been told time after time in committee and during today's proceedings, the issue is often best addressed at local level. I believe that strongly, and my experience tells me that that belief is absolutely correct. The Executive lodged amendment 12 in response to representations made—understandably—by the ASFB. It was forecast in evidence at Tuesday's Subordinate Legislation Committee meeting, at which a Scottish Executive rural afffairs department official stated: "The minister listened carefully to the representations that were made at the second stage 2 meeting of the Rural Affairs Committee. Yesterday, she indicated to the association that she is minded to lodge an amendment for Thursday's stage 3 debate"— that is, the amendment that she has just moved— "to cover that point and to reassure the association that whenever it is proposed to introduce a regulation, the minister will consult the district salmon fishery boards."—[ Official Report , Subordinate Legislation Committee , 9 January 2001; c 394-95.] That is an absolutely solid commitment that, whenever a regulation is laid, the appropriate river board will be consulted. However, my difficulty is that such a commitment is not made in the minister's amendment. Despite her reassurances, the amendment does not commit the Executive to consult the river boards. In fact, it contains an escape clause, and I do not think that good and robust law should allow such a way out. The issue  should be clear cut in the bill in a way that leaves no room for doubt. My amendment 13 removes any such doubt by committing the Executive to consult the relevant district salmon fishery boards—where they exist—and allows for wider consultation whether or not a board exists. Everyone agrees that local involvement is essential; my amendment guarantees such involvement.

All the evidence that we received as a committee—I think that I am right in saying that every organisation that gave evidence referred to its concerns about this matter—and a considerable amount of representation that I, and I am sure other members, have received demonstrates the concern about time limitation for regulations laid under the bill. Despite that, the bill lacks any commitment on that. During the stage 1 debate, Rhona Brankin said: "Whether regulations controlling exploitation are made in response to an application or on the ministers' initiative, the intention is to make them time-limited."— [ Official Report , 23 November 2000; Vol 9, c 7.]  I am sure that I do not need to remind the minister which road was paved with good intentions. In this  instance, good intentions and promises are not enough. A firm, robust intention should be included in the bill. My amendment demands such a commitment to time limitation, but I believe that it does considerably more than that. If we are striving, as the bill purports to, for the conservation of salmon, we must recognise that all regulations should be subject to frequent review. It therefore makes sense that time limitation should go hand in hand with regular review; that is what my amendment seeks to achieve. It ensures that each regulation laid under the act would specify a period for which the regulation would remain in force. It places no limit on that period, but ensures that the issue would be revisited annually to make certain that the regulation was still relevant. That is a logical part of a monitoring process. I fail to understand why there would be any difficulty in implementing such a logical step. The Executive has rightly stated that this is an enabling bill, which is part of a much larger picture. However, rather than being burdensome, annual reviews should be seen as part of an on-going process that would help to create effective measures in the conservation of salmon. My amendment addresses time limitation and demands that the regulations remain alive during that time to ensure that the conservation of salmon is an on-going and successful process. My colleague, Jamie McGrigor, lodged the other amendment in the group, amendment 10. I hope that members have noticed that, as always, the Scottish Conservatives seek to provide a balance and give a choice on time limitation. [Interruption.] I see that there is general approval from members, for which I am grateful. I believe that my amendment 7 is an improvement on Jamie McGrigor's amendment 10, in that it offers a continual review, which I believe would be important for the proper implementation of the regulations. My colleague's amendment 10, which will fall when mine is accepted, offers a softer choice. I accept that the five-year limitation is part of the life-cycle of the salmon, so I see its logic. None the less, I commend my amendment to the chamber. I move amendment 7.

I fully accept that the bill allows for the introduction of time limitations, but is the Scottish National Party happy that the intention of the minister is good enough? Personally, I would accept any intention of the present minister; however, she will not remain in this particular post for ever. Is Mr Lochhead happy to say that a good intention is good enough? A good intention is all that is in the bill.

I listened to the minister with great interest. I do not disagree with what she  said. However, I repeat that I do not believe that good intentions are enough in this case. In response to Richard Lochhead, I would say that I have not asked for things to be brought to the Parliament annually. I have simply asked that each regulation be reviewed annually to ensure that it is still relevant to the conservation of salmon. I introduced an amendment at stage 2 to that effect, but I altered it in recognition of the difficulties that might have been involved. I really believe that amendment 7 will greatly strengthen the bill. Any bill that is passed on the conservation of salmon must be as strong and robust as possible. My amendment would ensure that that is so.

It is always nice to see—as new section 10A(3) shows—that the Liberals are  as joined-up in their thinking as ever. I notice that Mr Rumbles has not objected to the removal of the subsection that his amendment, which was accepted at stage 2, inserted. Doubtless, there is good reasoning for that. The Conservatives are minded to support Euan Robson's amendments. New section 10A(6)(a) is too widely drafted. Even in its amended state, it says merely that the information that is required must be specified and given within a set time. That means that there is no limit to the nature or frequency of the information that is requested and that proprietors will be bound by law to provide any information that is so requested. That is perfectly fair, but in these days of ever-increasing bureaucracy and form-filling—and given that the Scottish Executive forever proclaims its determination to decrease bureaucracy and form-filling—it is only right and fair that the provision should be tightened. Amendment 5 would place a reasonable limit on the frequency with which information is requested from proprietors. We must remember that proprietors include not only large landowners, but small farmers, crofters, fishing associations and the netsmen at the mouths of the river. I am happy to speak to the amendment, which would ensure that information was requested no more than once a month. The amendment would ensure that demands were held at an acceptable level for the proprietors and allow the provision of the information that is necessary under the bill.

Both Richard Lochhead and John Home Robertson mentioned the fact that little has happened to change the make-up of the district salmon fishery boards since Victorian times. Some measures have been taken to allow the make-up to alter, and it would have done Richard Lochhead more good if he had accepted that, but I accept the principle that the basis of the boards has remained the same. There is an element of truth in saying that the fact that there has been no rapid change until now is a measure of the success of the boards. There is a perfectly justifiable  argument for that. However, I wish to take issue with Richard Lochhead's assertion—and I am sure that the Association of Salmon Fishery Boards will be every bit as horrified as I am—that together we are part of some sort of Tory conspiracy. Nothing could be further from the truth. John Home Robertson might be surprised to learn that we in the Conservative party are not against a review of the make-up of district salmon fishery boards—far from it. As Mike Rumbles said, that issue was addressed in committee, and we are totally satisfied by the minister's assurances that the matter will be looked at. We are unable, therefore, to support the amendments.

To ask the Scottish Executive what the timetable now is in relation to its proposals to end the distinction between residential and nursing care homes. (S1O-2665)

I thank the minister for that answer. Does he share the view of the Abbeyfield Society of Dumfries and Galloway, which believes that the proposal to standardise care homes will reduce choice, increase charges and result in a short to medium-term reduction in the number of care providers and bed spaces in that sector? Does he also agree that, in standardising all the homes to nursing care standard, this proposal is effectively placing a tax on tender, loving care that is currently available in abundance and free of charge at residential homes that are run by organisations such as the Abbeyfield Society?

I, too, congratulate the minister. The Conservative party welcomes the sincerity and general thrust of her opening speech. I will confine my speech to the conservation aspect of sea fisheries and the fish stocks without which the fisheries would not exist. In researching for the debate, I was struck by how often the subject of conservation is raised in the Scottish Parliament. That is to be welcomed. However, conservation always comes down to two basic points—habitat and harvest. We must accept that the balance of species becomes altered largely because of the interference of mankind, so it is up to mankind to do everything in its power to correct that balance. That is why some of the measures that are actively promoted by some environmentalist groups, such as no-take zones, are not quite as good as they might sound on first hearing. Merely saying that we have a problem in an area and that we must back off and leave it alone is no answer to any problem, let alone one that involves fish stocks. I understand that some of the scientific work behind that concept was carried out in the tropics—hardly the same conditions as the north Atlantic—and that the evidence by no means suggests that a no-take zone necessarily leads to the automatic recovery of the at-risk species. We cannot simply back away from the problem—we must stay involved. If we accept that leaving well alone is not an option, it follows automatically that we must look closely at what can and must be done. It is equally logical, when we consider species recovery, to address each stage of the life cycle of a threatened species. We must start with the spawning grounds where the life cycle begins and we must find out whether the scientists, in tandem with the fishermen—their involvement is vital—can strike a balance between the needs of the spawning grounds and the economic interests of fishermen. A mixture of science and common sense should mean that a rapid improvement in spawning rates could be achieved quickly. We must then turn to conserving greater numbers of juvenile fish. The Scottish Parliament and the fishing industry—as the minister pointed  out—can hold their heads high, having introduced square-mesh panels. Other nations must—not should—follow our lead, because the benefits of those panels are both instantaneous and measurable. The use of square-mesh panels, coupled with a maximum twine thickness, means that Scottish fishermen are leading the way in demonstrating how technical measures can play their part in the conservation process. If we are successful in increasing spawning numbers and juvenile stocks, we must then ensure that there is an adequate food supply for the increased stocks. That means that we must tackle some thorny issues. Seals—a word that only the bravest members ever mention—share with foxes and raptors the dubious honour of having no predators. We recognise that there is a need to control foxes, but we need to address the control of seal numbers sooner rather than later. I repeat the Conservative call for the establishment of a seal commission. After all, seal numbers have trebled in the past 20 years. That would be fine if the food stocks had trebled at the same time, but the opposite is the case. It is an emotive subject, for obvious reasons, but it is also a perfect example of what can happen when man stands back and does nothing. Industrial fishing for sand eels—a vital food source for demersal stocks—must come under tighter control. We should bear it in mind that a huge percentage of that catch is simply recycled as food for fish farms. There is an urgent need to investigate the role that saith stocks play, given that saith is a dominant predator on the sand eel. I am told that it is possible that heavier fishing of saith could have a beneficial effect on other species, because that would protect and preserve their food source. An abundance of options is open to us as we begin to address the regeneration of fish stocks and that can only be good news. To their credit, the fishermen have shown that they are willing and ready to help. The Executive must back that commitment by fully resourcing the science to help the fishermen to find the solution that will benefit us all.

The minister will be aware that in Dumfries and  Galloway, as throughout rural Scotland, one of the most abused drugs is alcohol. Is he aware of the considerable lack of funding for training alcohol abuse counsellors? If he is, what does he intend to do about it?

I cannot possibly match Jamie McGrigor's declaration of interests, but I draw members' attention to the fact that I own a short stretch of almost unfishable river in south Ayrshire. Therefore, I will not respond to the remarks that John Home Robertson has just made, but will leave that to others, as I suspect that I would be accused of bias. I will resist the temptation. I reiterate that Conservative members welcome the broad thrust of the bill. Its introduction provides a measure of recognition of the importance of the salmon to the social, economic and environmental well-being of Scotland. That said, I note from written evidence that some people are concerned that insufficient weight is given in the bill to the socio-economic importance of salmon fishing. In debating the bill, we must recognise that it is far from the uncontroversial bill that was originally trumpeted by the Executive, as I have come to realise in listening to the evidence that was taken by the Rural Affairs Committee and to representations that have been made to me since. I want to use the short time that is available to focus on the sincerely held concerns of one group on whose interests the bill could have a catastrophic impact, costing yet more jobs in rural Scotland and greatly reducing the amount of wild Scottish salmon in the marketplace. I refer to the  netsmen, who have been mentioned, who have reaped their annual harvest for many hundreds of years and who, in come cases, have a special historic place in our society, as well as a special place in their communities. For example, in Annan in Dumfriesshire in Dr Murray's constituency—I am sure that she would speak today if she could—

I see that she is doing better. In Annan, the rates that are paid by the haaf-netters go into the Annan common good fund, which is used exclusively for the benefit of all the good citizens of the town. Those fishings were handed down by royal charter to the people of Annan—a fact that, I presume, would render them inappropriate for the SNP—and form an important part of Annan's heritage and its community funding. That community is worried about the consequences of the bill because, if it is not carefully thought through at stage 2, it could signal the end of that historic and worthwhile practice. On the wider implications of the bill, the netsmen feel strongly, as do others, that measures that would be adopted under section 10A, as set out in section 1 of the bill, must be time-limited to keep the situation under review. That is only sensible, because any bill that would give powers to address a rapidly changing situation must recognise that that situation could change back again just as rapidly. As always, much play has been made of the consultation process that will take place when the powers are exercised. However, the netsmen have concerns that their voice will not be heard in that process. To that end, they suggest that all river boards—or whatever authority is consulted in areas where there are no river boards—should include a fair and balanced representation of upper and lower proprietors. I do not disagree with that. The netsmen point out—as others have done forcefully—that there are vital areas that remain untouched by the bill. The bill contains no measures to conserve habitat, which is normally the first item on any conservation agenda. It contains no measures to address the predators, other than man, that exploit salmon stocks 365 days a year. Incidentally, I agree with John Home Robertson that mentioning the word "seal" is almost as dangerous as mentioning the word "raptor". As the minister acknowledged, the bill contains nothing to promote research into—or to address in any other way—the marine phase of the salmon's life cycle. That is a glaring omission. It could be said with some justification that the bill stops where the problems of the salmon start. Many people have talked about parts of the bill  that need to be given greater definition. Sections 10A(3)(b) and 10A(6)(a) are far too loose to escape criticism and will undoubtedly receive attention at stage 2. Great emphasis is given to the use of catch returns for providing the guiding statistics in the bill. I believe that to be far too simplistic, especially when it is coupled with the catch and release policy that could be employed. Incidentally, the Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals is beginning to voice great reservations about that policy. Under catch and release, it is entirely possible that, during the course of a season, the same salmon could be caught and released perhaps three times. That could result in the figures showing that 300 salmon had been caught when only 100 exist.

I do not argue with Euan Robson's basic position, but I must point out that there is a chance that the 18,000 salmon of which he spoke were actually only 6,000 salmon that had been caught three times each—that was my point. The SSPCA's concern relates to the welfare of the fish, not to the policy itself. The member may scoff, but I am merely reiterating evidence that the Rural Affairs Committee was given the other day. I believe that accurate calculation of parr and smolt numbers would be of far greater benefit in determining numbers. The bill is a welcome step on the road to salmon conservation, but it is not the be-all and end-all. Our welcome is cautious and I hope that I have justified the fact that we will seek to make significant amendments at stage 2. With that caveat, I look forward to a bill that should, when sensibly amended, play an important role in conserving salmon stocks so that the socio-economic role of Scottish salmon fishing can be realised to its fullest potential.

He is being open and honest.

I declare an interest in the debate, as a landowner and former farmer. I congratulate John Scott and the Parliamentary Bureau. In many ways, this is a brave debate. I will take up one issue with Sylvia Jackson, because she has missed the point. I would not mind if the percentage of the land in Scotland that was under designation was doubled if designation was done on a voluntary basis, as happens in Europe. Designation should not be imposed. The imposition of an SSSI is unnecessary for the conservation or protection—there is a great difference between the two—of the hen harrier, in the four cases that have been mentioned. Although I applaud the decision of the chair of SNH to postpone the notifications of the four sites, I recognise that that is only a postponement and may well be nothing more than a token gesture. I am sure we will be told that any landowner on whom one of those SSSIs is to be imposed has the right to appeal, but appeals can be made only on the basis of scientific information. Given that most of that information is held by SNH, it is evident that that will not account for many of the concerns of landowners. Not only does the bias of specific scientific criteria ignore many other legitimate reasons why  sites of nature conservation interest may be valued; crucially, it raises unnecessary barriers between scientists, conservation managers, land managers and members of the public. Another unnecessary barrier is raised by the refusal of an SSSI to recognise a legitimate need for sustainable economic development. Cathy Jamieson mentioned that. I am delighted that that vital point is to be discussed. At the proposed site for Glenapp in Ayrshire and Galloway, one landowner, whose land is located on the edge of the site, wanted to retain the right to develop a stone quarry for the two good reasons of diversifying his farming operation and providing some desperately needed local employment. Despite the logic and passion of the landowner's arguments, the quarry could not be removed from the list of potentially damaging operations because, as the development has no scientific criteria, there was no right of appeal. In the Executive's National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000, the need for sustainable economic development is highlighted as one of the main aims of a national park. Given that aim, the power of an unaccountable body, such as SNH, to deny sustainable economic development seems to be unjustified, especially when one takes into account the paucity of jobs in rural Scotland at the moment. We need a reverse of the current situation, in which there is a distinct lack of open discussion. SSSIs are seen to be imposed by a heavy-handed Government body, which shows little concern for some of the wider parameters—to which I would have referred had not the Presiding Officer cut down the time allowed for my speech by about half.

The minister may well argue that it was sensible for the Presiding Officer to do so. Increasingly, resentfulness, bitterness and in some cases downright anger are being caused, as my colleague John Scott and I witnessed at a recent SNH meeting in Stranraer. I cannot believe that the present system is the ideal backdrop to sound conditions for a joint approach to conservation. I ask the Executive, SNH and the organisations that represent landowners and managers to address the issues that I have raised, so that the matter can be taken forward in an atmosphere of consensus, which will achieve results, rather than the prevailing atmosphere of mistrust and resignation, which most certainly will not.

Will Sylvia Jackson give way?

The charge is level across the board—every farmer pays £123.

Settle down.

In registering my interest, I thank the Parliamentary Bureau for picking this vexed question for debate today. Hoping that his head is not getting too big this afternoon, I too welcome the new Deputy Minister for Sport and Culture to his role. I wish him every success therein. During the two summers that have passed since the first election to this Parliament, I have held a series of tented surgeries at some of the agricultural shows in the south-west of Scotland, where I live. This year, there was virtually only one subject that people wished to draw to my attention: the annual Scottish Environment Protection Agency levy known as the groundwater maintenance charge. When I say that fury was the principal emotion displayed by many constituents who came to see me about the issue, that is to understate the case.

I am not sure what I have done to deserve the opprobrium of the minister, but doubtless all will be revealed in due course. As he embraces his new portfolio, the minister will witness that fury for himself and see that it has, if anything, grown stronger. That fury is understandable when the current plight of agriculture is considered alongside the fact that the Scottish Parliament was expected to make a difference. However much the Parliament might like to make that difference, the Executive has delivered a slap in the face to Scottish farmers which leaves in the mouth a bitter taste of  arrogance and hypocrisy. When the charge was initially introduced it was accepted, if grudgingly, as another piece of red tape dressed up as a way of reassuring the general public of the high standards of agricultural production that prevail in this country. Set at £123 per annum, even with the current economic fragility of Scottish agriculture, that amount of money was not likely to break the bank. Furthermore, the charge was initiated in response to an EU directive to protect groundwater. However, I would argue strongly that because it is an EU directive, and therefore an obligation, there should be an appropriate allocation of public spending to cover the cost. Neither the reason for the charge nor the amount of it was greatly questioned by those affected. All that changed following the aid package announced after the Downing Street farming summit on 31 March 2000, when the levy in England and Wales was waived for the following four years. Scottish producers waited expectantly for a similar announcement from the Scottish Executive, because it is a devolved issue. When no such announcement was forthcoming, questions were asked in the Parliament, all of which received a similar answer, that the Scottish Executive has no plans to waive the groundwater maintenance charge and that it is SEPA's policy to move towards full recovery of the costs of the regulation, in line with the polluter pays principle. In this case that is blatant nonsense. The original charge of £150 per producer covered the cost of establishing SEPA's database. SEPA carries out only a minimal number of inspections each year, and however much the Executive may talk of a review of authorisations, as it doubtless will, any such review is not due for another four years. I would love to hear the minister's justification for charging for inspections that may take place some four years hence. So all that has happened is that Scottish sheep producers are being charged for purely notional costs. That they have to pay them when the charges have been dropped in England and Wales flies in the face of the Minister for Rural Development's support for initiatives aimed at minimising farmers' costs. Far worse, it flies in the face of the pronouncements that we have had from the Executive that it is fighting to give our farmers a level playing field in Europe so that they can compete on equal terms. Never again can ministers say that; they have gone out of their way to create an uneven playing field in the United Kingdom. As I said earlier, neither the amount of the charge nor the reason for it is questioned. The blatant unfairness is being questioned—to such an extent that most farmers I know are refusing to  pay what it is now, by definition, an iniquitous charge. It would cost the Scottish Executive only £300,000 a year to waive the charge—that is 25 per cent less than the cost of moving the Parliament to Glasgow for three weeks. That is a minute amount to pay for justice, a pittance to pay for equality.

I would like to use this short time to focus on the heritage aspect of the Executive's cultural strategy. In doing so, I will use as an example a museum that I visited only last Monday and which Mike Russell mentioned: the Museum of Lead Mining at Wanlockhead in Upper Nithsdale. It is by no means just a museum of artefacts. It is a living, breathing example of great historic and educational importance nationally; it is also of enormous social and economic benefit to Upper Nithsdale. Due to the decline in its traditional industries, the area now suffers more than twice the national average level of unemployment and substantial deprivation. Consequently, local communities lack certainty and confidence about their future sustainability. However, they do not simply sit back and wait for the Government to come to their aid, or accept that there is no way forward. A recent survey—Kirkconnell 2000—achieved a remarkable response rate of almost 70 per cent and flagged up several key points that the community wishes to explore. A couple of months ago, I attended a meeting at which the working of the miners regeneration fund was explained. That meeting positively bristled with ideas and projects to try to regenerate the area. A further project is called deals on wheels. It involves a community bus that is entirely funded, operated and maintained by local voluntary effort. The volunteers ask for nothing in return for their effort, save the satisfaction of knowing that they are helping people less fortunate than themselves. The community does not hold out the begging bowl at every opportunity. Rather, it takes pride in trying to help itself, as rural communities so often do. However, it is deeply troubled at the prospect of losing the Museum of Lead Mining, which is its most important asset. Although the museum is important to the future economy of Upper Nithsdale, it is of greater importance that the Scottish Executive takes  action to preserve Scotland's industrial heritage and the history of its working people. It is not right that important cultural facilities such as the Museum of Lead Mining must rely on the generosity of already financially beleaguered local authorities for survival. Dumfries and Galloway Council has already said that it will be unable to maintain its previous commitment to the museum in the next financial year. Even last year, despite that commitment, staff had to volunteer to work for some months on half salary, to allow the museum to survive. They showed real commitment. In the short term, it is imperative that the Scottish Executive takes action to ensure that Scotland's industrial heritage museums do not close because of short-term cash flow problems. The minister said that the Executive is allocating millions for an audit of such museums. A tiny percentage of that money would ensure their survival. As David Mundell said, the cultural strategy document cost more than £70,000 to produce. If that sum were added to Wanlockhead's existing support, it could keep going for about 10 more years. The museum has suffered, as has all rural Scotland, because of the drop in tourist numbers—they have fallen by 17 per cent in the past year alone. That is not the fault of the museum, but it could lead to its closure. We believe that the Scottish Executive must put in place funding provision that ensures the preservation, protection and promotion of these important museums, to allow future generations to gain insight into Scotland's industrial heritage. I would also venture that such support could be delivered directly from the Scottish Executive, through the Scottish Museums Council. There is a precedent for that, as some £127,000 went to the Scottish Mining Museum by that route in the previous financial year. Given that the new audit of museums ordered by the Scottish Executive will not report for 18 months to two years, complacency is no option. Wanlockhead has about two months left. The Executive must act now, or some of our most important industrial heritage museums may be lost to the nation for good.

To ask the Scottish Executive how many of  the recommendations made in the report "Review of the Regulatory Burden: IACS and Inspections in Scotland" have been implemented since its publication in January 2000. R (S1O-2363)

I take it that the answer is that five of the proposals have been implemented. Is it not the case that, some eight months after his original announcement, the minister has been quick to grab the headlines but has lacked the technical back-up that is required to deliver the proposals? Does he agree that the headline-grabbing proposal—with a promised £6 million—to implement an electronic cattle-tagging scheme is technically, practically and financially impossible to deliver within his intended time scale?

As a member who on more than one occasion has been critical of the department's relationship with its farming clients, I am delighted to welcome the minister's statement. I hope that it will lead to an improvement in that relationship. I particularly welcome the fact that the procedure will provide appellants with a second opinion in cases where they feel that a wrong decision has been made,  and the fact that appeals can relate to reductions in subsidy payments, exclusions from payments and recoveries from past payments. Was retrospection considered for the appeals procedure? I am unable to find a crumb of comfort in the statement for the many people who have contacted members and who feel that they have a just case that would almost certainly receive attention and possibly a positive outcome under the new appeals procedure.

It seems a shame to come back down to earth. To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to ensure the survival of rural filling stations. (S1O-2313)

I thank the minister for that short answer, but as far as people who own and use those filling stations are concerned, the scheme is not enough. Rural filling stations are closing at the rate of five a week. Unless the petrochemical giants can be persuaded to review their policy of passing on the increased fuel prices to independent distributors, our rural filling stations will have to pay more per litre for their supplies than motorists in towns pay. Is the Executive prepared to oversee the closure of virtually every rural filling station in Scotland?

The debate was always going to be worth having, but it is considerably more so for my having had the pleasure of hearing Dr Simpson say something vaguely flattering about a Tory politician. I thank him hugely for that. On a more serious note, Dr Simpson's level of expertise is welcome in the debate. Politicians are expected to be able to rise to their  feet and make speeches and give addresses with ease and professionalism whenever called on to do so. The hardest address that I have ever given was at the funeral service of one of my greatest friends, who died not long before the Parliament was established; a matter of months after winning the exhausting hill race on our local gala day. He left behind two children barely into their teens. Everyone in the chamber and many people beyond will be aware that early death through cancer and other incurable diseases touches almost everyone in the land. One of the last things that my friend said to me was to ask me, when I got into Parliament, to do everything that I could in that field. I was therefore absolutely delighted to see the proposal to form a cross-party palliative care group. Like everyone else, I congratulate Michael McMahon on the work that he has done. I was even more delighted to join that group. I joined to learn because, unlike Richard Simpson, I do not know a lot about palliative care. Members will be glad to know that, because I am here to learn—and although I have already learned a lot through the cross-party group—I will refrain from saying too much. One of the first visits that I made was to Rachel House, to which other members have referred. I recommend any member to undertake a visit there. It is Scotland's only palliative care hospice and a visit there is emotive, humbling and rewarding. Another house is being sought. I phoned today and understand that a shortlist of sites on the west of Scotland has been arrived at. I wish Rachel House every success in that venture. I hope that the Scottish Executive will give it encouragement and any assistance which it asks for. I was struck by the fact that—as I understand it—Rachel House is currently partly funded by all 15 health boards in Scotland. It hopes to receive funding from all 32 local authorities for the second house, when it is established. It strikes me that there is a need to ensure that we get some joined-up thinking and working—co-ordination is what we are looking for. That was highlighted at today's lunchtime meeting of the cross-party group. It must be novel for a minister to come to a debate at which we are not asking for more money. However, it is surely not too much to ask for the Executive to develop co-ordination in this area and to take a lead. That would be welcomed by all concerned. In confining my remarks to that, I again congratulate Michael McMahon on securing this debate.

Given the vital importance of the car in rural Scotland, will the First Minister assure the chamber that petrol stations there will be given equitable status when it comes to replenishing fuel stocks and that they will not be left to the end of  the queue?

No one in the chamber seeks to conceal the fact that the actions and demonstrations that have taken place over the past few days have been highly disruptive and economically damaging. Matters may well get worse over the next few days. I hope that they will not, but I am told by the major supermarkets that they consider their situation in rural Scotland to be manageable up to the weekend, but do not wish to make forecasts beyond then. Stockpiling of the basic foodstuffs began yesterday in rural Scotland and continues apace. Things may reach such a state that even Jamie Stone will perceive next week "that there is something not quite right here"—[ Official Report , 6 September 2000; Vol 8, c 29.]— a sure sign of a situation in meltdown. A significant difference that has set this dispute apart from most others is that those people whose lives have been, and are being, disrupted continue to show a remarkable degree of tolerance to those who seek to disrupt their lives. That fact alone should set alarm bells ringing at Labour party headquarters. It is not as if the Government has not been warned. At every possible opportunity since the Scottish Parliament came into being, Conservative members and others have warned constantly of the irreparable damage that was being done, particularly in rural Scotland, as a result of the  ever-widening gap between fuel prices in this country and those in other European states.

Mr Stone is the only member to whom I will give way this afternoon.

I agree completely that the fuel tax is very damaging to rural Scotland. That is the whole basis of my speech, if Mr Stone would like to wait to hear the end of it. That widening gap has opened up the United Kingdom to continental hauliers who fill their tanks in Europe, spend the week in this country and return to the continent to refuel both themselves and their lorries, ready for another working week in Great Britain. The gap has ensured that some hauliers in Dumfries and Galloway cross the Irish sea to refuel in southern Ireland, where the price of diesel is 42p per litre, as opposed to the 68.5p per litre that they have to pay here. The widening gap has sickened many industries—road haulage, agriculture, fishing, forestry and tourism—and crippled the rural economy to such an extent that there was almost a feeling of relief at the blockades, convoys and queues that have marked the past week. The blockades, convoys and queues are nothing less than a signal that the buyers and users of road fuel have had enough, that there is a limit to their willingness to fund wider Government policies and that that limit has at last been reached. That is particularly relevant in rural Scotland, where the sad irony is that everybody, except those in the Labour party, seems to know that the car is a necessity. Public transport cannot, and will not, replace the car as the principal means of transport in rural Scotland. It is time that the Government addressed that fact specifically, by considering ways of rebating the increased costs of fuel to those who live and, in particular, work in rural areas. Furthermore, an ironic situation is turned into a tragic one by the equally well-known fact that wages tend to be lower in rural areas. Therefore, the lower wage earners have to pay the higher prices that exist in rural Scotland simply to go  about their everyday lives: getting to work, getting to the shops or visiting hospitals. For people who live in Stranraer and need to visit someone in hospital, the chances are that they will have to go to Dumfries. That is 70 miles each way, which is a fair old trip by car; by public transport, the journey becomes the logistic equivalent of a Himalayan expedition. Rural Scotland—by the look of things, rural Britain—has had enough and any Government, especially one that portrays itself as a listening Government, must begin to apply itself to ways and means of addressing those real issues. Transport costs have risen to the level where the phrases "economically competitive" and "rural Scotland" are no longer compatible. That is unacceptable. The disaster is of the Government's own making, and the Government must act: by considering rebating schemes; by considering whether fuel tax could be used as a price regulator; or by lowering the tax rate when crude oil prices rise and vice versa. The Government must take an innovative view of the structure of fuel taxation. That is the message from the past week, and I endorse it heartily.

On a point of order. Presiding Officer, I understood that you undertook that all members who wished to ask questions on this matter would be allowed to do so.

I welcome the minister's placing of agriculture at the heart of the rural economy. I declare an interest in this debate with the same feeling of guilt that I am told accompanies those who escape from a fatal accident or who cancel their booking on an aeroplane that subsequently crashes. I am not someone who is usually noted for being ahead of the game but, given the recent advice of the president of the National Farmers Union to his members that they should get out if and while they can, perhaps I have been fortunate in finding another occupation before it is too late. The fact that the president of the NFUS feels forced to give that advice to his members is indicative of the desperate—and I use that word advisedly—state to which farmers have been reduced. The income of producers has halved year after year since the Labour party came to power and their collective borrowing is now much more than £1 billion. Producers used to borrow for innovation and investment but now borrow simply for survival. Those individuals cannot be accused of complacency in the face of their increasingly desperate situation, for well over 70 per cent of Scotland's farmers derive a significant part of their income from non-farming activities. While I applaud the innovation and the entrepreneurial spirit that enables them to do so, I have no doubt that the vast majority do not do so voluntarily. What has the agriculture industry had in return from the Labour Government since 1997 and from the Lib-Lab Executive since last year? I link those two bodies because all the discussion documents that are issued by the Scottish Executive seem to be regurgitated versions of those issued earlier by Lord Sewel. The Labour Government came to power with a catchphrase of "Education, education, education", but that has been reinterpreted in relation to agriculture as "Consultation, consultation, consultation". While I welcome the minister's talk of urgency, our amendment highlights the time that has been taken so far. How could it take 10 months to produce this discussion document? How could it take 10 months to come up with the profound statements that we find on page 3? We are told that "Scotland is a significantly rural country." We are further informed that "The nature of farming itself varies."  The best statement of the lot is that "The size of farms also varies." I assure the minister that, if those pearls of wisdom are designed to set the farmers' minds at rest, he is in for a major disappointment. How could it take a further two and a half months to set up the steering group to take the process forward? The document and the steering group should have been in place long ago. That would have sent a message to Scotland's farmers that their plight was as high on the list of priorities as they were promised that it would be before the election for this Parliament. Instead, the minister has to deal with an industry that feels let down, unwanted and unvalued. The minister is not being helped in that respect by his departmental officials. It gives me no pleasure to say this, but those civil servants are becoming neither of service nor civil in their zealous pursuit of the rigorous interpretation of regulations. Why else would a farmer who wrote to me recently have had his application for the beef special premium scheme refused after he had voluntarily given the information that he had mistakenly claimed for a heifer? Why else would the Scottish Executive rural affairs department be reclaiming an entire year's sheep annual premium and hill livestock compensatory allowance from another farmer because the officials did not like his method of record keeping, despite the fact—as SERAD confirmed—that he consistently had a higher number of sheep on the farm than he was claiming for? The attitude that SERAD has towards its farming clients is nothing short of disgraceful.

If only time permitted, minister. I am seriously saying that the size of my postbag is increasing on this issue and that, if we are to address a long-term strategy for agriculture, we need individual producers as willing participants in the discussion. If the attitude problem continues—it is becoming more prevalent, at least in my mailbag and, I believe, in others—we will not achieve that willing participation, and the whole exercise will be a waste of time. I have had more than two cases.

Alasdair Morgan will be surprised to learn that I do not accept that at all.

Quite. I contend that the crisis accelerated considerably in 1997. I would love to find a farmer who would not prefer to be in the position in which he was in 1997 rather than in the position in which he is now.

Yes, including myself. The minister may be pleased to hear that we whole-heartedly welcome the desire to address the long-term situation, with the aim of maintaining a viable and sustainable industry—of course we do. However, unless we address the short-term issues as well, there is a genuine danger that only the rump of an industry will be left to sustain. I ask the minister to answer the following points when he sums up. Why are we in Scotland so far behind the rest of the UK in establishing a sheep tagging scheme that we are endangering what is left of our export market? Is money available for the establishment of the electronic cattle tagging scheme, which the minister trumpeted as a means of cutting bureaucracy, and what is the latest timetable for its establishment? Does he agree that the industry simply cannot afford the so-called modulation proposals, even at the rate at which they are set currently, never mind the rate of 20 per cent that Alasdair Morgan proposed? If the modulation proposals are implemented, does the minister agree that they must be implemented without any significant sectoral or regional disadvantage? I could put another 100 questions to the minister, but I am sure that the chamber will be grateful that I do not have time. I conclude by repeating that, while we welcome the desire to seek a long-term solution, there is an overriding and urgent need to address the short-term situation, which cannot be resolved by more words and consultation. I move amendment S1M-1051.1, to leave out from "the steps" to end and insert: "steps being taken to secure a sustainable future for the agricultural industry as part of the social, economic and environmental fabric of rural Scotland; recognises agriculture as the main economic driver in rural Scotland; deplores the lack of urgency being shown by the Scottish Executive in addressing the short-term problems of Scotland's farmers, and calls for a speedy conclusion to the  series of consultations on an agricultural strategy so that action can be initiated to protect the future of the farming industry."

To ask the Scottish Executive how many farmers affected by the double payment situation in relation to the countryside premium scheme have applied for compensation. (S1O-2053)

I would like to point out to the  Parliament that it is not me. [Laughter.]  I thank the minister for his answer. I thought that that would be the case. Does the minister agree that, as about 120 farmers are affected, this is a deeply regrettable situation, given that the fault never lay with the individual farmers? Will he undertake to simplify and speed up the compensation process for the farmers involved and instruct the Scottish Executive rural affairs department to take a proactive role in progressing that process? Will he also undertake to ensure that full compensation is given for stock disposal, which is at the heart of this whole sorry mess?

If I were to burst into song, Presiding Officer, you would want to turn a blind ear. Cathy Peattie's singing was absolutely beautiful. To look at me now, it is hard to imagine that I spent the second half of the 1960s yearning to be in San Francisco with flowers in my hair, spreading messages of peace and love in all directions and—more important, as I had by then just mastered the chords of C, G and D on the guitar—singing those messages. The trouble was that I was at least five years too young to aspire to hippiedom and, had I done so, I would no doubt have dispatched my parents to an early grave. I had to find a way to relieve my largely imagined revolutionary frustrations. Thus it was that—when maturity at last allowed what was on my unshaven features to resemble a beard and I had persuaded my long-suffering mother to knit me the compulsory white Aran sweater—I aspired to become a folkie. I must say that I was very disappointed to read an e-mail this morning that said that the days of four pullovers with out-of-tune guitars singing "The Wild Rover" are long gone. I am sad, because when I did that I thought that I had reached my artistic peak. If nothing else, that says everything one might need to know about my performing capabilities. The late 1960s and early 1970s was a great time to be involved, even in a small way, in the resurgence of Scotland's folk traditions. I mean not only the music, but the different languages, the story telling and the poetry—the whole gamut of the traditional heritage that is Scotland's culture. It is a special culture and one that we ignore at our peril. I must admit that my knowledge of Scottish  history is shamefully sketchy, but I can honestly say that before I got involved in folk music it was non-existent. It was through the songs, stories and poems, the camaraderie and what the Irish call the craic, that my ignorance began to be addressed. There is a huge educational benefit to be gained through investing in and promoting our Scottish culture, but not just in the obvious sense of making available the resources to teach those who want to take part in music. We can use that culture in all its forms to educate our young people about our history, our folklore and our heritage. There are probably people—some in this chamber—who think it odd that I, as a lowland Scot, would have any relevance at all to this debate, but I contest that strongly. Our cultural heritage comes as much from Stranraer as from Stromness and as much from Glasgow as from Edinburgh. It is of national importance and that is why the situation behind tonight's motion is so important to everybody in Scotland. That is also why the Scottish Conservatives, in our submission to the national cultural strategy, have urged the Scottish Executive to recognise and encourage the importance of our traditional culture alongside such national institutions as Scottish Opera and Scottish Ballet. I, of course, have nothing against those organisations, although I will live quite happily if I never have to see another ballet. However, I love opera—despite the fact that during a magnificent production of "The Pearl Fishers" that I once saw in Glasgow, Scottish Opera saw fit to smear copious amounts of white make-up on the tenor lead, who was obviously of African descent. The result was a sort of ghost-like grey, and it crossed my mind that the make-up department of Scottish Opera, at least, must be somewhat overfunded. Despite that lapse, I have always admitted the excellence of Scotland's classical institutions and companies and it is right that they should receive a level of funding that ensures that they can continue to do Scotland so much credit in the cultural world. It is not right that Scotland's cultural world remains essentially unsupported and is—in the words of a correspondent of mine, "encouraged, fostered and looked after by dedicated amateurs working with a small number of hugely talented but financially strapped professionals." We must invest in our culture. I use the word "invest" deliberately. Through tourism and commercial activity, there are economic benefits to be gained for Scotland if the necessary strategic support is given. I will finish by quoting another correspondent. He said: "I want to thank you all for bringing traditional music to  the debating chamber. As a musician, I feel that it is a great pity that I have to travel far from my own country to receive recognition for our own music." It is within Parliament's or the Executive's power to correct that situation. That would be one of our most important and long-lasting achievements. I heartily commend the motion.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to upgrade the A76 road from Kilmarnock to Dumfries. (S1O-1793)

The minister will be aware of the disdain with which the route action plan for the A76 and the A75 has been greeted in Dumfries and Galloway. Is she also aware of the considerable local concern about the effect that the welcome upgrade of the A77 to motorway standards will have on the A76, an already heavily used road? If she is, why are there no greater plans to upgrade that road, and if she is not, why not?

Will the minister give way?

It is a pleasure to follow the most negative speech of the morning.

Absolutely. In declaring an interest in the debate, as a farmer and landowner, I would like to go one step further and declare a lifelong interest, having spent my entire short life as a resident in rural south-west Scotland. Most of that time has been spent in a small village in south Ayrshire. It is a village that is typical of almost any village in rural Scotland. I moved to that village when I was seven or eight years old. It had a policeman, a schoolmaster, a minister, a garage, a haulage contractor, a forestry office and depot complete with head forester, two shops and two pubs. Not all that many years later, all those people—key people in any community—are gone: no garage, no contractor, no forestry office, only one shop and, despite my lifelong and unstinting devotion to the cause of trying to ensure that both pubs remained viable, only one remains open, because the landlord has alternative employment and therefore an income with which he can subsidise his business.

Not on the subject of my drinking habits. [Laughter.]

Governments of both political colours have been in power during my short life in that village. I am giving the background, which we all know. We were talking about cheap party political points earlier, but that question was the cheapest of the lot. The scenario that I have painted is surely familiar to all of us who represent rural constituencies in the Parliament. I welcome the commitments and the promises that were made  prior to, and have been made since, the establishment of the Parliament, that the interests of rural Scotland would be high on the Executive's priority list. I am on record saying that one of the benefits of the Parliament is that all matters rural now command more parliamentary time than was ever possible before. I am also on record saying that much of rural Scotland was sceptical about the perceived benefits that the Parliament would bring. I take little pleasure in saying that that scepticism is as great now as it was two years ago. That is little wonder when we consider some of the legislation that has been given the green light by this Administration. First, we had proposals for road tolling and town congestion charges—great ideas to cut down pollution and car use. But who, more than anyone else, has to use those cars to get into town? Those of us who live and work in the country, of course—people who are already bled dry by fuel prices that now verge on £4 a gallon. And just before Mr Rumbles gets up, I will answer the question that I suspect he and Mr Swinney want to ask. When we introduced the fuel tax escalator—yes, we introduced it—we did so at 4 per cent above the rate of inflation, and fuel prices were kept largely in line with fuel prices throughout Europe. It was the present Chancellor of the Exchequer who increased the rate by 50 per cent to 6 per cent; and it was this Government that opened the untenable gap between our prices and other European prices. The land reform proposals have been hailed as measures to right some usually imagined wrongs that are supposed to have been gnawing at the hearts and minds of every Scot for heaven knows how many years. As so often happens, emotive words and aims that are powerful tools in an election campaign become bogged down in the cold light of day when reality begins to bite. I much enjoyed and learned a lot from a tour of the north of Scotland with the Rural Affairs Committee, looking at examples of community buy-outs and other management practices. However, if those exercises do not get young people back into those societies, they are a waste of time. I was not convinced by stories that we heard in Assynt and other places, that young people were coming back. Then there were the proposals on access—in particular, the proposals to allow responsible access to enclosed land. With those proposals, the Executive has stirred up a hornets' nest and it will find it hard to escape.

That was an unnecessary intervention, but a fair enough point—which I am just about to address. It is interesting to note that the recently formed Right to Privacy Association has received 1,800 inquiries in less than a fortnight. People are beginning to wake up to the difficulties of policing and controlling a right of responsible access that would be interpreted by many of the less desirable elements in our society as a right to roam and a right to do exactly what they wanted to do. It is no wonder that much of rural Scotland feels under the cosh from the Executive. It is with a spirit of optimism that we pick up a document that is boldly entitled "Rural Scotland: A New Approach". Our initial reaction is one of approval. It is hard to disagree with the sentiments expressed on the cover: "Providing opportunity for young people—so they don't have to leave" and "Integral to Scotland's success, dynamic in harnessing its traditional strengths". But sadly, throughout the document, we often get the right heading followed by self-righteous detail. On page 48, great play is made of the desire to create 15,000 hectares of native woodland by 2003. That is a good headline. However, although good for conservation, there is little or no commercial value in native and broad-leaf trees, and therefore little add-on value. I agree with Euan Robson that add-on value should be at the heart of the debate and, indeed, at the heart of the economic regeneration of rural Scotland. The reasoning behind our amendment today is to establish that the single most effective way of kick-starting our rural economy is to add value to the primary products that we produce so well, and to do so by manufacturing them, processing them and marketing them as close to the point of origin as possible.

I am a partner in two partnership tenancies and a landlord in a traditional tenancy, so I have a foot in both camps. It might surprise some members, but the Conservatives broadly welcome the proposals. For some time, we have been calling for flexibility in letting land. However, we have one or two small reservations. We believe that a limited tenancy might discourage tenants and landlords from putting the necessary capital into the let land, which we would not want to happen. I also draw the minister's attention to a grey area that exists in relation to limited tenancy partnerships. After an initial period, those are often renewable on an annual basis. Would a renewal of that sort constitute a new lease, which would bring the partnership concerned under the terms of the proposed legislation? We broadly welcome what was said about diversification. However, if tenants diversify too much, or are able to do so, that has the potential  to change the basic character of the land and to dry up the amount of land available for lease, which none of us would welcome. The Conservative party welcomes any measure to simplify and cut the costs of the dispute resolution procedure, in the few instances that it is required. However, will the minister clarify his statement: "It is proposed that that test of the landlord's action should be modernised and widened to reflect the broader public interest"? What does that mean?

I want to begin by sharing with members an extract from an article that I found in a journal just last night. The article states: "The promises made during the devolution debate will leave a dangerous legacy for First Minister Donald Dewar and Labour. They promised us the world . . . and they must now deliver for fear of voters seeing Holyrood as a gumsy dog that's all bark, with Millbank controlling the bite." For the entire year preceding the election for this Parliament last May, I warned anyone who would listen that the promises being made by senior politicians in the Labour party on what a Scottish Parliament would deliver for the people of Scotland were not only unrealistic, but dangerously irresponsible. I have been repeating that warning ever since, because in the never-ending search for votes, the fantasy was fed—on a diet of ever-increasing pledges—that the electorate's delivery of a new Labour Executive would for ever rid Scotland of all her ills and deliver to her people a paradise of which they had only dreamed. The electorate delivered that Executive and even got something that they did not ask for and did not really deserve: a prop-up mechanism to make sure that Labour always got its way, called the Liberal Democrats. It is no wonder that the electorate are somewhat disillusioned: they have an Executive whose sense of priorities is such that it gave us the maximum three hours to debate the vital subject of Scotland's preparedness for the millennium bug and, if my memory serves me right, the minimum one and a half hours the very next week to debate Scotland's homeless. I should say that my opening quotation did not come from The Times , The Daily Telegraph or the Scottish Daily Mail , but came  from The Big Issue in Scotland . This Executive has some queer sense of priorities and of democracy; and frankly it has been some let-down for Scotland's people. The pity is that, as the start of the Scottish National party motion points out, the individual MSPs, the committees and the Parliament are working actively and remarkably well to move Scotland forward post-devolution. As David McLetchie pointed out, the tragedy is that neither the press nor the public yet distinguish between the Executive and the Parliament: what we have is a Parliament that is working, but an Executive that is failing time after time to deliver the impossible dream that it fostered and promoted. I agree with the first part of the SNP motion. However, the SNP predictably falls into the same trap that has become Labour's curse: it promises the earth through independence and "equality of status", which I think is a relatively new phrase. Although I certainly agree that it will be up to the Scottish people to determine Scotland's constitutional future as far as independence is concerned, I will strongly argue about this "equality of status" business. It is abundantly clear, even to a country lad such as me, that our present constitutional status—as a country with its own legislative Parliament—places us first among equals in the United Kingdom.

Briefly. I am very pushed for time.

There is no split on our benches. I am sure that we will have a debate on the subject that Andrew Wilson mentioned some other time. I will not speak for my colleague Brian Monteith; he is more than capable of answering for himself. A majority of people who were questioned in a single poll might well have supported increased power for the Scottish Parliament, but it is clear to me that in poll after poll, and—most important—in election after election, the people of Scotland have voted consistently and overwhelmingly against the SNP's separatist view and in favour of a unionist position for this country. The latter part of today's SNP motion is a mere distraction and does the Parliament and the debate no service whatever.

I am sorry; I am out of time. Even SNP members seem to have a continuing  debate about whether they really want to separate from the rest of the United Kingdom—why else do they have to make periodic statements to reassure their republican wing that that is the case? I wanted to join the Scottish Parliament very much, principally to see it develop into a successful catalyst that will bind the union ever closer together, for that is the true path to Scotland's economic and social prosperity. It is the easiest thing in the world—yet something that the SNP has not managed to do this afternoon—to wax eloquently in the Parliament about the perceived benefits that might come with independence and to promise the earth to the electorate. But as even the Executive has found out to its cost, delivering is another thing altogether. I support David McLetchie's amendment.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to review the current duties of local authorities in relation to rehousing convicted paedophiles and other sex offenders, especially in small rural communities. (S1O-1556)

I thank the minister for his answer, which he just managed to get in. Will he confirm that he has received representations both from my colleague David Mundell and from the convener of Dumfries and Galloway Council, which I fully support, about the severe problems that are being experienced at present in that region with regard to rehousing of former paedophiles? Will he agree to meet Dumfries and Galloway Council and the other agencies involved to discuss the problem, as they have requested as a matter of considerable urgency?

On that point, can the minister give an idea of the time scale in which a decision might be reached?

In declaring an interest, may I say that even when I was a working farmer, I did not participate in any of the schemes that I may mention during my speech this evening. First, I congratulate Tavish Scott on securing the debate, which will allow us to highlight some of the issues that are of grave concern to farmers and crofters not just in Shetland, but throughout the country, who are faced by some of the toughest times—in economic terms—that they have ever experienced. Frankly, it is shameful that only three of the five—sorry, six—political parties that are  represented in the Parliament are here tonight. Robin Harper will be pleased that I included him. I am like most rural MSPs, I am sure, in that issues relating to the double payments anomaly started hitting my desk last autumn. Rarely at that time did any agricultural meeting go by without someone speaking to me of their difficulties with their participation in one scheme or another. I accept fully that the double payments issue, relating to the regulations on stock disposal, was the result of a misinterpretation of those regulations by the Scottish Office agriculture department, as it was then. I also accept that the minister, by intimating that he does not intend to seek repayment of such double payments, has shown understanding of the situation, in that no double payments were the result of false or fraudulent claims and all claimants who were caught in the double claims trap were under the impression—given officially in writing in some cases—that they were perfectly entitled to use quota that was freed up by the reduction in stock numbers to claim subsidy for other stock that was previously not covered by quota. Indeed, that fact alone may well have made the difference for some entrants between applying and not applying for a scheme. Members can imagine the upset that SERAD—as the department had become—caused when it sent out notification that such claims could not be allowed. Sometimes, as Tavish Scott said, it is gratifying to discover that officialdom can make mistakes and admit to it and, to a degree, one can accept that if it is handled properly. However, I must make strong representations that this business has not been handled well and has increased greatly the frustration and hardship of some of the farmers and crofters involved. A farmer who wrote to me and on whose behalf I had considerable correspondence with the minister—he will know who the farmer is—and with SERAD officials, who were extremely helpful, had success, ultimately; I am delighted to report that. However, that farmer received his first notification that there was a problem with his claim under the countryside premium scheme on 22 June 1999. In that letter, the SERAD official stated that he would endeavour to get back to the farmer within eight weeks of the date of the letter—14 June—to explain matters further. The reply from SERAD arrived, eventually, on 24 January 2000. Can it be right that it took seven months—never mind eight weeks—for the farmer to receive that reply, despite his sending a recorded delivery letter to the minister on 23 December, to which he has yet to receive a reply? That is not right, and is symptomatic of something very wrong in the relationship between SERAD and its agricultural  clients—a relationship that appears to be deteriorating as time goes by. I will quote from a letter from another farmer, from south-west Scotland, who wrote to me as a member of the Rural Affairs Committee. He said: "May I recommend that your committee enquire into SERAD's relationship with its clients. I would sum it up politely as an attitude problem." Perhaps I was fortunate that I farmed in an era when my relationship with the department—as we always called it—was one of mutual respect and helpfulness, within reasonable parameters. Sadly, those days appear to have gone and it will be much to the detriment of SERAD officials and the individual farmer if respect and helpfulness are replaced by suspicion and obstruction. That would appear to be almost inevitable when one looks at the farce of the agricultural business improvement scheme, the shambles of some of the agri-environment schemes and the current non-availability of the farm woodland premium scheme. The only conclusion that I can come to is that SERAD is in a mess procedurally and that that is affecting its performance and that of those whom it exists to serve—its clients. I make no accusations against individuals, who have been helpfulness personified in trying to assist the people who have written to me, but I urge Ross Finnie to look into the concerns that have been expressed, to find out what is wrong and to take measures to put things right. That would be to everybody's benefit, not least the minister's. I support the motion.

On that basis, does Dr Murray think that we are irrelevant to the issue of the potential closure of rural post offices throughout Scotland?

I remember your earlier strictures, Presiding Officer. In declaring my interest, I point out that from my perspective as a hill sheep farmer, my view of my dairy colleagues was traditionally one of innate jealousy. My annual contact with them was always at the end of March, when it came to paying for the wintering. For those who do not know, that is a system whereby my young female sheep stock spent the winter vastly improving the fertility of a dairy farm—through the natural fertilisation techniques that all farm animals possess—in return for the host dairy farmer charging me an unforgivably large sum of money for the privilege. The dairy farmer always seemed to be in a win-win situation. That that is no longer the case cannot be denied. We have heard the figures this morning; they have been put eloquently by members from all parts of the chamber. We have read about the consequences and we have seen the pictures of calves being shot, milk being spread on fields and so on. Labour has been shed—not the Government sadly, but labour on farms. Off-farm work has been taken on and most forms of diversification have been undertaken as the squeeze has hit over the past few years.

With two minutes? I do not have time. I am sorry.

The member will have to speak to the Presiding Officer—and to Alex Johnstone. The industry has reached unsustainability. Only  this week, a creamery in Kirkcudbright has laid off 19 workers as it cuts production of ultra-heat-treated milk because of importation of UHT milk from France. The influence, Mr Stone, of a weak euro cannot be denied; that is why agrimoney compensation exists. It would be easy to say that the dairy farmer could just give up farming. Of course he could, but in all probability he would turn to sheep and beef production. My concern, and something that the Executive has to be very careful about, is that that should not lead to a seismic shift in beef production—away from our hills and uplands—as it is taken up by dairy farmers. Such a shift has already begun. It would seriously affect the balance of Scottish agriculture, which the Executive must pursue with vigour. Balance will not be easy to achieve; in essence, sorting out the medium and long-term future for the dairy industry occupies the first step on the ladder and holds the key. For that reason, and that reason alone, I support Adam Ingram's motion, which encourages direct contact with the dairy industry.

The warning was there for all to see when the concept of the Holyrood Parliament was first unveiled. It was, we were told, a concept based on upturned boats, but—as the ever-sceptical press reminded us at the time—it has turned out to be more reminiscent of a shipwreck. For once, the press was right. From the moment when the concept was unveiled—perhaps even since the Holyrood site was first chosen as the then secretary of state's personal choice—this parliamentary voyage has been destined to run aground on the beach of incompetence and mismanagement. I am sure that, if it goes ahead, the project will not be a functional disaster. However, for ever in  the minds of the Scottish electorate, it will have been a financial disaster. No matter how the figures are explained and no matter how much we are told that building costs do not include VAT, fees or fitting-out costs or how much we hear any other obfuscating terminology, the incontrovertible fact remains: from the devolution referendum onwards, the Scottish electorate was sold the idea of a new Parliament on the basis that it would cost between £10 million and £40 million. It was, therefore, in the spirit of the much-vaunted but yet to be witnessed new politics that I spent much of the year prior to the election, as I went about the business of being a candidate in Galloway and Upper Nithsdale, trying to help Mr Dewar out of his increasingly difficult predicament. Wherever I went, I was asked the same question: "Will the new Parliament really cost as much as £40 million?" "Not a chance," I replied, at meeting after meeting, week after week. "It will cost at least £100 million." For once, I was right, as was proved by the First Minister's admission in the chamber on 17 June last year. We have now reached the stage where, if the final cost of the Parliament is to be the £230 million upper level that is mentioned in the Spencely report, the VAT alone will come to £40 million—coincidentally the figure at which the Parliament was first sold to the Scottish electorate. It is incredible that we have witnessed a 500 per cent rise in estimated cost over a period when our national Government will boast to anyone prepared to listen that inflation is at 2 per cent. It is worth noting that the good people of Dumfries and Galloway only narrowly agreed to the establishment of the Parliament in the first place. Members can imagine the mood of any meetings that I attend now. That feeling is echoed wherever I go within and without the region that I represent and at whatever type of meeting I attend. Within the past 12 days, as well as my normal surgeries, I have been at meetings with gamekeepers in Perth, National Farmers Union members in Stirling and the poverty action group in Carlisle—Castle Douglas, I beg members' pardon. [Laughter.] I do not go that far out of my region. On each and every occasion, the subject of the cost of the Parliament has been brought up by those present—not by me, but by members of the electorate who are feeling cheated, let down and in many cases downright angry that, yet again, we politicians have given the impression that we can be neither trusted nor believed. That is the reality for which the First Minister must take responsibility and it must be an awesome responsibility. Sir David Steel can say as often as he likes that the buck stops with him, but it started with the then secretary of state and it  is on his shoulders that it must remain. We are now being asked to note the Spencely report and—basically—to get on with it. I would gladly do that if I could be convinced that the £200 million approximate cost bore favourable comparison with the alternatives that are available. That is what the Gorrie amendment, to which I am a co-signatory, is all about. It is a constructive amendment, allowing us, as responsible MSPs, to make an informed decision, not on conjecture or empty promises, but on proper cost comparisons, with the correct amount of robust information that is needed for such a decision.

I am sorry, but I have to wind up. One of the downsides of being elected to the Parliament is that I have had to rehouse my mother—if members had met my mother, they would know why that is a downside. Consequently, I am altering a cottage for her in her home village in South Ayrshire.

The concept of the alteration was priced at a certain amount. The design was costed within the same amount, despite changes to the original concept, and the final cost will not exceed that amount. I understand that, the architect understands that and the contractors understand that. If honesty had prevailed and the new Parliament building had been originally costed at £150 million, the people of Scotland would have understood that.

I have to wind up. The way in which the project has been handled since its inception reeks of incompetence and mismanagement. Donald Gorrie's amendment gives us an excellent chance to put that right. I urge members to take that chance.

I am not being overdramatic when I say that the subject of debate epitomises one of the great conundrums of our time. As a people, we have ability and science, but we lack certainty. We do not want to stand in the way of progress, but we are nervous—if not sometimes terrified—of what that progress might unleash. We are right to be nervous, right to be cautious and right to be somewhat wary of what is, after all, a comparatively new science. We have heard convincing arguments from members on the benefits that the scientists might bring us through this nature-defying technology. It does not, however, matter how convincing the arguments are—the practice of genetic modification is a non-starter unless, as Robin Harper said, the body of public opinion agrees with it. That is where the conundrum lies. Despite all the assurances, the great British  public remains largely unconvinced about the desirability of GM foods and crops. The great Scottish public is no different. They do not want GM foods. The more that we, the politicians, tell them that they should want GM foods, they less they, as consumers, will want them. That was the overriding lesson of the BSE crisis. If the Executive has not taken that lesson on board, it is considerably more arrogant than I thought it was. The House of Lords Select Committee on the European Communities published a report on genetic modification in agriculture in December 1998. It recommended that risk assessment should include "direct, indirect, immediate and delayed effects." The second and fourth of those adjectives most concern public opinion. I am sure that they are also of most concern to members. If the Executive insists—as, no doubt, it will—that we need have no fears over the indirect and delayed effects of GM, why is any analysis virtually hidden from sight and why are the statistics virtually unobtainable? Why, in these days of supposedly open and accessible government, is proof so hard to find? I welcome what the minister said about internet accessibility, but that is not enough to satisfy public opinion. The proof of the pudding is usually in the eating, but in this case the pudding is not even on the menu so it is no wonder that the public has severe reservations. The Conservatives firmly believe that there are potential benefits, which could be achieved by careful and controlled genetic modification of crops. We are equally firm in our belief that in order to achieve public acceptance, which is a prerequisite of the successful commercialisation of GM crops, we must take the steps that would have been outlined by my colleague Jamie McGrigor, had he been around when the Presiding Officer was looking for him. They are good, sensible steps. I believe that the most important one is to secure what we believe is a beneficial technology against its possible misapplication. There is a very fine line to be drawn between genetic modification and genetic manipulation. It is the prospect of the abuse of the latter that is the real reason for the fear that is felt by the opponents of this technology. I admit to Kenny MacAskill that, at one extreme, the potential exists to solve world hunger but that goes hand in hand with the other extreme, in which lurks the potential to destroy our countryside. That is why the Conservatives urge the need to be extra-cautious over the future programme of GM development. That is why we insist that the science and its results should be open and accessible to all, as Sylvia Jackson said a few  moments ago. That is why I commend the amendment, in the name of my colleague Alex Johnstone, to this chamber. Susan Deacon was recently referred to—she may not know about this—as the Margaret Thatcher of Scottish politics. If that is a reputation of which she disapproves, and I suspect that it may be, I am happy to offer her a way out. On this issue at least, she could prove that she is a lady that is for turning. If she does that, she will do a great deal to meet the aspirations of many Scottish people.

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures are taken by the enterprise agencies and local enterprise councils to ensure that public funding is not given to companies whose financial position is unsustainable. (S1O-1422)

I draw the minister's attention to the case of Galscott Foods, a seafood processing company in Stranraer. Despite receiving start-up funding of £300,000 only 18 months ago and a loan of £50,000 last December, it has now gone into liquidation. Despite a specific requirement in Dumfries and Galloway Enterprise's loan funding conditions that all contractors must be timeously paid, several small local firms are owed significant sums of money as a direct result of public funding. Will the minister agree—

I had to give the background, Presiding Officer.

I have reached the foreground, Presiding Officer. Will the minister agree to review the procedures that local enterprise companies undertake when assessing the financial viability of companies that are applying for funding, as part of his review of Scottish Enterprise, to ensure that they are considerably more robust than they were in this case?

I thought that the debate took a quantum leap forward when George Lyon said something about Liberal convictions. Until that point, I had no idea that those two words could be linked. [Laughter.] I am only sorry that he has left the chamber— leaving behind him 50 per cent of today's Liberal party representation. For that reason, if for no other, I am delighted to take part in the debate. During the campaign for the Scottish parliamentary elections, I often described the south of Scotland as becoming a sort of economic no-go buffer zone between the border and the central belt of Scotland. Nothing has happened since then to persuade me to change that view. As traditional manufacturing has declined elsewhere, rural Scotland has been affected to a disproportionate extent. When a factory or workshop shuts down in Selkirk or Stranraer, Galashiels or Girvan, there is unlikely to be much alternative employment. The sad result is that that gradual and persistent haemorrhaging of manufacturing jobs has led to areas such as Girvan in South Ayrshire and Newton Stewart in Wigtownshire being among the worst five travel-to-work areas in Scotland for unemployment. That is not only sad, but totally unacceptable, leading, among other things, to the drift of population away from areas such as Dumfries and Galloway, which was highlighted in a recent statistical report, "Scottish Economic Statistics 2000". I am glad to see that the First Minister will be waving his magic, spinning wand over that situation during First Minister's question time this afternoon. The Executive needs to use a magic wand, given that its response to unemployment in Newton Stewart is not to try to encourage manufacturing growth in that small town—rather, the response has been to close Penninghame prison, which is one of the main providers of quality jobs in that area. Let us face it—the debate is really about jobs and the basic right of an individual to live and work in the area of his or her choice. The statistical report, which showed the drift in population, was interesting. It showed that, where a given rural area is within commutable distance of a manufacturing base, it will retain its population density. The population declines in areas that are not within such commuting distances, such as Galloway and the Western Isles—not out of choice, but out of necessity, as young people are forced away from home for educational and employment reasons. The Executive simply must address that unsustainable situation if it is to live up to its promise to govern for the whole of Scotland. While there are seldom easy answers, strong possibilities certainly exist to reverse those discouraging trends. That is in addition to the new information technology manufacturing opportunities that other members mentioned. As I speak, the village of Garlieston in the  Machars of Galloway, which has been in the news for all the wrong reasons recently, is suffering the most appalling disruption as timber lorries incessantly rumble through its too narrow streets for up to 16 hours a day, to fill a ship destined for Birkenhead with 1,200 tonnes of newly felled timber. Communities across Scotland are increasingly aware of the increase in forestry traffic, which will double over the next 10 to 15 years as output increases. That also applies to agricultural products, for which there are ever-increasing journey times to the processing and manufacturing plants en route to the supermarket shelf. One does not need to be of rocket science intelligence to realise that, given the proper vision, Executive strategy and fiscal incentive, those products could be used to reverse the manufacturing decline that has taken place in the areas in which they are produced. Rather than complain about the traffic created by those products, how much more sense it would make to manufacture, process, package and market them as close as possible to their points of origin. Jobs would be created, value added and population drifts reversed. The environment would also benefit from vastly decreased transport problems. We could then begin to see the creation of an economic regeneration zone in the south of Scotland, rather than the almost no-go area that exists at present.

Does the minister agree that, even if such incineration plants are deemed to be acceptable, their establishment at locations such as Newton Stewart in Wigtownshire is totally unacceptable?

I start by apologising to staff who will have to stay late tonight. Once it was announced that business would be extended, I offered to withdraw the motion, so if anyone has an axe to grind, I hope that they will take it up with you, Presiding Officer, as you declined my offer. Nobody was more amazed than I was when this motion came up for debate, as it is a long time since I lodged it. In that time, I fear that the wording of it has altered slightly. The second half should read that "the Parliament . . . is concerned at the prospect of hazardous materials and munitions being" disturbed, not "distributed", "by the laying of underwater cables". However, perhaps that comes to the same thing, so we can let it go. Presiding Officer, had you spent much time in Ayrshire or Galloway over the past decade, the words pylon, interconnector and electricity would have become all too familiar. Those words were the catalyst for an alliance of unlikely bedfellows—drawn from every conceivable political hue and from every environmental faction—who were, and probably still are, united in a common cause. That cause was to prevent the implementation of the Scotland to Northern Ireland interconnector project: a project that will involve the erection of 203 giant pylons starting at Coylton in Ayrshire and terminating—in Scotland at any rate—on Glenapp estate near Ballantrae; a project that has been the subject of an intense public inquiry; a project that our First Minister's predecessor as secretary of state had ordered to run underground for eight of the most scenically sensitive of its 28  miles—a ruling that the First Minister, when he became secretary of state, summarily overturned for a reason that has never been properly explained; a project that is still the subject of intense local dissatisfaction; and a project that I have no doubt would have had a very different outcome had this Parliament been in existence 10 years ago. Despite vigorous opposition from both sides of the Irish sea, despite the best efforts of local politicians and punters, and despite public opinion, the Government has given the go-ahead for the erection of one pylon every 250 yd for 28 miles in order to supply electricity to Northern Ireland. The pylons will vary in height between 90 and 130 ft. Members will note that there will be no benefit to people who receive electricity in south-west Scotland, where they are as likely to have a power cut on a calm summer's day as they are during the now-traditional Christmas hurricane. There will be no benefit to the environmentally sensitive area through which this monstrous line is to be built, leaving yet another part of Scotland so scarred that film makers may have to go to Ireland to film unspoilt Scottish scenery. There is a certain Irish logic there, I think. There will certainly be no benefit to the consumers in Northern Ireland, who will be getting neither the cheapest electricity supply nor any extra jobs to go with its generation. It seems completely bizarre to me that the suggestion put forward by Meekatharra Minerals Ltd to build a power station at Ballymoney in Northern Ireland—to be fuelled by the 660 million tonnes of very low sulphur lignite coal from what has been identified as the largest single open-cut coal reserve in the United Kingdom—has been dismissed out of hand, despite the fact that it would supply electricity more cheaply, would create a considerable number of jobs in that troubled state and would involve no scenic vandalism at all in south-west Scotland. We are justified in asking why that suggestion was dismissed. The only possible answer to that question lies in an article in the Belfast Telegraph from August 1999, which highlights the fact that funding was being sought by Northern Ireland Electricity and the Electricity Supply Board of Eire to double the cross-border interconnector capacity between the two countries of Ireland. The article says that the interconnector "will take on added importance by the end of 2001 when the Scottish interconnector is commissioned", although I suspect that, like our new Parliament building, the timing is a little bit out of kilter. The article continues: "The combination of the Scottish link and the north/south interconnector will mean that for the first time the entire  electricity network of the British Isles will be interlinked." The ultimate aim of the whole project is to provide a United Kingdom electricity grid, although I would go one step further and suggest that the true aim is a European grid, given the amount of European funding that Scottish Power has attracted. Although I see nothing wrong with that aim—whether UK or European in intention—I strongly object to the pretence and secrecy that has cloaked the project from the start. That, more than anything else, has put people's backs up in the south-west of Scotland over the past 10 years. The combination of Big Brother government and a multinational utility company has ridden roughshod over every objection that has been put in its way, and an ugly scar looks certain to become an unwelcome part of some of the most beautiful scenery in south-west Scotland. However, that is far from the end of this sorry saga. Even the most geographically challenged will realise that any electricity supply that starts in Scotland and ends in Northern Ireland will have to cross the Irish sea, which is where the crux of my motion lies. In the middle of that ocean crossing, where the cables will be laid by Northern Ireland Electricity to carry the supply between the two countries, is the ticking time bomb of Beaufort's dyke. If I am to be completely accurate, I should say that it is the sea bed surrounding Beaufort's dyke that gives cause for concern rather than the deep hole of the dyke itself. As we are all aware, "The best laid schemes o' mice an' men Gang aft a-gley", and that has certainly been the case in the decision to use Beaufort's dyke as a dumping ground for surplus or out-of-date munitions. Munitions is a harmless enough word, and as recently as 1995, the Ministry of Defence was still insisting that a mere 120,000 tonnes had been dumped in the area. Since then, it has reluctantly revealed that around 2 million tonnes have been dumped, much of it short-dumped, which quite simply means that it is lying around on the sea bed in the shallower waters north of the dyke itself—the very area through which the cables will be laid to complete the interconnector project. As I said, munitions is a simple enough word. However, exhaustive investigations into exactly what munitions were present eventually revealed that alongside the everyday variety of bombs, grenades, rockets, bullets and explosives might lie a bewildering cocktail of canisters of sarin, tabun, mustard gas, cyanide, phosgene and anthrax. Phosphorus bombs abound and, in June 1997, it was finally revealed that radioactive waste containing both caesium 137 and radium 226 had been systematically dumped in Beaufort's dyke in  the 1950s. It has now been freely admitted that some of that waste was thrown overboard in 40-gallon steel drums encased in concrete. After an examination of films taken along the proposed route of the cables, experts have identified several containers of remarkably similar dimensions. As a result, the sea bed is littered with, at best, a variety of dumped munitions and, at worst, a lethal cocktail of explosive gases and nuclear substances waiting to be stirred up and released. The folly will be all the greater, given that we had a warning when, in 1995, a gas pipeline was laid through the region—admittedly before as much was known about the contents of the sea bed. The consequences of that were bad enough. After the pipeline was laid, 4,500 incendiary devices were washed ashore along the coast of Northern Ireland and south-west Scotland, which resulted in serious injuries to a child in Campbeltown and to an adult in Ballantrae. It is remarkable that more or worse injuries were not sustained. That is what lies at the nub of the motion. If the worst were to happen, and more injuries—or even a death—were to occur following similar disruption after the laying of the electricity cables, who would own the responsibility? Which agency or department will put its hand on its heart and say, "That is our fault and we accept full responsibility for it"? I would dearly love the minister to answer that question in his summing up, but—if past experience is anything to go by—my hopes are not great. Since 1997, objectors to the proposal have sought the answer to that question, through the Save the Overhead Powerline—or STOP—campaign. They have asked the Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions, the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, the Scottish Office, the Northern Ireland Office, the Ministry of Defence, the Crown Estates and even the Scottish Environment Protection Agency. I can say only that the quality and speed of the buck passing has had to be seen to be believed. The DETR said that it was responsible for issuing the licence to lay the cable, but that was all, thank you very much. Nobody else wanted to know. I willingly admit that I have always been opposed to the project, but lest anyone think that I am just some maverick MSP, off on a personal crusade, I should add that it is not long since Alex Smith, when he was still deemed good enough to be a member of the European Parliament, Alasdair Morgan—whom I am delighted to see here tonight—when he was the MP for Galloway and Upper Nithsdale, Friends of the Earth and the national steering committee of Nuclear Free Local Authorities all called for a halt to the project or, at the very least, a full public inquiry, such was the depth of their concern. Of course, nowadays, a  public inquiry would have considerable difficulties under the European convention on human rights. That is, in essence, the situation. We are faced with a monstrous accident waiting to happen. It was foolish indeed to deposit the munitions on the sea bed in the first place; how much more foolish will it be to disturb them for the second time in a decade? Do we really dare take the risk of finding out, and if we do, who will take the responsibility?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether participants in the countryside premium scheme and agri-environmental schemes which involve a reduction in the number of ewes kept will receive a compensatory package in the event of the rules of those schemes being reinterpreted to their disadvantage. (S1O-1156)

The minister will be aware—and if he is not now, he will be in a minute—that paragraph 13 of the countryside premium scheme explanatory leaflet states categorically that before seeking to withhold future payments for any reason whatsoever, an independent appointee must draw up a report for consideration by the Scottish Executive rural affairs department, a copy of which must be made available to the applicant. As that has not taken place in this instance, does the minister agree that SERAD has broken the rules of the countryside premium scheme, and that all overdue payments should be made immediately to the 120 farmers involved?

I will discuss two of the issues that have been spoken about a lot today. First, the Scots language and, secondly, income brackets. During the early days of this Parliament, many of us who were relatively new to the world of representative politics were carried away with the enthusiasm that was engendered and the desire to be involved in anything and everything that came our way. There was no end of invitations to join this society or that association. I found that it took a great deal of willpower to reject the many while prioritising the few that would be most pertinent or relevant to my own position. It was with some trepidation that I put my name forward, in those early days, to take part in the Holyrood poetry link scheme, whereby MSPs would be linked to a local poet. It was some time before I looked up my contact, who turned out to be the official writer in residence in Dumfries and Galloway, one Liz Niven. I can say that I am extremely glad that I took that step. Although I have lived in the south-west of Scotland all my life, Liz has given me her view on more than one issue, not least of which is the importance of the Scots language and the frequency of its everyday use among people in Dumfries and Galloway. Liz Niven's first poem since our linkage is a work entitled "Tis The Saddest Thing", which is a poem in the memory of the crew of the Solway Harvester, so recently returned for burial to their home villages. Members will not be surprised to know that I am neither a poet nor a critic, but I know something good when I hear it. This poem is a moving, apt and permanent part of what will be the legacy of that terrible tragedy. It is all the more poignant in that it is written in the Scots tongue, which is the principal reason why I am not going to recite it, but it gives a powerful indication of the importance of  the regional dialects that are spoken throughout Scotland. I am persuaded by that contact with Liz, and by many other representations that I have received, that recognition of the prevalence of these dialects would be helpful and, in the wake of the establishment of our new Parliament, would enrich and underpin our cultural roots and our linguistic heritage. A question on incomes is an altogether different problem, although I understand some of the arguments of those who feel that it should be included. Again I refer to Dumfries and Galloway, which was neglected in the recent £21.5 million handout for areas of special deprivation. If previous allocation criteria had been adhered to, some £600,000 would have been granted to the region. I must say that Dumfries and Galloway Council is keen that a question of this sort should be included in the census. Rural areas, no matter how idyllic, also have areas of intense deprivation. Some of the lowest wage earning statistics and some of the travel-to-work areas with the highest unemployment are to be found, regrettably, in the south-west of Scotland. Although a question on income might help to highlight that, I am persuaded by other arguments. First, people are more inclined to exaggerate their answers, both upwards and downwards, to questions of this type. Secondly, many people are reluctant to fill in this type of question, which leads to a higher rate of non-return. Thirdly, and possibly most important, the income of an individual is a matter for them and them alone, and not for any further state interference.

That is not what I am suggesting. I am suggesting that all people have difficulty filling in responses to these questions accurately. The Deputy First Minister and Minister for Justice showed us evidence to that effect, so including the question would not do the census any favours. Although I have great sympathy with many of the aspirations of Irene McGugan's motion, in common with many other members who have spoken today I cannot vote for any motion that would—in effect—temporarily annul the census order and delay it unduly. However, I am sorry that the Executive could not take a broader view on  some of the issues that the Equal Opportunities Committee has raised—particularly dialect. I hope that it will do so for a future census.

Does the minister agree that the unique and successful rehabilitation regime at Penninghame prison in Galloway will be greatly missed after its closure in March? That closure will leave the prison service—certainly in the south of Scotland—very much the poorer.

Pity.

If the minister were to meet the trade union side, does he agree that one of its principal concerns would be that the unique rehabilitation regime— [Applause.] Thank you, ladies and gentleman. Does the minister agree that the unique regime that is currently in force at Penninghame will be greatly missed after the prison's closure in March? Does he also agree that the prison service in the south of Scotland will be much the poorer for that closure?

Prior to last year's elections, the First Minister said: "we"— that was not early use of the royal we, as he had held a meeting with Mo Mowlam— "can see a wealth of opportunities for new relationships and dynamics within the British Isles. We can start to realise these aims now through our work on the BIC." Today, he followed that up by saying that he hopes that the council will bring "real benefits to all the people of these islands". I for one completely concur with those sentiments.  I would like to expand on the subject touched on in David McLetchie's speech, not from what John McAllion would call a narrow political point of view, but because it is a topic of great importance if linkage between Scotland and Ireland is to be fostered and strengthened. I refer to the vital importance of transport links to Northern Ireland and Eire through the south-west of Scotland and the unacceptable state of those links at present. It is a fallacy to argue, as many do, that nothing has been done for the past 20 years. If members do not believe me, they have only to ask the residents of the many towns and villages that were by-passed during the Conservative period in government. Just before the Executive tries to claim—if it does—credit for the £10 million improvement at the Glen near Dumfries, I am happy to inform members that that too was brought about and sanctioned by the previous Conservative Government. It was an Administration committed to road improvement, unlike the present one, which is committed more to driver persecution. Despite the fact that real improvements have been made, an awful lot more needs to be done. It is said that the first 30 mph restriction on a drive from Portugal to Stranraer is at Crocketford in Galloway—and that the second is at Springholm, about five miles further on. Needless to say, a Conservative Government would have by-passed those villages as part of its road improvement plan, whereas this Executive seems content to ignore their plight. The A77 is also in need of major attention between Ayr and Stranraer. These two major links to the Loch Ryan complex, Stranraer and Cairnryan, the A77 and the A75—which, significantly, and as Alex Salmond pointed out, is a recognised Euro-route, although it is often referred to locally as a Euro-goat-track—are the major British links to Northern Ireland, the brave new Northern Ireland, which so greatly needs our help, support and encouragement in these very tricky early days of peaceful co-existence. We all want that to succeed, and the British-Irish Council was first proposed towards that end. From a recent seminar in Stranraer organised by Dumfries and Galloway Council came a call for an all-party and, perhaps more important, all-parliamentary group from the European Parliament down, to press for urgent improvements to the A77 and A75. I commend Alasdair Morgan for facilitating a meeting of such interested parties. It is interesting that the most vociferous calls at the seminar came from representatives of all parts of Ireland. Those roads are absolutely vital for trade and tourism. To ignore their further  upgrading is frankly to ignore the future economic prospects of the south-west of Scotland and Northern and southern Ireland. It is my fervent hope that the British-Irish Council can help raise that issue up the political agenda. I have a similar hope—although I am not so optimistic that it may bear fruit—that the council may seriously consider the issue of Beaufort's dyke. As part of the Scotland to Northern Ireland interconnector project, underwater cables are to be laid through an area of sea bed on which lies a mind-boggling variety of munitions, explosives and other unwanted ordnance, much of which is liable to be washed ashore when disturbed. Whereas both Westminster and the Scottish Executive are content to pass the buck on this important issue for people in the south-west of Scotland, perhaps it is not too much to ask that the British-Irish Council may have the courage to address it and give real meaning to the First Minister's optimistic appraisal of the council's relevance a year or so ago and in his speech this afternoon.

Given that more people contract cancer in  Scotland and that cancer survival rates are much lower than in many other developed countries, how can the Scottish Executive ensure that the Scottish cancer group can effectively tackle what is one of the health service's chief priorities, when the NHS holds no data centrally on recent investment in cancer services?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to safeguard the welfare of 700 foxhounds in the event of a ban of hunting with dogs being endorsed by the Scottish Parliament. (S1O-866)

Given the recent report of the Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, I can only describe the minister's answer as slightly unsatisfactory. Will the minister reassure me that the report being carried out by the Macaulay Land Use Research Institute will examine the animal welfare aspects of such a ban as well as the economic aspects? Will the minister tell me how that institute can possibly report fully by the end of December, as promised by the Executive, when the six footpacks in the north of Scotland have not yet even been contacted by MLURI?

I would like to support Mr Russell's desire to have the issue heard in the Parliament. I was part of the Rural Affairs Committee, which heard evidence from all sides of the debate. The committee felt sympathy towards the Minister for Rural Affairs because it became obvious, through the process of gathering evidence, that he had been handed a poisoned chalice by his predecessor, Lord Sewel. One of the principles at stake is the extent to which the actions of the present Administration should be led by the promises of the previous one. What is more important is that there was all-party agreement in the committee about the fact that many applicants have spent considerable sums of money applying for the scheme. They are, under the present circumstances, very unlikely to get that money back. It is essential, for the sake of democracy and principle, that the matter be debated in this chamber.

I make no apology for quoting from a press release that was put out by a colleague of mine in the European Parliament. I happen to agree with it completely. He says: "It is a matter of great concern to the aquaculture industry that the tabloid press continue to mis-represent ISA by using emotive terms like 'fish aids' or even equating the disease to BSE in cattle." Will the minister put out a statement to reassure the public that ISA is of no danger to human health?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to ensure that Scotland retains a viable pig industry into the 21st century. (S1O-795)

I thank the minister for his answer, but that will be of little comfort to the pig farmers who are in the public gallery today. Does the minister accept that the opinion of a growing number of farmers from all sectors is that, as far as their needs are concerned, the Executive has become no more than a talking shop, and that, as far as the pig sector is concerned, that will continue to be the case until meat hygiene and inspection charges are taken over as part of the health budget and away from the primary producer, in common with many other European countries, until the question of country of origin labelling is addressed immediately—

I am asking a question, Presiding Officer—and until the minister takes a proactive lead in approaching both Nick Brown and Franz Fischler to fight for state aid to ensure that Scotland retains the healthy pig industry, which is only weeks away from total collapse?

Like everyone else, I broadly welcome the strategy that has been outlined in today's statement. I draw the minister's attention to the paragraph that highlights the proximity principle for waste disposal. It rules out lengthy transport of waste across the country, and states that wastes should be managed as close as possible to their point of origin. Will the minister look into the planning application that Dumfries and Galloway Council has received in relation to a waste-burning plant at Newton Stewart, with a view to calling it in and ensuring that any decision on it is taken in the light of her statement today?

On a point of order.

In view of the continuing French ban on British and Scottish beef, will the Presiding Officer ask the Minister for Rural Affairs to give an emergency statement in the chamber this afternoon to outline what further action he proposes to take?

rose—

I am grateful to Dr Ewing for giving way. In the minister's introductory speech, he spoke with great pride of making his first speech in the Scottish Parliament, for which he had always campaigned, and of being the fisheries minister. Does Dr Ewing agree that it is almost disgraceful that he should choose to denigrate the desire of this Parliament to discuss that fishing boundary early in its history and that it was out of place for a minister of this Executive to do so?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has reviewed the powers of private companies, public sector organisations and other entities in relation to compulsory purchase in the light of the incorporation into Scots law of the European convention on human rights. (S1O-746)

Will the adoption of the ECHR be taken into account in the event of the compulsory purchase of land in connection with the Scotland to Northern Ireland interconnector?

Given the adoption of the ECHR, will the Executive instruct district valuers to take into account the commercial payments for the erection of telecommunications masts when assessing payments to facilitate the erection of pylons in rural areas?

On a point of order.

On a point of order. Am I allowed to defend myself from what is an untrue statement?

May I intervene?

I agree absolutely with Mr Neil. I did make a tremendous speech. [Laughter.] But at no point during that magnificent piece of oratory did I commit my party to a substantial increase in the state pension.

Thank you, Presiding Officer and thank you, Mr Monteith. I would like to make three brief points. First, great weight has been given to the drugs enforcement agency, to which I wish nothing but success. I share with Bill Aitken the hope that Mr MacKay will take our comments as constructive contributions to the debate—we Tories are always constructive. I also hope that the minister will believe me  when I tell him that police forces throughout Scotland are concerned that, when the DEA is staffed to the level of expertise that will be required, their own drug action teams may be severely weakened if the DEA draws in their expertise. That would leave the police, who deal with the real and desperate problems of drugs at street level, too diluted to be effective. The minister will recall that he very kindly accepted a petition from me from the people of Stranraer, who have recently been experiencing desperate drugs problems. We must guard against the drugs enforcement agency becoming a sort of ivory tower of drugs-related theory; we must ensure that it maintains a hands-on approach to the problem. I would like to touch on the subject of prison closures, with particular regard to the decision to close Penninghame prison near Newton Stewart. Phil Jones, the chief executive of Dumfries and Galloway Council, said: "This has been a hasty decision. I don't believe there has been a full consideration of the consequences of this closure either for the Scottish Prison Service or for the local area." I totally concur with those sentiments. The minister mentioned value for money; Penninghame operated at 59 per cent of the average cost per prisoner in Scotland. The inmates of the prison have a huge value for society: every year, they put thousands of hours of voluntary service into the local community, which will be extremely hard to replace. Those people are highly valued by the local community. The prison has an excellent rehabilitation record, and its staff go way beyond the call of duty to ensure that that record is sustained. The proposed closure will lead directly to the loss of 45 quality jobs, affecting families in an area with one of the highest unemployment rates in Scotland. The closure has not been thought through and I do not accept that it is a final decision. My final point touches on rural policing. Unlike Linda Fabiani, I and my family were unfortunately the victims of a very unpleasant crime some years ago—a successful attempt to obtain money for drugs. It was not a pleasant experience and anyone who wants to give me sympathy will probably find me in Deacon Brodie's at about 7 o'clock tonight. My point in telling this story is that, when we finally managed to get to a working telephone—which, in rural Scotland, can take quite a long time—we found that the nearest police car was 34 miles away. When that happened to us, there was a significant crime wave throughout the rural part of South Ayrshire because the criminals—who are not stupid—realised that there was a vacuum of police cover during the night, and took advantage  of it. I do not think that that is acceptable and I hope that the Administration will address it.

I begin by declaring four interests: I am a landowner, a landlord, a farmer and a member of the Scottish Landowners Federation. I hope that that does not preclude me from speaking today. The ubiquitous Andy Wightman, a gentleman with whom I rarely find myself in agreement, asks what is to be made of the agenda for land reform—is it well informed, well targeted and radical? He says that one would like to think so but that, on closer examination, much of it turns out to be shallow and superficial; it presents a range of palliative measures that address symptoms rather than the underlying problems. I agree with Andy Wightman on this occasion, because he is saying that the Scottish Executive's proposals are an ill thought out, knee-jerk reaction to a perceived need for land reform. I question whether that need exists. Most important, as our amendment suggests, the proposals will do nothing whatever to alleviate the desperate economic situation in which rural Scotland finds itself. As Alex Johnstone pointed out, the Deputy First Minister, in his introduction to "Land Reform: Proposals for Legislation", which was published in July, stated that land reform was "crucial for rural Scotland". I contend that it is nothing of the sort. One can argue about whether it is desirable, but it is certainly not crucial. Jim Wallace also said that the advent of the Scottish Parliament finally gave us an opportunity to debate the policies that were right for Scotland—the debate on land reform is a good example of that.

I am sorry, but I do not have time to give way. Mike Rumbles should blame the Executive for not allowing long enough for debates such as this. [MEMBERS: "Hear, hear."] The right to debate should allow us more than the one and a quarter hours that were originally scheduled. Any assertion by the Executive that it has rural issues at the top of its agenda was negated by the Opposition debate on rural affairs two weeks ago. The Labour party's commitment to rural affairs was measurable by the attendance—throughout most of that debate—of five of its members. That is the true measure of Labour's interest in rural affairs and that will not be forgiven quickly by the  rural electorate. Let us examine the proposals for what they really are—an attempt to show that this Parliament can, as we keep hearing, make a difference so that the Executive can pat itself on its collective back and wallow in the self-congratulatory mire that today's motion exemplifies. Members may ask what puts the Conservatives in the same critical boat as Andy Wightman. I am happy to tell them the answer. Let us take the proposals on access, which will create a "right of responsible access". The word "responsible" throws up two problems. The first is the definition of what is and what is not responsible. The second is the ownership of responsibility in cases relating to accidents or damage. A dispute might be referred to a local arbitration forum. Will not it be too late, even if that forum finds in favour of the landowner? The damage will have been done. I suggest that freedom of access is a subject worthy of its own programme in the Parliament. It is vital to get it right, but that will be difficult when access is dealt with merely as a subsection of other legislation. The proposals for feudal tenure—which were skipped over—are equally flawed. Although we are perfectly happy for abuses within the system to be rectified, the proposed legislation will do nothing to recognise the many positive protective features that the feudal system offers. Would the new town of Edinburgh be so architecturally magnificent without the feudal system? Members who are lucky enough to be acquainted with the village of Gatehouse of Fleet in Galloway will appreciate the conservationist capabilities of that same system. Time does not permit me to highlight the vast number of flaws in the proposals on the community right to buy. The Conservatives have no objection to community ownership where there is local demand for it, where it is economically viable and where purchases are made on the open market. The Executive's proposals seek simply to transfer the financial burden of running some estates from the private owner to the taxpayer or the lottery player—whoever has the most money to spare at the time. By giving such lengthy consultation time to communities, and by giving a role to the district valuer, the proposals can have only an adverse effect on the overall value of land. That will, in turn, significantly reduce the willingness of landowners to maintain investments in their properties. That is not the best way forward for rural Scotland. The SNP amendment suggests that that party, too, agrees with Andy Wightman, although not for the same reasons as the Conservatives do. Its  long-term land reform policies were summed up by Roseanna Cunningham, who said in the House of Commons that the SNP sought people's land reform in Scotland. She continued: "That means ultimate ownership of the land by and for the people of Scotland."—[ Official Report, House of Commons , 29 April 1998; Vol 311, c 247.] That system was tried by the communists—look what happened to them. Mr Wallace's motion and the SNP amendment will do nothing to address the real problems in rural Scotland. That would be done better by tackling the planning regulations and the planning authorities, which embody the real bars to rural innovation and prosperity. We require practical solutions, not ideological theorising. I am pleased to support the amendment in the name of my colleague Alex Johnstone.

On a point of order. Today's business bulletin says that the debate on land reform will start no later than 3.45 pm. Will you take that into account in the timing of speeches?

I am aware that this will not find favour with my friend Mr Gallie, but I confess that as a rule I am not in favour of identity cards. I am torn between the view that people with nothing to hide have nothing to fear and the opposite view—I wish Phil Gallie would stop looking at me—that identity cards are one step too far down the route to Big Brother is watching you. However, Phil has at least three and a half years in the life of this Parliament and I hope at least four years after that to persuade me otherwise. He will perhaps approve of the start I have made because I believe that proof-of-age cards have a significant role to play. I particularly welcome the shift of legal responsibility from the licence holder to the purchaser of alcohol. I speak as a former licence holder. From 1982 to 1986, I was part owner of the finest restaurant that Girvan in South Ayrshire could boast. I say that without fear of contradiction because it was the only restaurant that Girvan could boast. It is still there. As, I hope, a law-abiding citizen, the hardest part of that job was ascertaining the age of customers buying drink. It was hard enough 15 years ago—the older I get, the harder it is to tell.  That the legal burden of selling alcohol to those too young to buy it falls on the licence holder is an understandable grudge of the licensed trade. The present legislation is unjust. It is akin to blaming the victim of a burglary rather than the burglar; blaming the fire rather than the arsonist; the corpse rather than the murderer. If that is over-dramatic, I am sure everyone agrees that there is far too large a grey area at the moment—far too high a level of injustice. I support South Ayrshire Council and commend it for introducing proof-of-age cards because they remove the grey areas and place the burden of proof firmly on the young person buying alcohol. I have no doubt that, where they are introduced, such schemes allow licensees to breathe a collective sigh of relief and allow law-abiding citizens to uphold the law with certainty.

For that reason, I will not be able to take any interventions—unless I am in a good mood. I will see how I get on with time. It is a crying shame that the SNP, which is so keen to embrace the ideal of the new politics when it suits it, has ruined a perfectly good motion by inserting a section that embodies the old nit-picking, negative, "let us have a go at every Government since the Act of Union" attitude for which we know and love that party so well.

Oh, go on.

Certainly not. I am describing the SNP as nit-picking. Conservative members would have supported the motion had it not contained the sadly vindictive and sniping section that our amendment would remove. That is not to excuse or absolve anyone, but to enter this debate in a forward-looking and positive fashion in the belief that the debate will benefit from moving forward. I do not want to give the impression that the SNP has a monopoly on misuse of the phraseology of the new politics; the Executive parties are just as guilty. Who can ever forget John McAllion pointing at the Opposition parties and stating in no uncertain terms that, "Youse"—a term that is becoming rather common—"lot must shut up and listen"? I have shut up and listened to the Executive amendment. Apart from its final sentiment—a determination "to promote long-term sustainable development . . . throughout rural Scotland",  with which I am sure we all heartily agree—it is made of nothing but fine words and flannel. It is expressed in a way that smacks of complacency and self-congratulation and it will be of little comfort to people in rural Scotland who are increasingly of the opinion that the Executive has little or nothing for them. I am happy to sum up on the amendment that stands in my name. I should, perhaps, declare a vested interest to the chamber, as for the next three weeks at least I will still have an active interest in farming. At the end of this month, I will hand over the business to a tenant. I will feel a great sadness severing an interest that has given me a reasonable living and a great deal of pleasure for some 28 years, although my primary sentiment is one of relief—relief that I have successfully escaped from an industry that does not allow the same luxury to many others. Last week, I sold my last 21 ewes. At five years old, they were fit sheep, although—not unusually at that age—they were missing some teeth. Usually, they would have realised a price of £10 to £15 per head; I received a bid of £1.40 for each ewe. After deductions, I received a cheque for £4.20—with the haulage bill still to come. I was lucky—at least I got a bid. Many others are having to shoot and bury stock that they have nurtured and tended all their lives. Those are horrendous acts, which some members will have seen vividly portrayed on television last week. Recently—as we have heard—the Parliament has had representations from the pig and dairy sectors. I commend the representatives of those sectors for their initiative in visiting the Parliament. As Euan Robson said, the members who took the trouble to attend the briefings could not but fail to be moved by the spectacle of grown men almost reduced to tears as they described the nightmare that their businesses have become. Why should we bother about another industry in huge financial difficulties? I will explain. Four years ago, Scottish agriculture had a gross income of almost £600 million. Given the generally accepted multiplier of 2.5, that income was worth £2,100 million to the rural economy of Scotland. This year—although official figures have yet to be released—the gross income is generally expected to be well below £100 million and possibly as low as £75 million; that gives an input to the rural economy of a mere £350 million. Given that agricultural borrowings now total much more than £1 billion, in business terms it is time for Scottish agriculture to call in the receivers. Scottish agriculture's input to the rural economy has been cut by one eighth of its input in 1995-96. That is why in rural areas such as Dumfries and Galloway, where in 1997-98 agriculture  contributed 23 per cent of the region's gross domestic product, words such as depression, despair and collapse are by no means too strong, as the minister suggested earlier. My colleagues have touched on other issues, such as the fuel escalator, affordable housing, rural transport and tourism, so there is no need for me to elaborate; I commend their words to the chamber. We also share concerns about e-commerce, post offices, organic aid and other opportunities that have been mentioned in today's debate. I would like to finish by repeating what I have said before. I mean this in the spirit of the new politics—if such a thing still exists. There was, and is, a deeply held scepticism in many sectors of rural Scotland that the Parliament will do nothing for them. Thus far, neither Executive policy nor Labour's attendance at today's debate—at times there have been as few as five members—has done anything to alleviate that scepticism. I ask the Executive to think beyond fine phrases and to address the real issues facing rural Scotland. The Executive must consider how it can best encourage the use of the primary products of rural Scotland—meat, milk, timber and tourism—to create jobs in the areas where they are produced. Christine Grahame and Euan Robson also touched on that topic. The Executive must consider how best to encourage the branding, labelling and marketing of Scottish products to enhance the end prices of those high-quality products. Furthermore, it must consider how to promote our country at home and abroad. I acknowledge that a start has been made, although there is an enormous amount still to be done. The Executive must also protect our producers by giving them a much called for level playing field to combat unfair competition and over-regulation. If the Executive can see past the smokescreen of its own verbosity and begin to deliver on those fronts, it will be worthy of support and will receive it. Until then, I encourage the proposers of the motion to accept our positive, forward-looking and practical amendment, which I heartily commend to the whole chamber.

Does Lewis Macdonald accept that the dairy and pig sectors do not receive any public funding?

It is a good one and it will get better.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to support the UK Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Food in his efforts to assist the UK pig industry by requesting financial aid from Europe to eliminate the cost burden caused by BSE. (S1O-482)

I thank the minister for his full reply—I am sure that the pig industry will be very grateful for the announcement that he has just made. However, given the fact that imports of pigmeat into the UK from Belgium have increased by 51 per cent in the first two quarters of 1999, despite the fact that dioxin-contaminated feed was given to the Belgian herd, what steps is the Executive taking—or has it taken—to ensure that pigmeat from Belgium, which may have been contaminated by dioxins, has not reached the Scottish consumer?

Will Mr Kerr give way?

I congratulate Mr Kerr for giving way, if that makes him feel happier. If the Labour Government is so tough on the causes of crime, perhaps he could explain why crime figures are increasing in general.

On a point of order.

Yes.

I hope that Alasdair Morrison will correct me if I am wrong, but I think he said—and I was horrified to hear him say it—that the Scottish tourist boards will be meeting in Maastricht shortly. As someone who is wary of all things European, I pray that there will not be another Maastricht agreement in my lifetime. Rural Scotland today relies on an economy generated from the traditional sources of agriculture and fishing and the more recent sources of forestry and tourism. As the input of the traditional wealth creators diminishes annually, the input of the modern economic generators rises in importance. For some years, because of a multiplicity of factors, manufacturing industry has tended to polarise away from rural areas such as Dumfries and Galloway, which I know best. As a result of that shift, tourism is becoming the major if not the only area of potentially massive growth for rural Scotland. As the world becomes more accessible to an increasingly large percentage of its population, tourism should be the jewel in our Scottish crown, given the magnificent raw materials in our history, culture and scenery. I agree with Fergus Ewing that it is a combination matched by few other countries. However, tourism is not the jewel in our crown—it is on a downward trend and not the great success story that it should be. We must ask ourselves why. To that end, I commend the Executive on its consultation exercise, because it is right to try to pinpoint both the way ahead and the problems faced by an increasingly vital industry. I beg the Executive to listen to all the submissions, and in particular to pay attention to the grass roots of the industry: the bed-and-breakfast landladies, hoteliers, shopkeepers, caravan site owners and filling station owners, who provide the real barometer for trends in the tourism trade. If the Executive listens to those people, it will discover several key pointers towards reversing the downward trend. The first, I am sure, will be to  cut the red tape that so bedevils all today's society, which I keep coming up against in Galloway. For instance, one landlady I met is limited to having six guests. That is not unreasonable for three double bedrooms, but if a couple with a small baby—for whom she would not charge—arrive at that guest house, she instantly loses not only the use of one of the four remaining beds, but up to £2,000 per annum because of that petty bureaucratic regulation. The second key pointer will be the cost of travelling in Scotland, a matter that has already been raised today. It is a simple problem to solve. If the Labour Government and the Scottish Executive are serious about increasing tourism throughout Scotland, they must get Gordon Brown's foot off the fuel escalator and cut the cost of petrol. That would bring many other benefits and would do more than anything else to boost the tourism industry. Thirdly, we must take a long hard look at the operation of the area tourist boards, and particularly at how they are financed. In Dumfries and Galloway and, no doubt, in several other areas, the area tourist board has to prepare its budget without knowing the contribution that will come from the local authority. Funding must come directly through the Scottish Tourist Board, and the local authorities must be removed from the equation. The tourist board network must focus its attention increasingly on promotion and decreasingly on the red tape and bureaucracy that I have described. We must become more flexible in allowing seasonal tourism-related businesses to advertise themselves in a reasonable manner. Far too often, facilities are prevented from promoting themselves by an overzealous authority, which will allow only those awful dull brown notices for tourists, which suggest a field of mud rather than a field of dreams. If the Executive is serious, I beg it to examine the key points that I mentioned. If it does so, and if they are properly addressed, the future of Scotland's tourism industry will be bright indeed. I commend the amendment.

The minister openly and rightly drew attention to the fact that the Scottish CMO expects there to be  more than 2,200 cases of BSE in Great Britain this year. However, as Alasdair Morgan said, only 25 cases have been confirmed in Scotland so far this year, all of which have been in the dairy herd, which does not go into the food chain. Given that fact and the current advice of the English CMO, does the Scottish Executive agree that the Scottish public should be given a free choice to buy beef on the bone, as was originally proposed by SEAC?

I thank Alasdair for allowing me to speak in this debate. I congratulate him on again getting Galloway mentioned in the Scottish Parliament. One of the joys of the Scottish Parliament is that areas of rural Scotland are mentioned considerably more often in parliamentary circles than they were before its establishment. Saturday 16 May 1998 is memorable for more than one reason. It was my first day as the approved Scottish Conservative candidate for Galloway and Upper Nithsdale, which is highly notable. It was also the day of the official opening of Wigtown as Scotland's national book town. I would not like to make a pitch as to which event was the more important—it was probably Wigtown's national book town status. My first duty as a prospective candidate was to attend the opening of the national book town. It was a joy to witness the optimism on the faces of Wigtown residents and businessmen as the initiative was unveiled. Places such as Wigtown do not often receive good news on the scale that winning the national book town competition must have been. However, I have to ask whether that good news has been lived up to. What seemed to offer such promise has a long way to go if it is to live up to the early expectations. I appreciate that Wigtown, as a book town, is still young, but to identify some of the problems, we need look no further than the Machars visitor survey report that was published recently. Some of its findings point to areas where, as Alasdair said, there is a need for further investment. Visitors were not satisfied with the quality of visitor attractions; the public transport; the condition of the roads; the range of catering facilities; the availability and quality of public toilets; the facilities for disabled people; the shopping facilities; the opening times; and the range and quality of visitor activities. That is a shopping list of even greater length than Alasdair Morgan's. The shortcomings highlight the fact that it is not enough simply to nominate a village such as Wigtown as a national book town. There is a need  for follow-up investment so that the peripheral businesses and further literary businesses that are needed are encouraged to establish themselves in Wigtown. Governments are fond of what I call headline politics. They excel at the creation of a popular headline but often fail to follow it up with the investment that is required to give substance to the headline. That is what has happened with Wigtown. If the expectations of Wigtown are to be achieved, further Government investment is necessary in this laudable and excellent initiative. I think that it was Lord Gordon of Strathblane who said that all Galloway needed to get people to turn left at Carlisle was one substantial visitor attraction. Wigtown could be that attraction, if it receives the help that it needs. I support the motion completely.

I strongly agree with the member—although I cannot remember who it was—who said that this debate should not become an opportunity for everyone to make a pitch for their own areas. I hope that it does not become a bidding competition between Dundee and Aberdeen, particularly as I cannot now make the pitch for Dumfries that I would like to have made; otherwise I would have strongly majored on that aspect. However, Presiding Officer, let me say straight away that, as a farmer, at least in a former life, I think that I speak for the whole agricultural community in that I very much welcome the introduction of a food standards agency, particularly now that it has a UK-wide brief and that its funding will come from central Government. I welcome the agency as a much-needed buffer for an industry whose confidence is at an all-time low, and whose image in the eye of the consumer is at a similarly low ebb. The agency will have an unenviable balancing act to perform: how to bolster the confidence of the consumers in the food that they buy and eat, while simultaneously laying to rest the frustrations of the producers, who feel that they are everyone's target, from the President of the European Commission down to the shoppers who buy their products on a daily basis. In order to achieve that delicate balance, the food standards agency must have the complete confidence of every link in the complex food chain, from producer to consumer alike. Likewise, every link must have complete confidence in the food standards agency. If it is to be successful—and it must be—it must foster a two-way relationship based on mutual trust and mutual benefit, rather than a "do as we command" relationship based on the bureaucracy and dictatorship so beloved of this Administration. To do that, it is absolutely imperative that this agency is openly and genuinely independent, both in its thinking and in its make-up. Members of the FSA must be asked to register their interests. It is important that representatives of all those links in the food chain, from plough to plate, are included in the make-up of the board. I seek the Executive's assurance that there will be farmer representation on the board of the new agency. If all that can be  achieved, the agency will be judged solely by its actions. However, I am concerned about some possible limitations. Will the FSA be able to ensure that all food products and animal feedingstuffs are accurately labelled, showing a complete list of ingredients—whether or not those ingredients are genetically modified—the country of origin and, where appropriate, the system of production? Will the agency be able to lift the beef-on-the-bone ban without reference to the Executive, which is a perfectly legitimate question, if the ban is still in place? Will it be able to lift the ridiculous regulations requiring ewe carcases to be split and the spinal column removed before export? Incidentally, that regulation was introduced on the results of evidence that can at best be described as spurious. Its introduction has led to many of the problems faced by today's sheep farmers as they face the prospect of culling thousands of ewes that previously were worth good money. Will the agency accept that kitchen practices have their part to play in E coli scares, every bit as much as do manufacturing processes or butcher shops? Can it ensure that imported foods are produced to the same exacting standards as our own, and are adequately labelled to say so? If it can address those issues and others, if it can build confidence between itself and the food chain, and if it can truly remain independent, it can achieve success across the spectrum of the food industry and will be welcomed greatly by all. Despite my disappointment that the agency will not be placed in Dumfries and Galloway, the region in which agriculture has a higher input into the rural economy than any other region in Scotland, I support this motion.

As the member who lodged the original prayers motion, as it became known, I would like to commend the Parliamentary Bureau for coming up with a speedy and, as far as I am concerned, wholly acceptable solution to what must have been a difficult conundrum: how to balance the  requirement for what Donald Gorrie called proportional praying in the original debate with the quite understandable traditional desire for Christian-only prayers, as proposed by my colleague, Phil Gallie. I freely confess that that desire has dominated my mailbag by a ratio of some 70:1. I have read and replied to every one of those letters, and have had most of the Bible quoted at me in their text. One quotation was not thrust in my direction. It is the one quotation that should most influence the decision that we are about to take, that we should "do unto others as you would have them do unto you". That is a maxim with which I can find no cause to disagree, and which we would do well to adopt as a Parliament. It is, above all, a maxim that promotes tolerance. If we intend to be a tolerant Parliament, as I hope we do, we must allow MSPs who are not of a Christian persuasion a recognised moment of comfort alongside the rest of us before business begins. Whatever form of contemplation is held on a given day will not prevent me or anyone else, as a practising Christian, from finding comfort from my particular god. If there is no other Parliament in the world that has such a practice, I am sorry—so what? To my mind, that is a reason for us to adopt a new, open and welcoming procedure as we enter both a new phase of Scottish democracy and the new millennium. "Do unto others as you would have them do unto you": that is not a bad way to live. I support the motion and commend it to the chamber.

It is with a certain amount of trepidation that I enter this debate, because I acknowledge that my subject rolls into the fields of justice, education and social services, as well as taking its primary place within the health service. I strongly believe that my subject is not only one of the greatest dangers to our health, as a nation, but is capable of damaging the social structure of our society. It is a curse that knows no boundaries of class, creed, wealth, colour or political affiliation and that frightens all parents as their children grow up in today's society. It is a curse that has an adverse affect on every community, no matter how large or small, and that we must address, as a Parliament whose aim-indeed whose promise-is to improve the lot of those in our society who can least help themselves. I refer, of course, to drugs and to those who use, misuse and abuse them. Any debate about those who supply them is for another occasion.  As a Parliament, we will be guilty of the utmost neglect if we are not able to concentrate on and prioritise the issue of drugs in our first four-year term of office. The rewards of making progress would be enormous; for example, there would be huge benefits in terms of police resources. Just this week, I had a meeting with the chief constable of Dumfries and Galloway, who informed me that 70 per cent of crime in that region was directly drugs related.  There would be equally enormous benefits to our social services and to our local authority resources, but the greatest benefit would be to our health service and consequently to the health status of our nation and its people. It is surely incumbent on this Parliament to try to achieve those benefits because, as the minister said, we have a magnificent opportunity to take a new initiative on this and other issues.  I have spoken to many people who are involved in drugs rehabilitation and I keep coming up against the view-interesting and unusual these days-that there is plenty of money being thrown at the problem. The Scottish Drugs Forum all-party working group's report states that £50 million annually is the current expenditure on response to drugs use. However, I am constantly told that that £50 million is not being used in the most effective way. We need to find the most effective ways, or best practice as it is better known, and we need to consider prevention through education. There is an overwhelming need for a national strategy rather than the fragmented one that is currently employed. Where we fail to prevent or to educate, we need to listen to those who work in rehabilitation and to listen and learn from those who have first-hand experience of the pain and  peril of drug addiction.  Given the belief that sufficient resources are available, but that they could be better applied, the answer to some of the problems lies in another of the Executive's buzz words, which also appears in Mary Scanlon's amendment: partnership. This issue, above all, is surely the perfect one in which partnerships should be employed-between Government departments, local authority departments, the voluntary sector and individuals. The Government's drugs expert, Professor Howard Parker, predicts that we are on the verge of a new heroin epidemic, as if the present one was not serious enough. The announcement of a new drug enforcement agency, while welcome, brings problems of its own, not least in how that agency will be staffed without diluting the expertise on the ground. The agency will not in itself provide the whole answer.  The credibility of the Executive, indeed of the Parliament, is on trial to an extent, not least in the media. An urgent, innovative and joined-up approach to the drugs menace in our society would give us a golden opportunity for redemption. It will be to our eternal shame if we do not grasp that opportunity. I support the amendment.

We cannot hear either.

I will preface my remarks by acknowledging the letter from Mr McLeish that conveniently arrived on my desk at about quarter past two. I acknowledge the £1 million for Dumfries and Galloway's enterprise action plan for 1998-99 and the £2.4 million for the 1999-2000 action plan, but question how much of that money will end up as consultancy fees, feasibility studies and jobs for the boys, rather than jobs for the men and women who need them.  David Mundell described the serious situation in Dumfries and Galloway. While I agree that we must not talk the area down, there are underlying problems with the agriculture and forestry industries, which account for a staggering 30 per cent of the region's gross domestic product. That is a stunningly high level of dependency in anybody's language and the Scottish Agricultural College has projected that there will be 1,700 job losses over three years. The crucial importance of those two basic rural industries is clear to all and the SAC report shows how much the agricultural situation has worsened during the year.  Parliament will not want to hear, nor have I time to give, all the facts and figures that are available to illustrate the demise of agri-forestry, so I will confine myself to a mere two facts. They are stark and sobering. First, in 1996, total farm income in Scotland was £546 million. In 1998, it was £187 million. I still have trouble getting used to the second fact, which is that it is cheaper to import fencing posts from Latvia than it is to manufacture them in Scotland.  That is why 1,700 jobs are at risk in south-west Scotland. Not just farmers' or farm workers' jobs are at stake; the jobs of shop assistants, drainers, fencers, sales reps, forestry workers and saw mill workers-the myriad of jobs that agriculture and forestry help to sustain-are at stake. Entire rural communities are under the severest of threats because of the decline in those most rural of industries.  What can this Parliament do? I strongly maintain that, within the European Union, the Scottish farmer will take lessons from no one on production efficiency. However, perhaps we have lessons to learn in marketing. I hope that the Parliament will be able to promote the benefits of co-operation and co-operative marketing as one positive way of improving agriculture's lot.  I have no doubt that one role of this Scottish Parliament will be to promote Scotland and all things Scottish. I believe strongly that as part of that role the Executive, in conjunction with local authorities and enterprise companies, should work to encourage the further manufacturing of a region's primary produce, so that the region may gain substantially from the added value and increased economic input that rural communities so desperately require.  There is already a deeply held scepticism in many rural areas about whether this Parliament will be of much benefit to them, and I am afraid that the legislative programme that was set out this morning will have done little to alleviate it. We must unite across the parties to set our parliamentary sights on regenerating the rural areas of Scotland. That is the only way in which this Parliament will be deemed a success. Indeed, it is on that that the oft-mentioned but seldom-witnessed new politics will be judged in rural Scotland.  I support totally the call for an Executive-led task force and strenuous backing for the region's efforts to obtain objective 2 funding. In short, I fully support the motion.

On a point of order. I hope that you will forgive me, Mr Presiding Officer, but I thought that this was a debate on allowances, not a party political broadcast.

I was tempted, for a moment, to withdraw the motion, but only on the ground that any religious service is likely to be drowned out by the sound of members' pagers going off for most of the service, which would render any form of contemplation almost impossible.  I am not minded to withdraw the motion, however, for the simple reason that many members have spoken in favour of it. I accept, to a certain extent, what the First Minister said about its wording. I tried to make it plain and was advised by the clerks earlier today that, if I made my intention plain in my opening remarks, any misunderstanding of the wording would be made up for.  One misunderstanding was referred to by Dr Ewing. Coming from the deep south of Scotland, I thought that plenary was a splendid word to introduce to any motion but was rather horrified when a clerk pointed out to me that it would mean that prayers would take place once every four years. That would find 100 per cent approval in the chamber, no doubt. I made it plain in my opening remarks, however, that my sole intention is to ensure that prayers are said in one form or another, on a daily basis, at every meeting of the whole Parliament in the chamber.

I am grateful for that comment. I am in complete agreement with the interfaith concept of the motion. It was perhaps naive to use the word non-denominational, but I have never been in any doubt that the interfaith aspect is the one that we should pursue.  I also have sympathy with the "Thought for the Day" angle-which I think Mr Salmond used-that I mentioned in several interviews this morning as presenting a model that could be considered. I cannot agree with Mr McCabe because I think that he is disputing the merits of prayer. We have been praying for almost 2,000 years and I think that it is more than time to take a stand.  I strongly believe that with the new Parliament we have a new beginning. I see no reason why we should not have a new all-embracing form of contemplative thought or prayer as part of our parliamentary procedure. I cannot agree with some members who think that everything that  comes from Westminster is bad. I believe that daily prayer would be enormously to our benefit and I commend the motion to members.

rose-

In moving the motion, may I first clarify any confusion over its wording by stating quite clearly that my intention is to ensure that prayers are said, in one form or another, on a daily basis, at every meeting of the whole Parliament within this chamber.  Much has been made in the past week of the fact that during the inaugural meeting of the Parliament about one third of MSPs chose to make the affirmation rather than take the oath. It has not been pointed out as strongly that two thirds of us chose to take the oath. Some 86 of us preferred to swear our allegiance in the name of God.  I, like you, Sir David, am a son of the manse. I was, therefore, brought up in a Christian, God-fearing household, although I admit that for much of my early upbringing I tended to fear the wrath of my father on earth rather more than that of my father in heaven. None the less, throughout the years I have found the occasional moment of prayer or simply of quiet and reflective thought to be of great assistance in my daily business.  My motion today, however, is not born purely of personal preference or desire. Rather, that desire was reinforced during the build-up to the election on 6 May by the surprisingly large number of people who voiced their concern on this subject to me, having read the various rumours in the press, among them one that suggested that there would be no room for prayers at all in the daily business of this Parliament.  Great play has rightly been made of the concept of this Parliament, and its committees, being able to call on the help of others from outwith its ranks  for advice and guidance on any issue that falls within its remit. It seems entirely appropriate, therefore, that this Parliament, particularly as it meets in the assembly building of the Church of Scotland, should ask for a little daily advice and guidance from the greatest expert of all.  This is not a party political matter; it is a question of getting our priorities right. To my mind, a Parliament that meets without prayer is not respectful or complete. Therefore, as a matter of urgency, I move,  That this Parliament agrees in principle for Prayers to be held on a non-denominational basis, at the start of each plenary session of the Parliament, and remits to the Parliamentary Bureau to make arrangements therefor and to come forward to the Parliament with recommendations speedily.