5. To ask the Scottish Government, in light of the recently announced £90 million in additional costs, whether it plans further upgrades to the Glasgow to Edinburgh rail link under the current improvement plan. (S4O-02871)

The Scottish National Party’s 2011 manifesto beguiled us with journey times of just over 30 minutes between Glasgow and Edinburgh. Now we are told to forget that and accept that we might get journey times of 42 minutes in five years’ time. Bigger trains and longer platforms may address a capacity issue, but what I and the many other regular commuters on that route want now are quicker trains and shorter journeys. When will the minister even partly deliver on his manifesto promise?

This debate has been redolent of a now-hackneyed refrain from the SNP. In essence, the SNP argument is this: nothing good comes from Westminster and the only hope for Scotland is independence. [Interruption.] I was waiting for the cheer, but it did not come. That is the familiar reprise that is repeated in the motion, so there is nothing surprising there. The detail of the motion bears examination. Suddenly, free school meals—a policy that was dropped from the 2011 SNP manifesto and was mentioned in passing as a five-word post-independence aspiration in the white paper—is produced like a rabbit out of the hat by Alex Salmond this afternoon, as a substantive policy for primaries 1 to 3 from next January. So, why now that belated conversion? Could it be that the much-maligned Westminster Government has pledged free meals from this April and that the SNP was caught napping and red faced, and is playing embarrassed catch-up? The further irony, of course, is that the policy needs no constitutional change. All that it took was a Tory-led coalition at Westminster to force Alex Salmond’s hand. [Laughter.] Listen to the raucous laughter. If the policy was such a prominent feature for the SNP, where was it in the massive white paper? Where was the detail and time schedule? The same is true of the other proposals in the motion. To his credit, Willie Rennie has consistently pushed the issue and contrasted Scotland with the rest of the UK. Again, it does not take constitutional change to deliver those improvements; they can be made within devolution. As Ruth Davidson powerfully pointed out, there is a hypocrisy at the heart of the motion in saying that only independence can deliver those changes. Actually, they could have been delivered by the SNP at any point in the past seven years. The estimated benefits to Scotland of such childcare measures, which include an increase of more than 100,000 women in the labour market, an increase in Scottish output of £2.2 billion and a boost to Government revenues of £700 million, all of which are possible, probable and laudable if they can be achieved, are of course—in the best traditions of the SNP—not substantiated by one jot of data. They are guesstimates. For all we know, some women might choose not to go back to work. There is no reliable quantification.

If the First Minister is such an enthusiast for mental arithmetic, as he seems to be, he will no doubt applaud the coalition policies from Westminster, which are increasing employment and reducing unemployment. I turn to what the motion is completely silent on. On child poverty, the Joseph Rowntree Foundation has said that, in 2011-12, there were “1,100,000 children fewer than were in poverty in 1998, and the lowest level of children living in poverty since the mid 1980s.” As I was saying to the First Minister, the motion is also silent on how the best way of eradicating poverty for all is by reducing unemployment and increasing employment, which are both currently happening under a Tory-led Westminster Government. Nowhere in the motion—surprisingly—is there reference to the Westminster tax cuts for 25 million people. It has also been said that from April of this year the personal allowance will increase to £10,000, which is a typical tax cut of £705, and 2.7 million people on the lowest incomes will pay no income tax at all. Also, nowhere in the motion is there reference to keeping mortgage rates low, which is made possible only by controlling borrowing. Nowhere is there reference to cutting income tax by half for people on the minimum wage, and nowhere is there reference to the biggest-ever cash rise in the basic state pension. That is the reality of being in the United Kingdom, and it is a very uncomfortable truth for the SNP. By contrast, the SNP not only offers a predictable jam-tomorrow vision of separation, but advances a quite extraordinary political proposition. It appears to say that it has the jam now, but we will get it only if we vote for independence. What a bizarre and cynical gesture. I believe that the public will see through that bare-faced hypocrisy and threadbare rhetoric, and I am confident that they will resoundingly reject separation in September. I support the amendment in the name of Ruth Davidson.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking in response to reports that, in the last year, the conviction rate in criminal cases has fallen by 7 per cent. (S4O-02737)

It is instructive that with corroboration the conviction rate for sexual offences rose. With the best of intentions, the Scottish Government wants to abolish corroboration, but the only certainties consequent upon that will be more prosecutions and more miscarriages of justice. There is certainly no certainty of more convictions. Given the controversy that that proposal has generated, will the cabinet secretary please consider, for the sake of all interested parties, removing the proposal from the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill and referring it for an external group to consider and advise on?

We have had a thought-provoking and timely debate, and all parties can agree that violence against women is a blight on Scottish society, which we must seek to eradicate. Sadly, debates on violence against women are a recurring feature in the Parliament. That is a matter for sorrow but it is also a matter of necessity, because the statistics on domestic abuse and rape make for depressing reading. Worldwide, violence against women is one of the most common but least punished crimes. It is, of course, possible that those statistics show that victims are becoming increasingly confident about reporting incidents of violence because they believe that action will be taken. If that is the case, we can draw some encouragement from it. However, the fact remains that, in Scotland, violence against women is a pervasive social problem that affects every neighbourhood. It can be found in every social background, as Jackie Baillie powerfully illustrated. We must continue to reassure victims that abusive behaviour is not normal. It is repugnant, disgusting and unacceptable, and victims must be supported in understanding that they are not to blame. The people who are to blame are the perpetrators, and the greatest protection that is available to them is silence. That silence is potent. It spawns in the mind of the perpetrator an illusion of power and control. Women must therefore be encouraged to report incidents and, when they do so, support must be provided and any convicted perpetrator dealt with appropriately. My colleague Margaret Mitchell articulated her concerns that the warm words of the motion are not reflected in practice, and she cited various instances of her concerns. In particular, her comments about sentencing for domestic abuse offenders are entirely valid. Perpetrators in a third of domestic abuse cases received only a warning, which sends out totally the wrong message to victims and to the criminals. I repeat our concern about automatic early release. The Scottish Government’s promise to end that discredited practice for only the most serious offenders and violent criminals is betraying victims. We must never forget that young girls can be victims of violence, either as witnesses to incidents of abuse or, heartbreakingly, as victims themselves. Alison McInnes referred to that. In January, I suggested that, to raise awareness and to help any youngster who is under threat, a smartphone app might be a way forward. The cabinet secretary, Alex Neil, seemed to be receptive to that idea, so perhaps the minister could outline in closing whether any progress has been made on that. On a positive note, I welcome the development of the strategy to tackle violence against women. I hope that it will have the effect of enhancing the good work that is already being done by voluntary organisations. A great deal of excellent support is being provided by charities, not least Zero Tolerance, Scottish Women’s Aid, and Rape Crisis Scotland, and I pay tribute to them all. Victims need to be supported by a justice system that places victims first, and by adequate and long-term funding. In that connection, I am pleased to see that funding has been awarded until 2015, but I urge the Government to plan now for funding beyond that. Violence against women includes modern-day slavery. I say to Rhoda Grant that I was encouraged to hear yesterday about the UK Government’s draft legislation, which will disrupt and imprison for longer the organised criminal gangs that are behind much of the modern slave trade. I welcome indications that the Scottish Government is willing to explore a legislative consent motion for the bill. I also note Jenny Marra’s efforts to introduce a member’s bill to tackle the issue. I do not consider that those two bills will be mutually exclusive, and I hope that the best bits from each can be adopted in Scotland to provide the practical help that many victims are crying out for.

6. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the demographic projections in the recent Institute for Fiscal Studies report on the fiscal sustainability of an independent Scotland. (S4O-02627)

The Scottish Government was, of course, quick to criticise the IFS report, but one point seems to have hit home. In yesterday’s white paper, the Scottish Government appeared to accept that Scotland has a relatively more challenging pensions situation than the UK as a whole. That turnaround has also affected policy, which has switched from talk of a reduction in the pension age to talk of potentially delaying the rise in the age threshold to 67 and leaving it all to a commission, which would report in 2018. Is it not glaringly obvious that, when it comes to pensions in an independent Scotland, the Scottish Government does not know what it is doing, when it will do it and what it will cost?

Nothing could be more important than the future of Scotland. We care about that for ourselves, for our families, for our friends and for our fellow countrymen and women. The debate has illustrated the depth of feeling and passion that the issue inspires. However, there is a paradox, in that the white paper, “Scotland’s Future”, is not a blueprint for the future of Scotland. There is an irony in the fact that that much-vaunted guide for the journey to independence is an extraordinary brew of aspiration, fantasy, fiction, wish-lists, pledges with no price tags, and some cop-outs. It is actually a do-it-yourself constitutional map with scattered destinations, enticing resort descriptions and some roads under construction; the rest is blank, with an invitation to people to colour it in for themselves. When we separate out what the document presents as absolute, unconditional fact, on analysis, we find that it is nothing of the sort. Let us take Europe. Page 206 of the document says: “We will continue to be a member of the EU and will have a seat at the top table”. What does the first part of that sentence actually mean? Membership of the EU is not within Alex Salmond’s control, but if, under article 48, all the member states of the EU agree to vary EU treaties, Scotland may be allowed to join as an accession state, subject to conditions that we do not know. The only precedent that I have been able to find for a state joining the EU by that route is Croatia, which used articles 48 and 49, and the process took 10 years. It would probably be simpler to proceed under article 49 as a new member state, which is what every accepted current authority anticipates—

That is another remarkable paradox: my party is prepared to give voters a say but the member’s party is prepared to keep schtum and give voters no say in whatever conditions it negotiates for an independent Scotland in the EU. How bizarre is that? The second part of the sentence says that we “will have a seat at the top table”. However much the SNP might dislike this, the three powerhouses in the EU are currently Germany, France and the UK—that is universally acknowledged. [Interruption.] SNP members should not ask me; they should ask the other member states in the EU. If we become a member state, we will probably be number 29 or 30. However, the three powerhouses will still be Germany, France and the rest of the UK, so where is that top table? On border controls—

I want to make progress. Page 489 in the “Q&amp;A” section asks whether we will be in the common travel area with the rest of the UK, and the answer is yes. In an ideal world, we would like that, but if it is a condition of joining the EU, we will have to accept the Schengen agreement, from which the rest of the UK has opted out, and we will not be able to prevent the rest of the UK from installing border controls to control entry to the rest of the UK. Those are another two central issues that will be beyond Alex Salmond’s control. Surprisingly, on finance and the economy, the white paper contains one absolute statement that is true. Page 72 says: “Scotland is currently running an estimated fiscal deficit”. Yes, it is. In fact, for 20 of the past 21 years, Scotland has run a fiscal deficit. However, the real magnitude of this inconvenient truth for Alex Salmond is highlighted by two sources. Surprisingly, one is in his own document, the white paper itself. Only one of its pages is devoted to the issue. We are given tax and spending figures for one year only—2016-17, the first year of independence. The question arises: why are there not further projections? The conclusion can only be that to make further projections would be dangerous because they would be either so guarded and canny that they would raise justifiable fears about the deficit, or so rosy as to be utterly incredible. The second source is the IFS report, to which various members have referred. That report lays bare the fiscal gap and the likelihood of increased taxes, which Gavin Brown covered incisively. When that alarming analysis is set against the white paper’s range of spending commitments, with no price tag attached, the complete uncertainty of our future finances is there for all to see. However, there is one certainty in the white paper. It is not a certainty that gets much attention, which is, in itself, surprising, given the paucity of certainties in the other 649 pages, but it is there. I refer to job losses in defence, whether directly, in Faslane and our naval shipyards, or in the many excellent and highly skilled Scottish companies that support defence technology. Their core activity depends on a United Kingdom strategic defence facility, and an independent Scotland can neither equal nor replicate that. Alex Salmond can argue it broadways, sideways and longways, but everybody working in that arena knows that job losses will follow independence. In conclusion, the white paper does not address why I have to be made a foreigner to my family and friends in the rest of the UK.

Why is the natural connection that I feel to so many people throughout the UK to be severed? For the future of Scotland—my country—I reject the motion, and for the future of my country, I support the amendment.

Whatever Alex Salmond says, an independent Scotland using the pound will not be under his control; it will be under the control of a foreign country. At page 111, the white paper concedes the possibility of “a different arrangement”. Will the Deputy First Minister please clarify what the different arrangement will be if the currency negotiations to use the pound fail? Will it be the euro, the groat or the Aberdeen dollar? What is plan B?

Like John Lamont, I speak as an elder of the Church of Scotland and I propose to vote for the bill this evening. I am concerned about the level of protection afforded to, say, an individual celebrant from a religious community that has opted in but who chooses to opt out. As I read it, the relevant amendment to the Equality Act 2010 says that a person controlling the use of religious or belief premises will not contravene the act by refusing to allow the premises to be used for a same-sex marriage or a civil partnership. However, we might be talking not about a person within the Church of Scotland but about a collective entity such as a congregational board. It might also be that, after a request to participate in a same-sex marriage is declined, a subsequent request to use the church premises for a reception is also declined. Is that also covered by this protection?

Before the Deputy First Minister has a heart attack, I do not propose to oppose amendment 6. I wish to apologise to the Presiding Officer and the Deputy First Minister for my late arrival. I was misinformed about the time of commencement of proceedings.

I am in sympathy with Mr Macdonald’s amendments because, usefully, as Mr Macdonald indicated, they would create a specific distinction about who is campaigning for what and under what guise. That would provide an additional and welcome degree of clarity to the bill as well as transparency for the public. That transparency for the public is all important, so I welcome and support the amendments.

When scrutinising the bill as a Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee member, I was taken back to an experience at my primary school—that is not an allusion to either the Scottish Government or my committee colleagues. The occasion was a primary 7 Christmas party, or, as we liked to style it, dance. We had been learning all these marvellous Scottish country dances, I loved the music—I still do—there were interesting things emerging called boys, and I just could not wait to get to the dance.

My mother, on the other hand, was solely concerned with what I was going to wear and whether I possessed any presentable, never mind suitable, shoes. She was right, because that detail required thought and attention or the dance would not work. In a sense, we are in a similar situation: we are all caught up in the debate—the excitement of the referendum and the preparations for it. Whatever side of the argument we are on, we are out there, taking part in debates and attending public meetings. We advance our views with passion, field the questions with vigour and deal with challenge robustly. There is excitement in the air. I love it—I guess that I am not alone—and I want to be in the thick of it: 18 September 2014 is right at the heart of my unionist calendar. To happen, the referendum needs its own clothes and shoes; it cannot work without them. [Interruption.] John Swinney wants to participate. I will take an intervention.

A taciturn Mr Swinney—I am very glad that he was not at the school dance. [Laughter.] Scrutinising the Scottish Independence Referendum Bill has been an essential and not unenjoyable task. Like the Deputy First Minister, I, too, thank our convener, Bruce Crawford, the clerk, Andrew Mylne, and his team, our advisers and the Scottish Parliament information centre. We may not have done a dashing white sergeant or a gay Gordons round the committee room, but we got there, and that was in no small measure down to our convener’s skilful and wise stewardship, together with impeccable guidance and attention to detail from the clerking team. Our SPICe advisers certainly kept us from straying down some cul-de-sacs. Although they may not have realised it, all of them, in their own way, produced the clothes and shoes to ensure that the rest of us can go to the ball. The stage 1 report noted: “The Committee is confident that its Stage 1 inquiry has enabled this important Bill to be subject to a wide-ranging and robust scrutiny process.” However, it pointed out that “some aspects of the Bill ... require adjustment ... and ... clarification”. That was a neat summation of the position then. Stage 2 produced a constructive set of amendments that addressed the need for that adjustment and clarification, and that is how we have proceeded today. I was sorry that Lewis Macdonald’s amendments were not accepted, because they would have enhanced the clarity of the bill. I regret that they failed. However, I welcome the Scottish Government’s amendments on the common plan and accept that they provide an important clarification. The Deputy First Minister might remember that, at stage 1, I mentioned my continuing concern about the behaviour of Scottish Government quangos during the purdah and regulated periods. Indeed, she provided a welcome acknowledgement of those concerns and confirmed that the Scottish Government would issue guidance to relevant public bodies. She offered to provide to the committee a draft of the guidance, and as the committee continues in being even though the bill will be passed this evening, I ask her when that draft guidance is likely to be available. Although the regulated and purdah periods are naturally the subject of focus, in my opinion—and I am not alone—the sooner that guidance is available, the better. It will provide reassurance to many people that those Government bodies are getting a steer and a framework in which to operate. We also need to know, because there may be some ambiguity about this, exactly which bodies she anticipates the guidance will cover. Perhaps she can clarify that. Other than that, I support the bill. It delivers a workable mechanism for 18 September 2014. Like Drew Smith, I confidently expect that, on that date, Scotland will overwhelmingly reject separation from the rest of the United Kingdom.

In my opening speech, I raised some questions for the Deputy First Minister—[Interruption.] Oh—Mr Swinney is back among us and is having a wee chat. Does he want to intervene?

The proposition is simple—it is called staying in the United Kingdom. Members: Aw.

In all seriousness, I say to the Deputy First Minister that I would be grateful if she responded to the questions that I raised in my opening speech. The Deputy First Minister referred—rightly—to the Edinburgh agreement, which was historic, pivotal and an exemplar of how a Westminster Government and a devolved Government can work together. The Deputy First Minister says that that reflects what could happen after a yes vote; I say that it is a shining example of how devolution can continue to work in the United Kingdom following a no vote. Sandra White uttered the memorable phrase: “Scotland has flourished under devolution”. Let us all pin that to our lapels and not let it be forgotten. The Deputy First Minister said that the white paper will present an overwhelming case for independence. Should that case not have been made by now? It has certainly been a long time coming. I will reserve judgment on the white paper and leave the enthusiasm to the Deputy First Minister. The Deputy First Minister made an important point about the language and conduct of the debate, to which Bruce Crawford and I, and others, referred at stage 1. I was struck by what Bruce Crawford, Malcolm Chisholm, Ken Macintosh and Patrick Harvie said today. This is not about being consensual. How could it be? That would be an intellectual confusion. There will be passion, robustness, fire, flair and verve—they all have their place. However, intimidation, jeering and sneering do not in any circumstances have a place. On the merits or demerits of the argument, assertion is not fact and repeated platitudes are not evidence. I know that the public want facts and evidence. I know that the public want clear language and that they want information and explanation, not provocation and confrontation. Like others, I have attended public meetings. It might be uncomfortable for the SNP that it has emerged that more is known about the partnership that is the United Kingdom than is known about separation. People understand what the United Kingdom is; they understand what it means and what it has done. I have no doubt that that explains the polls to which Mr Maxwell referred. Some might have no time for the United Kingdom and find nothing good in it, but others see virtues.

I am very tight for time, having given Mr Swinney a very generous intervention. Other people see virtue in the United Kingdom’s capacity to influence, whether that is through our permanent membership of the United Nations Security Council, our being in the G7 and G8 groups of countries or our influence on the global stage, about which Tavish Scott talked. People understand that, because they see it happening. People very particularly understand the meaning and significance of our British armed forces. The recent remembrance commemorations poignantly underscore that. They understand what the pound is. They know that that is their currency in the United Kingdom and they want it. All that means that the separation case and the white paper face a significant challenge. The white paper needs to set out the case for separation. It must not just detail the virtues that those who make the argument maintain are there but produce the blueprint as to how separation would work. There is a huge sentiment in Scotland, which is shared by me and hundreds of thousands of other people, and which is the polar opposite of the sentiment that was expressed by Linda Fabiani and Annabelle Ewing. It is that people like being part of the United Kingdom and regard that as positive. Contrary to what SNP members argue, there are hundreds of thousands of non-SNP supporters throughout Scotland who want to keep the United Kingdom, and they place that above party politics. That is why I am confident that next September people will vote for the proven, positive partnership that is the United Kingdom and reject separation.

1. Thank you, Presiding Officer. To ask the Scottish Government what funding strategy it has to facilitate a high-speed rail link between Scotland and London. (S4O-02562)

I am aware that the Scottish Government has given significant support to the scheme. I, of course, disagree with the Government’s policy of independence, which I hope that the electorate will reject whole-heartedly at next year’s referendum. Nonetheless, if independence happens, how will the high-speed rail link be funded between a separate Scottish Government and the United Kingdom Government? Who will pay for what?

It is a great pleasure to take part in the debate. I, too, thank Mike MacKenzie for bringing the issue to Parliament. I should declare an interest, in that I have been invited to become an honorary fellow of the Royal Incorporation of Architects in Scotland—an invitation that I have, with great pleasure, accepted. I do not have an entry in the register of members’ interests yet because the process is embryonic rather than complete. I believe that I have to attend a dinner next year and make a speech, at which point I am in, so to speak. The RIAS is an important influencer in Scottish affairs in general, but most particularly in the important arena of our built environment. As Patricia Ferguson said, there is widespread evidence of that all over Scotland. That influence is captured well in the motion. In no way is the RIAS either passive or purely advisory. It is a catalyst in the encouragement of creative design and build, both in its programme of activities and of course in the awards scheme to which the motion refers. I, too, congratulate the 12 winners of the 2013 awards. They reflect the cream of talent in the profession. The fact that they emerged from 75 submissions from throughout Scotland is, in itself, a tribute to the calibre of ability to be found among practitioners. It is also an inspiring contribution to the shape of our future built environment. One of the 12 winning projects is the Beacon arts centre in Greenock. I can speak at first hand about its attributes. It is a superb facility in a stunning location. I was privileged to listen to Nicola Benedetti playing in the state-of-the-art theatre, I have attended an art exhibition in the flexible conference area and on more than one occasion I have enjoyed delicious food in the bistro. That imaginative and attractive facility has given a real lift to the Inverclyde environment. As others have said, the winner of the Andrew Doolan best building in Scotland award will be chosen this evening from the 12 RIAS award winners, with the award announced and presented in the Parliament this evening. Unfortunately, like Patricia Ferguson, I cannot be present, as I have another engagement in Glasgow. However, the award will be a prestigious triumph for the successful contender. I only hope that my absence does not scupper my honorary fellowship or my free dinner. The phrase “built environment” can sound rather abstract and a bit dreich, but arguably there is no more important influence on how we live, where we work and how we relax than the built environment. Historically, people congregated where there were centres of activity; perhaps that activity was trade, or access to a market, or perhaps it was maritime activity identified with a river or coastal location. A built environment then developed to accommodate people and their families and to create ancillary facilities for trade and worship. Much of that, as we all know, has left a fascinating legacy of historic interest and quaintness the length and breadth of the United Kingdom. Many buildings, despite being hundreds of years old, are iconic. However, I am equally fascinated by what happens when architects are asked to address a new human and social need and to create a built environment appropriate to that. I have much enjoyed reading a chronicle of post-war history, which is David Kynaston’s series “Tales of a New Jerusalem”. I commend it to anybody who is interested in how Britain has evolved in the past 70 years, because it is readable and fascinating. It shines a light on how we have become shaped as a society in the past 70 years. Much of that is down to political intervention, but a great deal of it is down to our built environment, which features prominently in the chronicle. We sometimes forget that the first town and country planning legislation was passed only in 1947, just over 60 years ago, but it was hugely influential in shaping much of our current environment. It is fascinating to consider how architects addressed the post-war challenges of devastated locations, in which the need for new housing was paramount, with the concept of new towns and building upwards to address the scarcity of land. We did not always get it right, but that work has been vital in informing how we approach design now, as Mike MacKenzie said. The experience of those early pioneering projects has been instructive. Mike MacKenzie also said that Scotland faces challenges. We face the emerging trend of an increasing proportion of elderly people, which is good, but it means that we need to think about how our built environment should adjust to that situation over the next 20, 30 or 40 years. With the architectural talent that is so clearly available in Scotland and with a dynamic and engaged body such as the RIAS, I feel confident about the future of our Scottish built environment.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the stage 1 debate on the Tribunals (Scotland) Bill. I am not a member of the Justice Committee, so I must say that undreamt-of vistas, without limit of horizon, have opened up for me this afternoon. Who would have imagined that reform of tribunals could reveal such glittering facets as “judicialisation” and “courtification”? One feature of this debate that has distressed—nay, alarmed—me is that, while the rest of us have been sustained throughout the afternoon with the presence of colleagues, the minister has been on her own for lengthy chunks of the debate. Quite honestly, in the 21st century and a debate of this nature, that is not humane, and I think that the Scottish Government should address the matter without delay. I accept that the topic of reform of our tribunal system might not set the pulses racing but, as members have acknowledged, it is an important topic and reform is overdue. The tribunal system as we know it grew up on an ad hoc basis during the 20th century as Governments acquired more and more power over citizens’ daily lives. An important landmark was the 1957 Franks report to which Nigel Don referred. That followed the Crichel Down affair in which land acquired during the second world war was not returned to the previous owner but was instead handed over to the Ministry of Agriculture and leased out—so land grab is nothing new. Following that scandal, the Franks report moved tribunals from an executive and administrative model towards a judicial footing, based on the three principles of openness, fairness and impartiality. That was an important change. That judicial footing can be observed without either judge overload or—to use that extraordinary word—courtification. That sounds to me more like a mandatory term for wooing, so I hope that the minister will let me know how she gets on with that. In Scotland there is a clear division between tribunals that deal with devolved matters, and are therefore under the responsibility of the Scottish Government, and those that are reserved. However, users of a tribunal are unlikely to be concerned about or aware of—or, for that matter, care about—whether a tribunal is devolved or reserved. We must come up with a system that is as efficient and fair as it can be and which, above all, meets the needs of the users. Indeed, the minister specifically referred to that. I welcome the Scottish Government’s commitment to continue working with the UK Government in coming up with a satisfactory solution for the reserved tribunals, which are more numerous and deal with far more cases than the devolved tribunals. Ah—the minister has found a friend. I am much comforted by the appearance of Kenny MacAskill in the chamber. The system’s complexity has been commented on. Indeed, the 2008 Philip report specifically referred to that complexity and fragmentation. It also expressed concern that the system did not “meet the key principles of independence and coherence.” I think that we all acknowledge that that complexity is not in the best interests of the users of tribunals; nor does the duplication of resource, in whatever form that occurs, represent value for money. Although the Scottish Government has taken some limited steps to simplify the system—most notably by bringing some of the devolved tribunals under the administration of the Scottish tribunals service—progress has been slow. I observe that the UK equivalent to this bill was passed six years ago. As Roderick Campbell observed, the legislation represents movement, but it will still apply to only a tiny 2 per cent of tribunal cases north of the border. There is a risk that we may create different systems for tribunals in Scotland, compounding the complexity that surrounds them, which would be unfortunate. Currently, only some tribunals are supported by the Scottish tribunals service, and the bill will establish a separate structure for some devolved tribunals, while leaving untouched other devolved tribunals and all the reserved tribunals. I will now comment on a few points that were raised on the committee’s stage 1 report. As mentioned by Margaret Mitchell, the Lands Tribunal for Scotland has expressed concern. A number of members have commented on that, and I expect that the minister will comment on the matter, too. That raises the wider point that the challenge for the Scottish Government is to come up with a system that preserves the specialist qualities required by the Lands Tribunal without complicating a structure that is meant to simplify things. I also reiterate the points made about the importance of protecting our tribunals’ unique and distinct approach to civil justice. There is no doubt that the informality and less adversarial nature of our tribunals, compared with the courts, is a strength. However, there is a legitimate concern that, with the Lord President in charge, a senior judge appointed as president of the tribunals and the expansion of judicial members, care must be taken to avoid judge overload. I hear alarm bells ringing with the proposal that, until the newly created Scottish Civil Justice Council is in a position to take over, ministers will make procedural rules. Ministers, who are of course sometimes subject to tribunal proceedings, should not be making the rules, no matter how much independent or expert advice they take. Instead, the rules should be made on an interim basis, either by the new Scottish Civil Justice Council with additional resource or by another interim body. Other speakers have commented on independence. It is critical to tribunals, and the bill could do more to promote that—an idea that the Lord President shared with the Justice Committee. Indeed, I understand that he suggested the inclusion in the bill of a similar provision to that in the Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Act 2008. Perhaps the Scottish Government will consider that. The new structure, with the position of president of the tribunals appointed by the Lord President, is interesting. I have noticed a restriction: the bill limits the pool of candidates to senators of the College of Justice. I have no quarrel with the senators of the College of Justice, but that pool is deep rather than wide and it needs to be broadened out. The system would benefit from a wider scope of qualified and experienced personnel. The Justice Committee’s stage 1 report notes that much of the detail of the new structure is not contained in the bill. One or two speakers have referred to that, and I am slightly concerned about it. It hampers scrutiny and, although I accept that the proposed legislation seeks to provide a framework for the new structure and needs to be flexible, the amount of detail that will be left to delegated legislation is disquieting. I hope that the Government will take on board some of the comments that the Delegated Powers and Law Reform Committee made. The Justice Committee will closely scrutinise the forthcoming secondary legislation, but it already has an enormous workload and I think that it would have preferred that the Parliament be given more specific information about the detail of the proposed new structure. Perhaps the minister could address that. I believe that the Government is considering merging the Scottish tribunals service with the Scottish Court Service, but has it considered related matters, such as the sheer number of tribunals and the concerns that have been expressed about the independence of some of them?

Hear, hear!

I, too, thank Jackie Baillie for bringing this important issue to the chamber. In doing so, she underlines the vital role of a Parliament in finding common accord across party boundaries to highlight something that is wrong. That is no trite moral judgment. This is not about prim ladies of propriety of a certain age, who might be of ample proportions, pursing their lips in disapproval at the antics of their juniors. This is about how we wish the image of Scotland and the United Kingdom in the 21st century to be represented, and particularly how we wish women in that society to be portrayed. I should also clarify that the views that I am expressing are my personal opinions. To put this debate in context, I point out that women died that we might be given the vote; rent strikes were women fighting for their families and the justice of fair rents while their husbands were at war; women fought for our right to university education; and down the ages women have made sacrifices of all kinds for their families and their society that others might be given chances and opportunities. Given those heroic achievements, it is no surprise that women have risen to the highest levels of every activity imaginable. Their influence and success is as impressive as it is beyond dispute. In 2013, how do we celebrate that? With the consistent portrayal of topless women in a tabloid newspaper. That tasteless and demeaning portrayal of some women is actually a gross and offensive betrayal of all women. For example, when Jessica Ennis won an Olympic gold medal, which was a major achievement in sport, an occasion for national celebration, a fantastic representation of female ability and signalled the creation of an excellent role model, The Sun recognised that triumph by giving greater pre-eminence to a photograph of a topless woman. To me, Lucy-Anne Holmes, with her petition to stop this tacky and questionable practice, is a new heroine. She is right and I support her position, as do more than 120,000 others. However, she, I, Jackie Baillie and all the other signatories also recognise that there is a darker side to this practice, a sinister and disturbing element that is referred to in the motion. As has been confirmed by research, there is a known and proven link between the portrayal of sexualised images of women in the media and attitudes that reinforce sexism, sexual harassment, abuse and violence towards women. That alone should justify stopping the publication of photographs of topless women in newspapers; the practice is indefensible, as are the purported arguments advanced by those who support such activity. We are told that freedom of the press must prevail. As a proposition, that does not bear even superficial scrutiny; it is more naked than the page 3 offerings. Publishing material in the public interest is not the same as, and can never be confused with, producing salacious material to satisfy the prurient interest. We are told that commercial freedom justifies that, and that, after all, no laws are being broken. If that proposition is intellectually robust, we should expect First ScotRail to employ topless ladies on the catering trollies, our supermarkets to have topless female staff stacking shelves, and topless women at the counters of our banks and building societies. Can members imagine that? That will not happen, because those businesses not only have to defer to public taste and acceptable conduct but they cannot afford to be associated with practices that induce and reinforce sexist attitudes, sexual harassment, abuse and violence towards women. It is a no-no. If it is a no-no for them, it should be a no-no for The Sun. The Sun needs to act up to its name. It needs to reflect the light of its title on the darkness of the shadows that are cast by its topless feature on page 3. When groups as diverse as UK Girlguiding and the other organisations that are mentioned in the motion and that Jackie Baillie mentioned in her speech, not to mention the Scottish Parliament, raise the cudgels, The Sun needs to listen. As UK Girlguiding pointed out: “The Sun is a family newspaper. Anyone can pick it up, turn to Page 3, and think that it is normal for young women to be treated as objects. This is just wrong.” I agree with UK Girlguiding. In 2013, women deserve better from The Sun, and The Sun can and certainly should do better by women. The motion is timely. In the Scottish Parliament, as in the National Assembly for Wales, we should build on the momentum that Jackie Baillie has generated.

The debate is timely. We are discussing the abolition of corroboration, which is a long-standing and much-valued component of the law of evidence in Scotland. I thank members for their contributions to the debate, some of which were more thoughtful and measured than others. I speak as a former solicitor, but I am no longer a member of the Law Society of Scotland and I am not on the roll of solicitors. In my years in the Parliament, it has been my privilege to take part in many important debates, but this one is pre-eminent, because corroboration finds itself in the dock, charged with being an irrelevance, an anachronism and an impediment to convictions. Those are serious accusations and I want to examine them. Traditionally in Scotland, two crucial facts require proof in every crime: first, that the offence was committed; and, secondly, that the accused committed it. So where does corroboration come in? What is it, when did we get it and why has it been considered so important to the law of evidence in Scotland and the presumption of innocence? Historically, it goes back to the new testament, when it was developed to avoid the execution or capital punishment of innocent individuals. More recently, in the 18th and 19th centuries in Scotland, the rationale for corroboration became that a single witness is insufficient for proof or, to quote the founding authority on Scottish criminal law, David Hume: “no one shall in any case be convicted on the testimony of a single witness”. As members have said, corroboration underwent reform and was developed as a theme of evidence so that, by the 1950s, it was clear that two witnesses were not required to prove every fact in a case. Reference has been made to the Moorov doctrine, which allows corroboration by similar facts. I sympathise with the situation that Christina McKelvie described, but I point out that the complainer’s distress as observed by a third party after an alleged sexual offence can be used to corroborate the use of force or a lack of consent. Of course, there are now some statutory exceptions to the requirement for corroboration, which tend to relate to minor crimes such as road traffic offences. What remains unchanged is the underlying principle of corroboration, which is that one version of events on its own is not enough and is not safe. Mr MacAskill says that it is not just about one witness, but then what is it about, because that is what I and others are now completely unclear about? Some members of his party think that corroboration is not to be abolished, but Mr MacAskill’s amendment says explicitly that it is to be. For modern purposes, the rule is based on the idea that it is better to let a few guilty people escape conviction than to risk depriving an innocent person of their liberty. The current authority on Scottish criminal law, Professor Gerald Gordon, put it in a nutshell when he said: “we accept that sometimes a single witness can be reliable and that by refusing to believe him we may be doing injustice in the particular case; but we cannot always be sure about our judgments of reliability, and indeed we are so likely to be wrong, and the results of our error are likely to be so serious, that it is better to make it a rule that we shall never rely on only one witness, because, on the whole, that will lead to less injustice than will reliance on our ability to detect unreliability”. How might the testimony of a witness be unreliable? Contrary to popular belief, witnesses lie in court and their motives might be sinister. Alternatively, they might be completely honest but simply wrong in what they thought they saw, or they might get flustered in the tension of a courtroom environment and, through anxiety or confusion, misrepresent the actual position. That is because giving evidence is a human process and, for whatever reasons, human beings are fallible. If corroboration as we understand it is abolished, none of that will be tested or challenged. The bastion of the accused’s protection against such frailty and the guardian of the presumption of innocence is corroboration, and that view is shared by all the groups that are mentioned in Margaret Mitchell’s motion: lawyers, judges, groups of police officers, the Scottish Human Rights Commission, adult survivors of childhood sexual abuse and Justice Scotland. On the matter of judges, I ask the Justice Committee to investigate which judges support the abolition of corroboration, with the honourable exception of Lord Carloway. Why does corroboration find itself in the dock? In the wake of Cadder, the Scottish Government instructed Lord Carloway to carry out a review of criminal procedure. That case gave rise to significant issues to do with detention, period of detention and the right of the detainee to legal advice. I disagree with Mr MacAskill: I do not think that corroboration was central to the Cadder case. Lord Carloway made numerous recommendations about Cadder, prominent among which was the abolition of corroboration. That is what we are talking about. I say to Sandra White that if she is any doubt about that, she should look at the text of her colleague’s amendment. What consultation, research or evidence taking was engaged in to justify that conclusion? None of any extent that I am able to discover. The conclusion is therefore largely subjective. That, in itself, is not fatal—Lord Carloway is an eminent judge—but that conclusion demands the support of a rigorous examination of the arguments that have been advanced. We are told that corroboration does not serve its stated purpose of preventing miscarriages of justice and that the real protection is the standard of proof that is required. No, it is not. If the standard of proof is beyond reasonable doubt, we still need reliable evidence to satisfy that test. In the absence of corroboration, a dishonest, mistaken or confused witness could easily satisfy that test. Corroboration is then condemned because it concerns—

I am very tight for time, so I apologise to the cabinet secretary; I want to develop my theme. Corroboration is then condemned because it concerns the quantity and not the quality of testimony. I have to say that, when it comes to a meaningless mantra, that takes the biscuit. When we are dealing with evidence, if we reduce the quantity, we will as surely prejudice the quality as night follows day. Dishonest, wrong and confused testimony will prevail—what kind of quality is that? I would not want to be at the mercy of that if I were the accused. Then we are told that corroboration acts as an artificial barrier to prosecution in which the only potential evidence might be from the testimony of a single complainer. Yes, it does. That is a strength in our criminal justice system, not a weakness. Of course abolishing corroboration will increase the number of prosecutions, but to imagine that that will lead to more convictions is as naive as it is nonsensical. It will lead to greater doubt in the minds of jurors, who might be much more inclined to acquit people who are guilty. How does that serve the victims? It will certainly lead to innocent people being convicted on dishonest, mistaken or confused testimony because the witness convinced the jury. The other arguments advanced in the review do not merit the abolition of corroboration, but I accept that they justify its reform. That is a different matter entirely and I am sympathetic to that. The motion in the name of my colleague Margaret Mitchell makes the investigation of that option a possibility. The Scottish Government is proposing to abolish corroboration on an analysis that is flawed, reasoning that is opaque, logic that is incoherent, and a conclusion that is plain wrong. The Scottish Government has no substantive alternative substitute or mitigating safeguard to offer and that too is plain wrong. It is akin to demolishing the dam wall without putting any flood prevention measures in place. In my opinion, corroboration is innocent. It requires reform, but the charges against it have not been proved. We should keep it, we should reform it, and I support the motion.

The context in which I made that observation was in relation to health visitors and the option for authorities to be able to look at families about which concerns had been expressed. That is entirely different from universal conferral of named persons on families, whether they want that person or not.

Next year will be a momentous one when, arguably, the most important decision ever to confront Scottish voters will require to be taken. The debate is already passionate, voters are getting engaged with the issue and emotions are running high. However, I echo Bruce Crawford’s view that the debate must be conducted with clarity, courtesy and a degree of dignity and must not become an unedifying barney or stairheid rammie. Whatever we may think, the public have no great impression of politicians as it is, so an uninformed shouting match will merely cement that negative perception. The public deserve better. If the debate is vital, no less so is the process to ensure that there is a mechanism for the referendum in which voters can have confidence. That may be a lot less sparky and may be redolent to some of the drabness that can attach to process, but process matters. We have already dealt with phase 1 of the process in the Scottish Independence Referendum (Franchise) Act 2013 and we are now dealing with phase 2: the Scottish Independence Referendum Bill. As a member of the scrutinising committee, I pay tribute to Bruce Crawford for his canny and wise chairmanship. I do not say this lightly, but I enjoy serving on the committee. I thank Andrew Mylne and the clerking team for really breaking sweat to support the committee through a demanding timetable. I thank, too, our advisers and SPICe for excellent input, which I found extremely helpful. All that endeavour has culminated in the stage 1 report that is before the Parliament today. With that absence of logic in which I rejoice, I will start at the end of the report by quoting paragraph 322, which states: “The Committee is confident that its Stage 1 inquiry has enabled this important Bill to be subjected to a wide-ranging and robust scrutiny process. Inevitably, as with any large and complex piece of legislation, there are some aspects of the Bill that require adjustment, and other points on which clarification is needed. Overall, however, the Committee is confident that this Bill should provide a suitable framework for next year’s referendum.” I think that that adequately encapsulates the position and my party will support the bill this evening. Let me tease out one or two issues that I think require adjustment or comment. An issue on which there is probably complete consensus is when we get the result. I had some anxiety over that, as it was not clear from the bill if or when a local result could be announced. It was less than clear when the chief counting officer would announce the overall result. The public expectation is clear, as is that of the Electoral Commission, that once the chief counting officer is satisfied with the local count, the local counting officer will be authorised to declare it locally. I hope that the Deputy First Minister will confirm today that that position is now beyond doubt. I am also satisfied that it is clear that there is an expectation that the national result will be announced as soon as is practicable. To me, the main area of sensitivity all concerned the period before 18 September next year, governed by the regulated period of 16 weeks and the purdah period of 28 days. That has implications for campaigning groups, their activity and their expenditure, but it also has implications for Governments and their quangos. My impression is that the principal campaigning groups are content with those periods and understand their impact on their activities. However, I have to say that emotions ranging from mild suspicion to rampant paranoia surrounded what Governments and their quangos might get up to during these sensitive periods. I think that a purdah period for Government of 28 days is reasonable. While the Scottish Government is content to have its conduct for that period regulated in the bill, I do not consider it either necessary or reasonable for this long-standing protocol to be legislated for at Westminster. There has been no need of that in the past. As she has confirmed today, the Deputy First Minister has expressed herself content with the terms of the Edinburgh agreement and such a legislative obligation on Westminster seems to me to be excessive. For that reason, along with Tavish Scott, Patricia Ferguson and James Kelly, I dissented from that proposal in the report. However, I think that taxpayers would take a very dim view of any quango or public authority appearing to support either side of the debate, whether within the purdah period, the regulated period or any other period between now and next September. It seems to me to be both unnecessary and inappropriate for quangos to express any such views. The Deputy First Minister, while being characteristically robust when questioned on these matters, did not seem entirely unsympathetic to concerns that Tavish Scott and I expressed. She strongly rejected any suggestion that such bodies would behave inappropriately by stating: “Public authorities do not operate in a political way, and they will not do so during the regulated period any more than they do now.” She went on to say that to suggest that such bodies would be “out there campaigning for either side in the referendum ... stretches credibility.”—[Official Report, Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee, 13 June 2013; c 564-5.] However, the Deputy First Minister provided what to me is a welcome acknowledgement of the concerns expressed by confirming that the Scottish Government would issue guidance to relevant public bodies and she has offered to provide a draft of such guidance to the committee. I hope that that draft will be available in early course, but I also hope that it is broader than covering just the 28-day purdah period. It should reflect the Deputy First Minister’s confidence that such bodies will not behave inappropriately. As has already been indicated, this Parliament will have to resolve the issue of the two days of the purdah period during which the Parliament will now operate. I think that that is described as a casus omissus, which is a Latin euphemism for something else, but it is certainly not clever and it needs to be addressed. The bill delivers a workable mechanism for 18 September 2014, when I confidently expect Scotland to reject overwhelmingly separation from the rest of the United Kingdom.

I thank the Presiding Officer, the party leaders and Margo MacDonald for all the kind and touching remarks that they have made this afternoon, spoken with affection and grace. I know that David McLetchie’s family will have been much comforted by all that has been said. My first recollection of David McLetchie, at a party meeting many years ago, is hardly an extensive encapsulation of either his character or his talents: I noted him simply as that good-looking big Edinburgh lawyer chap with the glasses. Mind you, coming from a then Glasgow lawyer, that was in the realms of high praise. [Laughter.] Even then, David made an immediate impression, leavening the universally dry fodder that was so characteristic of the business meetings of all parties. Not only was he analytical and forensic in his approach to all issues, he was dogged in his pursuit of what he believed to be right. Those attributes, in conjunction with an approach to political issues derived from basic principle and an unshakeable commitment to his political beliefs, made him the effective and formidable political operator that he was. In politics, working relationships between colleagues in the same party are routine and we could not function without them. However, real friendships within parties are perhaps a little less common, and across parties they are rarer still. Yet, in politics, David McLetchie cultivated and established all those different relationships. That is not easy to do, but, as we have heard from the speeches this afternoon, even among his political opponents he elicited respect and affection. When David became leader of the Scottish Conservatives, those personal strengths of character served his party and his colleagues well. His first ever speech to the Parliament in 1999 had clarity, vision and his trademark acerbity. He began by saying: “I am well aware that, unless there is a sudden, widespread and highly unlikely outbreak of common sense, my candidacy for First Minister will not succeed this afternoon.”—[Official Report, 13 May 1999; c 19.] He then articulated his vision for the Scottish Conservatives: he said that we should be a constructive Opposition in the Parliament, dedicated to making it a success, and that we should aspire to Government in Scotland again some day. That is still the vision for my party—it was endorsed by me and Ruth Davidson as his successors. David was unflagging in his endeavours to realise those ambitions. When I succeeded David, I could not have asked for a more supportive colleague. His counsel was sound and any confidence that I shared with him remained with him; he knew how solitary leadership can be. His friendship was comforting and reassuring, and his integrity manifest. The one word that I knew never to mention in David’s presence was “consensus”. To him, “consensus” was synonymous with fudge, dilution of intellectual rigour and impairment of political purity. However, he was pragmatic. As others have said, in 2007, when the Parliament first experienced minority government, there was a need for party business managers with honed political skills, razor-sharp minds and acutely sensitive political antenna who were astute in judgment and skilled in negotiation. I could not have been better served than I was by David McLetchie. He excelled, and not only his party, but the Parliament, were the beneficiaries. The touching and eloquent tributes that we have heard this afternoon reflect David McLetchie’s enormous contribution to Scottish politics and our sorrow as politicians at the loss of a colleague, a gentleman and a friend. [Applause.]

I admire the tenacity of Alison McInnes and Patrick Harvie in pursuing the inclusion of their amendments in the bill. They have certainly done their best to expound their arguments and articulate their positions. However, my problem is one of fundamental principle. In my opinion, if a court considers prison to be an appropriate sentence for an accused, suspension of liberty rightly involves suspension of franchise. I realise that Alison McInnes and Patrick Harvie may disagree with that view, but it is the view that I take. Both of those members called on evidence in aid of their argument by referring to various witnesses who support their view. However, no reference was made to another important body of evidence, which is the court of public opinion. An extensive poll that was carried out last year showed that 63 per cent of respondents felt that no prisoners should be allowed to vote in elections. I do not think that we should disregard what is a fairly powerful expression of the public view. I realise that Margo MacDonald’s amendment 7 is well intended, but again I find it flawed in both principle and rationale. If a judge is determining the sentence for a convicted accused, I want that judge to consider the crime, the victim, the particular circumstances of the accused and—as James Kelly said—any ancillary material such as a social work report. I do not consider it relevant for the judge to consider whether or not an accused will lose the right to vote. The loss of the right to vote is not a mitigating factor in sentencing, but a consequence of an individual’s transgression against society. I am therefore unable to support any of these amendments.

I am not accustomed to taking credit for anything, but I think that I highlighted at committee concerns about the structure of the canvass form. If I were being picky, I might say that this information should be placed at the beginning of the form; however, I will not be. I am very pleased about this change to the canvass form; it is good to have the amendment and I will support it.

Today represents the final stage of phase 1 of an important legislative process that will culminate in the referendum on 18 September next year. I echo Patricia Ferguson in thanking all those who have been involved in the process in whatever capacity. In aggregate, their evidence has helped the whole process of scrutiny and improvement of the bill. Although the issues at stake in the referendum are immense and are already being debated passionately, deciding who is entitled to vote is also of profound importance. Broadly speaking, I think that deploying the existing franchise for local government and Scottish Parliament elections is sensible, but using as significant an occasion as the referendum on Scotland’s future as a test-bed for extending the franchise to 16 and 17-year-olds is, in my opinion, premature and misjudged. As I observed during the stage 1 debate, I do not deny that there is a debate to be had about the franchise and the age at which it is obtained, but little if any value can be extrapolated from the limited experience in Scotland of such an extension, given the dismal turnout levels for the health board elections. If there is a desire to look at age levels for elections—or, for that matter, when people may first drive a car, purchase alcohol or hold a firearms licence—a broader debate and more widespread consultation would have been sensible. Being mischievous, I observe that the First Minister is not a man to make decisions without a reason, nor is he averse to a promising punt. I can surmise only that his enthusiasm for extending the franchise was because he envisaged wide-eyed innocence and unquestioning sentiment embracing and promoting his separatist agenda and fanning the yes vote. However, the young people seem to be having the last laugh, because a recent poll suggests that 60 per cent of them will reject independence. Notwithstanding their commendable common sense, I still feel that extending the franchise for the referendum is premature. I realise that I am a lone voice on this issue, but my dissent, which is noted in the committee’s stage 1 report and in my party’s opposition to the bill at stage 1, will be reflected by my voting against the bill at decision time. However, recognising that the bill will be enacted, I want to make some constructive comments. It is essential that these enfranchised young people have access to information. Given that many of them will still be at school, it is paramount that local authorities understand the difference between the legitimate provision of information provided by balanced debate and partisan propaganda. The first can be responsibly provided by properly balanced panel discussion in schools or by referring young people to the main campaigning entities, Better Together and Yes Scotland, but the second—partisan propaganda—is completely unacceptable. I recognise that it would be wrong for the Scottish Government to intrude on local government territory by imposing guidelines, but local authorities must demonstrate their resolve by opposing anything that reeks of influence or coercion by setting out a code of practice for their schools that underpins neutrality and minimises disruption to learning. Turning to more specific aspects of the bill, section 3 prohibits convicted prisoners who are held in a penal institution from voting. We have to some extent rehearsed that issue when we discussed the amendments. Suffice it to say that I agree with the Scottish Government’s view on the issue and, given the recent rulings by the European Court of Human Rights, which questions such a blanket prohibition, it was right to deal with the matter in the bill. However, as I have said, there is a fundamental principle underpinning the prohibition of votes for prisoners: if a court considers prison to be an appropriate sentence for an accused, then the suspension of liberty rightly also involves suspension of franchise. I was interested in the discussion that surrounded the risk of legal challenge on that issue. However, based on the evidence that the committee received from the Scottish Government and other witnesses, including the Law Society of Scotland, the prospect of a successful challenge seems extremely remote. In conclusion, I will refer to a couple of the bill’s technical points that interested me during the committee’s evidence. First, the Deputy First Minister confirmed that she had been reassured by the Cabinet Office at Westminster that individual voter registration would not start until after the referendum. I would be grateful for clarification on whether progress has been made at Westminster with the necessary statutory instrument to achieve that outcome. Secondly, as I have said, I was worried that the canvass form did not make it sufficiently clear to the adult completing the form that the address of a young person does not need to be disclosed. I therefore welcome the Scottish Government’s amendment on that that was passed earlier; it is a welcome improvement to the bill.

Will the member give way?

I hope that this debate—I am pleased to have played a role in stimulating some sort of debate—has disturbed part of the consensus. What I said was intended not as a polemic but simply to introduce a bit of contrary thought to the process. The point that I was going to make to Mr Crawford when he courteously refused my request to intervene was that, while I accept the consistency of what he is arguing for, I do not know the answer to the question whether, if we are giving young people of 16 and 17 the vote, we should let them buy alcohol. Do we give them firearms licences? Do we allow them to drive motor cars? No one has clarified those aspects to me. Perhaps that debate is for another day. One important area that time constraints meant that I could not dwell on in my opening speech is the right of our armed forces personnel to exercise their vote. In fairness, I accept that the Deputy First Minister has listened to concerns that emerged at the committee and I know that she is working with her Westminster counterparts to facilitate every possibility that armed forces personnel outwith Scotland can exercise their vote on such an important issue. A related anxiety is about ensuring that 16 and 17-year-olds who are abroad with their armed forces parents are given the same opportunity. I know that the Scottish Government is investigating that. If there is an update on that, I would very much appreciate hearing about it. The process that the bill envisages involves the need for information, the encouragement to vote and then, on the day of voting, access to appropriate facilities. I was struck by the briefing that we received yesterday from the National Union of Students Scotland. It made some excellent points and pointed out that “It is vital that comprehensive efforts are made to educate young people who will be eligible to vote at the time of the referendum about how to register, and ensure they have the information and tools needed to take part in this historic vote”. That is absolutely right. The NUS also makes the interesting point that it would support “the unbiased promotion of referendum participation in schools and colleges”. I agree, provided that such promotion is unbiased. It goes on to say that it “would like to see polling places open on college and university campuses for the referendum.” I have a great deal of sympathy with that, because the referendum will take place at what could be a critical transitional point for some students. The Electoral Commission also picked up that issue in its briefing. Another aspect that I will dwell on is whether there could be a useful tandem between the NUS and the Electoral Commission. A lot of the Electoral Commission’s briefing involves cross-references, and some themes are repeated by the NUS and the Electoral Commission. Such a tandem might be helpful. The Electoral Commission’s briefing talked about what it was doing to improve awareness among 15 to 17-year-olds. It is very encouraging that it says that it has been “working with educational bodies including the Association of Directors in Education Scotland ... Education Scotland and School Leaders Scotland”. Could that extend to the NUS? Could the Electoral Commission enter into discussion with the NUS about a fruitful conjoined set of proposals to increase information to voters, to heighten awareness of what is necessary to register to vote and to facilitate people’s ability on polling day to cast their vote on such an important occasion?

2. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the structure and operation of the community transport system across the country. (S4O-02263)

Many elderly people who are eligible for a free bus pass rely heavily on community transport, whose merits the minister has just lauded. They regard community transport as an essential support, but they have to pay for the facility. Does the minister accept that that is both illogical and unfair? Does he agree that a much fairer system would be achieved by raising the age of eligibility to 65 in line with the pension age, extending the concessionary travel scheme to community transport, and thereby removing the current unfortunate discrimination?

The cabinet secretary’s colleague, Humza Yousaf, who is sitting beside her, recently got into hot water in Qatar by patently misrepresenting the United Kingdom Government’s position on European Union membership. At any meeting with the European Commission, will the cabinet secretary undertake to ensure that that gaffe is not repeated and that, instead, attention is focused on obtaining answers to the many challenging and unresolved questions that are posed by her Government’s policy on independence?

I, too, thank Hanzala Malik and congratulate him on bringing the motion before the Parliament for debate. I know that before he came to the Parliament, he played an important role as an advocate for the Muslim community as a Glasgow City Council councillor for 17 years. Indeed, it was my pleasure to encounter him in that capacity many years ago when we were members of the court of the University of Strathclyde, to which he made a distinguished contribution. We brought our different backgrounds and experiences to that forum. In bringing this debate to the Parliament, Hanzala Malik has achieved two important things. First, and quite rightly, he has highlighted the imagination and innovation of Amina—the Muslim Women’s Resource Centre in Glasgow in devising and launching the I speak for myself campaign, which deserves praise in its own right. Secondly, the carefully drafted script of his motion lifts the veil on the vulnerability, apprehension and isolation that are felt by many in the Muslim community, all of which can be intensified by external events. As a Parliament, we should be very concerned if that community suffers from misconceptions about and endures discrimination towards Muslim women and the Islamic faith. That is utterly unacceptable and it is important that this Parliament—as an institution and through its proceedings and debates—condemns such activity and plays its part in educating, dispelling the myths and promoting awareness of such issues in order to eliminate those negative attitudes. Show Racism the Red Card Scotland and Nil by Mouth have been very effective vehicles in their own way in maintaining awareness, keeping the issues to the forefront of discussion and guarding against the enemy of complacency. I note with interest the suggestion in the motion of a more “integrated and systematic approach to tackling problems of negative stereotypes and discrimination.” There may indeed be scope for that, but there is also strength in numbers and I would not like to see the identities of those two campaigns and the new one—I speak for myself—blurred. All three have something very important to say. Broadening out the debate to consider what positive options are available to help in the work of those campaigns, I can think of no better model than the annual Pakistan Welfare Trust dinner. Like others in the chamber, I have had the pleasure of attending that dinner over many years. It is a highlight in the Muslim community’s calendar and it has developed a very positive reputation, with many guests from politics and civic Scotland. It has played an important role in broadening awareness and understanding, and in nurturing solid and positive relationships. It is also an immensely enjoyable social occasion. This year the dinner was outstanding. It took place against the backdrop of the appalling murder of Lee Rigby in Woolwich, to which Malcolm Chisholm referred, but that tragedy served to demonstrate how, from our different backgrounds and cultures, we stand united in condemning what is wrong and bad and supporting what is good and right. That unity of purpose was explicit in the apposite reading from the Qur’an that evening and the many speeches that were made at the dinner. There was a power for good that evening, which was tangible to all who were present. It was born out of mutual respect and—quite simply—born, over the years, out of getting to know one another. I hope that those strengths will imbue and encourage both the existing campaigns and the new I speak for myself campaign. I wish it every success.

I, too, thank Joan McAlpine for bringing the debate to the Parliament. As someone who loves the countryside and wildlife, I am very supportive of any initiative that recognises and seeks to promote our distinctive and beautiful Scottish environment. I am therefore not unsympathetic to the concept of a national tree for Scotland, although perhaps Ms McAlpine should not be too wafted away by that endorsement—I shall explain why. I have form when it comes to promoting national things. Although that may have stopped short of promoting the Scottish National Party, it extended some years ago to promoting a national bird for Scotland. I was asked to take under my wing, as it were, promotion of the golden eagle. At that time The Scotsman, in conjunction with the RSPB, asked a number of people to adopt different birds, culminating in a poll in 2004 that the golden eagle won. I hope that members will indulge me in my recounting of this cautionary tale, because it is instructive for any desire to establish a national tree. On the back of the poll victory, a petition backed by the RSPB was presented to the Parliament’s Public Petitions Committee to establish the golden eagle as our national bird. In November 2004, the committee decided to write to the Scottish Executive to clarify the process for establishing a national bird—and the months passed. In June 2005, the committee agreed to approach the relevant minister, expressing concern at the lack of a response—and the months passed. In January 2006, some response must have been received, because the committee went back to the petitioner. In September 2006, the committee referred the petition to the Enterprise and Culture Committee. In October 2006, that committee took evidence and agreed to write to the Lord Lyon, the Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport and VisitScotland to seek views on what effect the establishment of a national bird would have on tourism. I would have thought that the self-evident answer would be “pretty damn good”, but never mind. On 5 December 2006, the Enterprise and Culture Committee agreed to take no further action on the petition and to notify the petitioners and inform the Public Petitions Committee of the decision.

I am encouraged by what Ms McAlpine says. There is certainly a lesson there about not being thwarted by adversity. The final note before dismissing the petition on the national bird was that the Enterprise and Culture Committee agreed to write to the Scottish Executive to ask for clarification on the process and procedure for the establishment of a national symbol. Interestingly, that was pretty much what the Public Petitions Committee had done initially more than two years previously. The golden eagle is still not the national bird of Scotland. That sorry tale was told not to discourage but to outline the pitfalls. Joan McAlpine has been wise to keep her motion non-specific about the type of tree, although her speech was perhaps a little more partisan. It is also important that neither the proposal nor the tree that is ultimately chosen, if that happens, be claimed by any one party. The proposal will work only if there is cross-party and broad-based support. I observe that accepting a principle is only the start of a long and tortuous journey. From my experience, careful thought must be given to process. It has to involve wide public consultation and embrace public comment on the principle, because if the public do not want a national tree, the game’s a bogey. However, if the public are supportive of that, there are other issues to clarify. The Lord Lyon may have views about the matter and there will need to be some mechanism by poll of constituting a short leet of suitable trees and then inviting a national vote to establish a winner. If we can do it to decide the name of a bridge over the Forth, surely we can do it to decide on a national tree. Would it be too much to hope that, one day, the golden eagle might sit on that tree as our national bird? I just might have to make that a prerequisite for my continuing support.

Does the minister agree that a marvellous creative place to celebrate in Scotland would be a dedicated film studio with related facilities? When does she expect Scotland to get its own Hollywood or Pinewood?

The referendum next year will be the most important decision that Scotland has taken in 300 years. I am glad that the Westminster and Scottish Governments were able to agree that there should be a referendum with one question before the end of next year, because the issue must be resolved. It is of course important to confirm the franchise arrangements for the referendum. As I understand it, such franchise directions would normally be contained in the bill constituting the referendum, as was the case with the alternative vote referendum last year. However, the SNP’s desire to extend the franchise to 16 and 17-year-olds, with the additional administrative requirements to compile a new electoral roll to deal with that, as well as the timescale involved, meant that a separate paving bill was necessary. I serve on the committee that scrutinised the bill. I, too, pay tribute to the clerks, SPICe and the committee advisers, Iain Grant and Professor Stephen Tierney, all of whose input I found supportive and helpful. I thank our convener, Bruce Crawford, for his fairness and inclusiveness and his exemplary patience during the more testing moments of the scrutiny process. I am satisfied that the scrutiny process has been thorough and that the stage 1 report is a fair reflection of the committee’s deliberations. I turn to more specific aspects of the bill. Section 3 prohibits convicted prisoners who are held in a penal institution from voting. I agree with the Scottish Government’s view on that issue and, given the recent rulings by the European Court of Human Rights, which question such a blanket prohibition, it was correct to deal with the matter in the bill. However, I also agree with the principle underpinning prohibition. In my opinion, convicted prisoners serving custodial sentences have, by committing the crimes, sacrificed their entitlement to vote. The best way to preserve that entitlement is to stay out of prison.

The distinction is the custodial element. I have made clear my view. If someone has sacrificed their right to be at liberty in society, other consequences follow and, to me, one of those is loss of franchise. I recognise that Alison McInnes may disagree with that assessment, but that is the view that I hold.

I would rather make progress, if Ms MacDonald will excuse me. Interestingly, as some members have said, Professor Stephen Tierney and the Law Society of Scotland both raised the issue of possible legal challenge by a disenfranchised prisoner. Professor Tierney considered referenda to be exempt from the relevant provisions of the ECHR but did not dismiss the possibility of a challenge, although he considered such a challenge unlikely to be successful. The Law Society took a similar view. To be fair, the committee examined the Deputy First Minister closely on that point but she was clear about the legal advice that the Scottish Government had received. In everything, there is a risk of legal challenge and I am satisfied on the basis of the evidence and opinions submitted to the committee that the prospect of a successful challenge is minimal. The main thrust of the bill is, of course, to extend the franchise to 16 and 17-year-olds. The previous limited application of that extension to pilot health board elections provided no useful basis for discussion other than recognising abysmal turnout levels. Therefore, my party is not supportive of the principle of using the referendum as an experiment for extending votes to 16 and 17-year-olds. That is not to say that we do not consider that there is a debate to be had. There is and it would be welcome, but my party feels that the step in the bill is precipitate and premature. We would have welcomed broader discussion and consultation involving the Electoral Commission. For that reason, my dissent to the proposal was noted in the committee report and my party will vote against the bill at decision time.

I need to make progress. I have enough to get through. I apologise to Ms MacDonald. On a purely personal note, people may think that the views that I hold now are disquieting, but they should have seen my views at the age of 16. They were scary. Experience of life—not least the workplace—was to temper them. Although I disagree with the extension of franchise, the committee’s examination of the process was useful. Two important elements emerged. First, the introduction of individual voter registration by Westminster is welcome but the timing of that legislation could have placed an impossible administrative burden on electoral officers preparing for the referendum. Therefore, I was relieved to learn of the reassurance that the Cabinet Office at Westminster had given the Deputy First Minister that individual voter registration would not start until after the referendum. I look forward to confirmation from the Scottish Government that the necessary Westminster statutory instrument has been enacted to ensure that that is the case. Secondly, understandable interest was expressed in ensuring that young people voting for the first time in the referendum should have access to information. I agree with that, but the distinction between the provision of information and propaganda is a fine one. It is right that the Scottish Government has no control over local authorities in that respect, but there is a huge obligation on local authorities to strike a proper balance in the reasonable provision of information to young people to increase awareness, stopping short of anything that reeks of a coercive attempt to influence. It is equally important that young persons preparing for exams must not be diverted from essential study. The delegated powers in section 11 of the bill are wide—wider than might normally be expected. They are subject to affirmative procedure, but I hope that such breadth and scope of delegated powers in legislation in the Scottish Parliament will be the exception not the rule.

Hugh Henry is to be commended for bringing the debate to the chamber. I am clear that, among the many issues that legitimately demand the attention of politicians in the Parliament, childcare should be at the centre of our focus and in the forefront of our discussions. I say that not because I have been in the Parliament for nearly 14 years and not because, in that time, I have heard numerous suggestions from all parties—whether in government or opposition—about how we should deal with childcare, but because I start from first principles. Some parents decide that their family will have a non-working mother or father and can afford to make that decision. That is fine but, for the majority of parents, it is not an option. The reality of modern life is that both parents work—possibly out of choice, probably out of necessity. In working, they bring much-needed skills to the economy, bring stability to their workplace environment and generate welcome spend in the economy. That can only be regarded as positive but, for some parents who cannot access childcare, that opportunity does not exist, and that is wrong. For those reasons, I regard the provision of childcare to be as essential as the provision of healthcare or schooling or as maintaining our public transport system. To avoid confusion, I clarify that I am not advocating a new publicly funded universal benefit. I am saying that we can do an awful lot more to match the needs and responsibilities of parents with reasonable and more effective support from Government. The other important consequence of childcare is a direct benefit to the child. That may range from learning new personal skills and nurturing positive relationships with other children to embarking on the process of learning. Hugh Henry rightly referred to that. On how the Parliament has fared on that front over nearly 14 years, the answer has to be patchily. Things are certainly better than when we started, but recent progress has been more glacial than swift. On the positive front, the statutory provision of 475 hours per annum for three and four-year-olds, which was introduced in 2007 to improve on the previous 415 hours, was helpful. The proposed increase to 600 hours by 2014 is welcome. It is overdue progress—it has, after all, taken seven years to accomplish. Where does Scotland sit in relation to childcare? The statutory provision is not as good as that in England. England’s childcare entitlement is being extended to two-year-olds from 40 per cent of the most disadvantaged families from 2014. The Secretary of State for Work and Pensions, Iain Duncan Smith, is in discussion with childcare providers to persuade them to price services on an hourly rate rather than in blocks. That would make childcare more affordable, as parents would not have to pay for care when they did not need it.

I am sorry, but there is not sufficient time. I ask the minister’s forgiveness. In a country the size of Scotland, why can we not have similar national clarity? If the Scottish Government is serious about recognising the needs of parents for flexibility in the hours of childcare, as Joan McAlpine said, why can it not be available from 7 o’clock in the morning to 7 o’clock at night and spread across two days instead of three? That would transform employment opportunity for many parents, as would extending support to parents who work less than 16 hours per week. Where are those options? Who is investigating their provision? A commission of qualified people with a focused remit, as proposed by Mr Henry, sounds to me a better bet than a general Council of Economic Advisers. Good things are happening—I do not deny it—but better things are happening in England. With imagination and innovation, we can make better things happen in Scotland, within the existing constitutional settlement and without even having to wait for a referendum. Mr Henry’s motion is sensible and reasonable, and I support it.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what progress is being made in the teaching provision of modern languages in primary schools. (S4O-02072) —s’il vous plaît?

Does the minister accept that there is considerable concern among businesses and industry that fewer students are choosing to study foreign languages at higher level? Declining numbers of students in such languages mean declining numbers of teachers of the languages in the future. What steps are being taken at primary school level to heighten awareness of the importance of having diverse language skills and to encourage more young people to study foreign languages, for their own benefit and to meet the need for a teaching provision in the future and avoid a teaching desert?

I welcome both the Scottish Government’s recent consultation and this afternoon’s debate on redesigning the community justice system. That matters not only because more and more offenders are being punished within the community but because it relates directly to Scotland’s eight community justice authorities, the sole purpose of which is to reduce reoffending in Scotland. As a number of members have noted, reoffending is a both worrying and costly problem in Scotland. Margaret Mitchell was right to reflect that in her amendment, which I support. Why is it worrying? It is worrying because nearly one in three offenders are reconvicted within a year. Why is it costly? Despite spending £128 million annually in an attempt to reduce reoffending, the Scottish Government estimates its economic and social cost to be around £3 billion a year. I am pleased that the Scottish Government accepts that reform is necessary. The Audit Scotland report, to which many members have referred, concluded that the way in which CJAs were set up, along with inflexible funding, have “significantly limited their effectiveness.” The report was remarkably blunt and concluded that CJAs “have made little progress with reducing reoffending.” Identified shortcomings include a lack of incentive to reduce reoffending, complex management arrangements, a short-term approach to funding and a lack of assessment of CJA performance. Those are serious criticisms. The Scottish Government has put forward three proposals for reform, each of which has advantages and disadvantages. Like the Government, I, too, will wait for the consultation responses before indicating a preferred option. However, I would like to make three general observations. First, the priority of any future model must be to direct resources to what works in reducing reoffending. As the Audit Scotland report notes: “There is a mismatch between what is currently being delivered and what is known to be effective.” That is damning, so we need to ensure that the new model is much more clearly focused. Secondly, I suggest that the Scottish Government must learn from its mistakes in driving through the reform of the police service despite justified criticism. It must seek to carry all the relevant agencies and, I would suggest, the Opposition parties, with it in the process. I welcome the Government’s apparent willingness to take time to get this right. It is helpful that this debate has been called before any firm decision has been made. Thirdly, I suggest that the Government should not restrict itself to the three options proposed for reform. Perhaps in summing up the minister will indicate whether the Government has considered more radical reform. For example, there is clearly room for improvement in throughcare. Christine Grahame, Colin Keir, Graeme Pearson and Alison McInnes all made what I thought were helpful and reflective contributions in that respect. Has consideration been given to the creation of one body with overall responsibility for reducing reoffending both inside and outside of prison? It would be remiss of me not to look back at the creation of the system that we are debating today. I was convener of the Justice 2 Committee, which considered community justice authorities back in November 2005. My party was the only party in this chamber to vote against the bill that introduced them. We did so for two reasons. First, we took the view that insufficient time had been afforded to assess the regime that CJAs replaced, which had been established in 2002. By 2005, it was already proving to be useful in effectively co-ordinating activity and co-operation between agencies. My party worried about unnecessary bureaucracy. Eight years down the road, we are debating whether CJAs are fit for purpose. Back in 2005, the view was taken—and has been embraced by the Scottish National Party—that because reoffending rates were slightly lower for those who were given community sentences than they were for those who were given custodial sentences, more offenders should be dealt with in the community. My party has no principled objection to robust community sentences, which are cheaper and can be more effective than a prison sentence for some crimes, but we do not support the use of community sentences as a means of emptying our prisons of violent and dangerous individuals who should be locked up for the protection of the law-abiding majority. We fundamentally disagree with the SNP’s analysis that, because reoffending is lower with community sentences, more and more offenders should be spared prison. That is like saying that, because lambs in fields do not attack people, we should put more lions into fields—it is perverse logic. It is not the community element that reduces reoffending; it is simply that less serious offenders are given community sentences, so the risk of reoffending is lower. The second reason why my party opposed the Management of Offenders etc (Scotland) Act 2005 was that it introduced home detention curfews and did so under the much-discredited automatic early release regime. I lodged amendments to try to end that practice, but I am afraid that the Labour and SNP members of the committee voted against them. As I was looking back at the passage of the 2005 act, I came across a statement by a substitute member of the committee, who agreed with my approach on automatic early release. He told me: “I have a great deal of sympathy with what you are trying to achieve”. He added: “We would all agree that we wish that we were not where we are. We are not in the chamber so, to some extent, who did what and when does not matter. What matters is what we are going to do about it. Lawyers are all aware of the differences: 50 per cent for those serving under four years and two thirds for those serving more than that. The public, however, are baffled; they simply think that whether the sentence is six months, two years or 12 years, what you see should be what you get.”—[Official Report, Justice 2 Committee, 27 September 2005; c 1688.] I wonder whether the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, Kenny MacAskill, still stands by the comments that he made eight years ago.

Can the minister confirm whether the Government’s approach is restricted to the tripod of options in the consultation document? Is there a willingness slightly to look outside that envelope?

The First Minister said in his statement that the franchise bill will define who is eligible to vote and that that will include service personnel. How will the First Minister ensure that the men and women from Scotland in our United Kingdom armed forces and their families, if based in other parts of the UK or overseas, will not only be entered in the register of voters but be given every facility to cast their votes?

Having listened to the minister’s impassioned delivery, I ask him to explain whether he understands what is meant by a deterrent. It is difficult to prove a negative, but does he concede any merit in the concept of deterrence?

The debate has been emotionally highly charged, which was predictable because the issue of nuclear weapons does not permit ambivalence. My opponents might be surprised to hear me say, on an issue of such magnitude, that robustness in the views of both sides of the argument is important. I say that because the debate must never become static or atrophied. Indeed, I concede that the United Nations secretary general’s five-point plan is an important contribution to the debate. During my lifetime, I have seen a major change in attitude to nuclear armaments. Historically, over centuries, defence strategy has depended on outthinking, outsmarting and outequipping the enemy. In any debate on defence, there will be a viewpoint that considers war to be unjustifiable in any circumstances. Although I respect that opinion, I cannot agree with it. The ancient Roman writer Vegetius said: “Igitur qui desiderat pacem, praeparet bellum.” Who desires peace, let him prepare for war. Time and again, history has demonstrated the wisdom of that observation. Of course, every alternative option should be explored before that decision of last resort but, in the face of implacable evil, war is the last resort. In any debate on nuclear weapons, I accept that there are, among the opponents of such weapons, many people who accept the need on occasion for war, but cannot accept the justification for that weapon of last resort. Again, I understand that position; I respect that opinion, but I do not agree with it. If debate is not about exploring why people hold views and about subjecting those views to examination, debate is sterile. Part of that examination is to discover whether there is any conjunction of sentiment and, if there is, to clarify where there is a divergence of opinion. So—let me introduce what may be an unexpected contribution. If I am asked, “Do you instinctively like nuclear weapons?” No, I do not. If I am asked, “Do you think that they have an awesome capacity to destroy?” Yes, I do. If I am asked, “Do you feel that their cost is troublingly expensive?” Yes, I think that it is. If there were a march tomorrow to support multilateral nuclear disarmament, would I be on it? Yes, I would, and so would many others in this chamber.

I will just make this point. What, then, separates me from those who seek unilateral disarmament? We both want the same things: peace and stability. That is the nub of the debate. I believe that the fundamental principles that are relevant to nuclear deterrence have not changed since the end of the cold war and are, sadly, unlikely to change in the near future. “Deterrence” is the key word. Mr Brown neither considered nor engaged in that debate and—to my disappointment—nor did his colleagues. To be fair, Mr Biagi tried to, but did not address the matter of deterring illegal nuclear developments. The fact is that since acquiring that deterrent, we have had four decades of non-nuclear conflict. What we all want to achieve, which is multilateral disarmament, cannot be negotiated from a position of weakness. It does not work that way.

It is in my opinion simply self-evident, in relation to the general strategy of having defence capability, that it is a foolish nation that does not accept that, at times, the only way to deal with implacable evil is to be prepared to defend the position of the country and its citizens. On negotiation, it is precisely because of their destructive powers—as Ruth Davidson said, the “uniquely terrible threat” that nuclear weapons pose—that they have the capability to deter acts of aggression. That scale of deterrence is completely different from that of any other form of deterrence.

I want to make progress with my point. That is why I believe that unilateralism, however well intended that view is and however sincerely it is held, will achieve the exact opposite of peace and stability. It will destroy any capacity to negotiate and will weaken the momentum for multilateral disarmament. It will give succour to the aggressive, the acquisitive and the despot who are nuclear armed, and it will make the world a more dangerous place. I profoundly disagree with those who argue that removing Trident from Scotland will somehow make Scotland safer. If their proposition is, “If we don’t have nuclear weapons here, no one will attack us”, I have to say that from the perspective of any hostile aggressor on the impact of such a nuclear strike, the United Kingdom and France, which have nuclear weapons, have one and the same geography as Scotland. Perversely, we remain safer by retaining Trident at Faslane; the removal argument is spurious. For the communities of Helensburgh and Dunbartonshire and their local economies, precipitate removal of Trident from Faslane would have a disastrous effect; Jackie Baillie made the point eloquently. Kenneth Gibson made a characteristically robust and, at times, provocative contribution. However, the response from his friends in these seats was nothing compared to the response that he got at the public meeting in Helensburgh, where his remarks cut no ice whatever. We all aspire to a world that is free of nuclear weapons. The only way to achieve that is to work proactively, vigorously and with commitment to expanding and enhancing the non-proliferation treaty. The UK has an excellent track record in that respect, which is why I feel that unilateralism would be an absolute gift to any rogue nation or hostile power that was developing illegal nuclear capacity. That is why I support the amendment in the name of Ruth Davidson and oppose the Scottish Government’s motion.

I appreciate how passionately the member feels about welfare reform, but many millions of families will be better off with the universal credit. The Department for Work and Pensions has estimated that 350,000 children and 500,000 adults will be lifted out of poverty. Therefore, I am not quite sure whether the member is arguing that there should be no welfare reform. Does he not accept that there are helpful aspects of welfare reform?

The motion for the debate speaks of an aspiration “to make Scotland the best place in the world for children to grow up”. Let me try to bring a smile to Mr Russell’s face. If I were a querulous polemicist of dyspeptic demeanour, I might observe that the motion implies that Scotland is not already the best place for children to grow up—indeed, Mark Griffin and Dennis Robertson alluded to that aspect. That implication would be unfortunate, because I, like many others in the chamber, grew up in Scotland and I could not have grown up in a better place or had a better upbringing. That is not the same as saying that I am well brought up—an assertion with which many would take issue, I am sure. If the motion exhorts us to do better, so that more children can enjoy what many of us were fortunate enough to enjoy, that is an entirely worthy aspiration that I whole-heartedly support, as, it is clear, do other members across the chamber. There have been some notably thoughtful contributions. The unpalatable truth is that too many young people in Scotland do not get the start that they need, the stability to which they are entitled or the supportive love that is so essential in their lives. Those are uncomfortable truths, but we need to acknowledge them. The debate has been a welcome opportunity to discuss those issues in a frank and open manner. However, we must recognise how much is already positive in Scotland for young people. The majority of children in Scotland grow up in a loving, secure and stable family environment. Of course, more of those young people need to know the reality of what a loving, secure and stable family environment is. That is why I applaud the increased focus from successive Governments on targeting spending on the earliest years. The importance of early childhood development and the impact of early intervention on determining future health, social wellbeing and educational achievement cannot be overemphasised. Quite rightly, that is seen as a priority. It is a sad fact that too many children are affected by a background of lack of stability, substance abuse, alcoholism or poor school attendance. Any one of those problems can seriously prejudice a child’s development. Those problems span two or three generations disturbingly often and cannot be solved by the will or policies of one Parliament or one Government. Solutions may come from a variety of sources—some from within politics, others not. I welcome the Scottish Government’s recognition in the motion of the role of the third sector. Aileen Campbell referred to the collaborative approach that is already being adopted. I will consider some of the issues that have arisen and some possible solutions. Health visitors are people close to my heart. We cannot underestimate the role that those professionals perform in their significant contribution to the health and wellbeing of families and communities across Scotland, which is why Liz Smith lodged her amendment. I remember visiting a health centre in a part of Glasgow facing many challenges, where one of the GPs eloquently described how a health visitor could both gain the confidence of and enter a household into which that GP might not be invited. The GP was clear about the twin benefits of the health visitor, first, in being seen as a help to the household—not a threat, or part of officialdom—and, secondly, in being able to identify at an early stage any possible cause for concern in the household. The children and young people bill will be a chance for my party to reiterate our commitment to health visiting, which is a vital preventative service in the early years. My party has advocated extending universal health services to all children, with particular emphasis on the first three years. Many members have referred to parenting. The sad and stark fact is that, in some cases, we have seen three generations where either there has been an ignorance of parenting skills or the parenting role has been fundamentally prejudiced by other issues, such as substance abuse or alcoholism. Instead of seeing an example of good parenting, children have grown up with parental chaos and have had no good model of parenting to adopt and pass on to their children. As members have suggested, even when many new parents want to do their best, they may not have a full understanding of the demands and responsibilities of their new role. Mark McDonald referred to that aspect of parenting. Those problems become more acute when there is no support network of family and friends. I have long since argued that we need a wholesale review of parenting. To that end I whole-heartedly welcome the publication of the Scottish Government’s national parenting strategy. Charities and voluntary groups have a vital role to play, and it is good to see that recognised in the motion. I have previously referred in the chamber to street stuff, which is a project in my area that I think George Adam is familiar with. It does fantastic work with young people who come from very challenged backgrounds. Another important area is the particular and significant problems facing children in care, to which Liam McArthur referred. I am delighted about the renewed focus on GIRFEC; the philosophy underpinning it is admirable. We must also support and encourage young carers themselves. Those committed and brave young people are doing a wonderful job. It is all too easy for them to slip off the radar screen. We have heard reference to childcare. My party would extend free childcare provision to all two-year-olds, starting with the most deprived. It is also important that we bring more flexibility to the provision of childcare. We need hours that suit the parent; that would be an enormous help to many parents, particularly women, and would give them the opportunity to re-enter the workplace. It has been a helpful debate, which has highlighted a number of interesting ideas. We all want to do more to ensure that all children in Scotland can enjoy at first hand the experience of this being a great place to grow up.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

The debate has demonstrated a significant and justified concern over the implementation of a single police force. Although that concern may not, as yet, be on the radar screen of the general public, if the safety of Scotland’s communities is in any way thought to be at risk, it certainly will be. Those who work for the police are concerned. Many of them do not know whether they will have a job in the single force, less than three weeks before that force is due to be established. Those in charge of the single police force are concerned. Chief Constable Stephen House told the Justice Committee that he had identified “a gobsmacking major problem with the legislation.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 27 November 2012; c 2119.] Vic Emery, chairman of the Scottish Police Authority, is concerned. He responded to the Government’s intervention in January with the warning: “the board’s reservoir of patience with the protracted nature of resolving this kind of issue is already running low.” In any major organisational change, teething problems could be expected, but this level of confusion and fundamental disagreement is alarming. It boils down to the basic issue of who calls the shots in the new single police force. Is it the chief constable, as the most senior police officer in Scotland, or the administrative head of the Scottish Police Authority who controls the purse strings? At the moment, we have two jockeys on one horse, which is an impossible situation. That Christine Grahame, at this stage, should be asked to mediate or to hold the jackets—depending on how you look at it—at a meeting of the two protagonists says it all. That such confusion should prevail, with less than a month to go—

I am tight for time. I am sorry. I am merely reiterating what Ms Grahame confirmed to the chamber. That such confusion should prevail, with less than a month to go, is an indictment of the Scottish Government’s handling of the matter. My party strongly supports the Lib Dem call for a review of the legislation. We have to clarify two points: who is in charge of what, and, most important, who is in overall control. It is appropriate that such a review includes clarity of the business case, as called for by my colleague Margaret Mitchell. One person, in blissful solitude, is not concerned—the First Minister. Last week, he said that he was not being kept awake by the leader of the Scottish Liberal Democrats. Despite the obvious flaws in the new police force structure and the ensuing widespread concerns, it appears that the First Minister is not being kept awake by that either. He has dismissed the dispute over police staff as “creative tension”—there is a classic first ministerial euphemism. This is not a production of “Macbeth”; this is how we run Scotland’s police force. Although we are supportive of the principle of a single police force, the Scottish Conservatives always maintained that it could be created only if it went hand in hand with direct democratic safeguards, which the SNP rejected. Although we could not have predicted this particular spat between two prominent individuals, we did not vote for the bill because we did not think that it had been properly thought out and because, as Alison McInnes said, the SNP used its majority to vote against nearly all the Opposition amendments that would have improved it. Significantly, this mess has arisen at the 11th hour because the SNP has dictated the timetable for the changeover although it was warned time and again of the challenges that were involved in railroading the measures through. So, where are we now? Around 6,000 police staff still do not know about their future; the agreement between the SPA and police Scotland will result in a duplication of services, which is a waste of money; there is anecdotal evidence that front-line officers are being recalled to replace civilian staff; and, amid all this confusion, we do not know who calls the shots in the new single police force: a chief constable or an administrative head. The Scottish Government needs to sort that mess out, which is why I support the motion in the name of Alison McInnes and the amendment in the name of Margaret Mitchell.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

Will the cabinet secretary take this opportunity to remind members that he wanted to increase the number of Scottish police officers by 500, but the Scottish Conservatives, out of respect for the police, forced an increase of 1,000 officers?

My colleague Gavin Brown would normally participate in this debate, but he is unable to be present, so I have been shipped in. On the basis that ignorance is bliss, it is a great pleasure to speak in the debate. As the Presiding Officer is actively encouraging loquacity, I am her woman. The subject under discussion could not be more important. As others have done, I commend the Finance Committee for undertaking such a timely and significant inquiry and for producing such a useful report, which I found illuminating and helpful. As Mr Gibson said, the IMF identified the issue a number of years ago, and it is worth while to repeat what it said in 2008: “In spite of the large fiscal cost of the crisis, the major threat to long-term fiscal solvency is still represented, at least in advanced countries, by unfavourable demographic trends.” The Finance Committee’s report aims to identify the impact of the demographic trends in Scotland and it then examines the planning that is being undertaken to mitigate that impact. As others have said, it does that across several strands including health and social care, housing, pensions and the labour force. The report rightly looks at the financial impact, but it is worth while to make the point that an enormous positive contribution is made by older people throughout Scotland. Although we face demographic challenges, the vital work that is done by many older people means that we also have potential demographic opportunities. They should not be ignored and their potential should not remain unexplored. I turn to the demographic landscape that is specific to Scotland. The National Records of Scotland has made the following stark forecasts: the working age population is set to increase by 7 per cent between 2010 and 2035, but in the same period the pensionable age population is set to increase by 26 per cent and the number of people aged 75 or over is set to increase by 82 per cent. Changes of that magnitude are bound to have a massive impact. I therefore support the committee’s recommendation in paragraph 24, which states: “The Committee invites the Scottish Government to provide details of the work it is currently carrying out in forecasting the budgetary implications of demographic change.” That will not only reassure us that such work is being done but allow us to assess the robustness of that work. I hope that such information will be included in the Scottish Government’s response to the report, which the cabinet secretary mentioned. I also highlight the recommendation in paragraph 26, which states: “The Committee recommends that future Spending Reviews include an assessment of the impact of demographic change in each portfolio chapter.” That would allow us to drill down further, with a portfolio-by-portfolio consideration of the issue, and it would be an important advance in understanding better both the focus and the priority of spend.

I say to the cabinet secretary that, where I am concerned, he is pushing at an open door. I have always believed that we should never be shy in looking at how we deliver our public services. Many contributions to that debate are now coming forward and they certainly merit serious consideration. I note that the committee also took evidence on healthy life expectancy. Discussion often centres on life expectancy, but healthy life expectancy needs to be given a much sharper focus. The report states that it is “the length of time an individual can expect to live free of chronic or debilitating disease”. Like Mr Macintosh, I was struck by the differences in different areas of Scotland. We can compare the average not-healthy period of 5.5 years in one area with the period of 11.2 years in another area. I think that we would all regard that as a staggering difference. The gap between life expectancy and healthy life expectancy for men has actually been widening again. We would like to know what action the Scottish Government is taking on that. It will be challenging to plan ahead successfully. It will require comprehensive and—I do not like the phrase, but I cannot think of a better one—joined-up thinking and partnership action. The Improvement Service phrased it well when it said that we need to “endorse a long term shift from a service base that is reactive to one that is preventative and promotes positive outcomes first time round.” There is also a striking difference of approach between various councils when it comes to developing a strategy. Mr Macintosh alluded to that. Some councils are enlightened and proactive. One has taken long-term planning seriously and it has a 10-year plan, but others are moving at a more leisurely pace and they focus on three-year funding cycles. That has to change, so I welcome the meeting with COSLA that Mr Gibson mentioned in his speech. In that context, I ask the cabinet secretary what central Government’s advice to the public sector is on long-range planning. Are there clear guidelines, or is there just a general opaqueness? Further to that, what does central Government itself do in practice? The committee was told that activity varies between departments, but some clarity on how that activity varies and the timescales that are adopted in certain policy areas would be welcome and helpful. The committee posed a number of other questions that need to be answered. On health, although I listened to what the cabinet secretary said and accept that there have been many advances in preventative spend for health, we have to ask why we have not seen improvements regarding emergency admissions to hospital and what actions will be taken to turn that around. On the broad issue of preventative spend, again my party is more than sympathetic to the idea of deploying resource to that objective. In fact, I have to say that the new drugs strategy for Scotland, which my party insisted be delivered in 2008 and which focuses on recovery, is all about trying to help people in advance, support them in their addiction and have a much more positive destination at the end. The cabinet secretary referred to my home patch of Renfrewshire. He is right to say that some extremely successful community safety initiatives are taking place there. I and one or two others in the chamber contributed to a debate on a motion that I lodged on the street stuff project in Renfrewshire, which is a strikingly impressive example of what happens when all the main partnership agencies get together and deliver a welcome and meaningful improvement. I welcome the funds that have been set aside in general for preventative spend. I think that there are broad questions about how the Government can ensure that the fund is going on genuine preventative spend and about how that is measured. I am not pretending that it will be easy, but I think that there is a need to focus on those issues. Housing has been dealt with in the debate, and the housing for older people strategy is a good idea—I will probably be a beneficiary of it in the not-too-distant future. However, where are the measurable targets and the corresponding budgets? In conclusion, I commend the committee on what I think is a good, constructive and helpful report. Its last paragraph echoes what Mr Macintosh was talking about. It says: “Both this Committee and its predecessor have consistently called for the need for more effective collaborative working across the public services including the need to pool resources and to share good practice. There is also a need to develop a more performance based and target based approach as a means of measuring the effectiveness of the various government strategies and policy initiatives which in turn should provide an increasing evidence base for accelerating the cultural and structural change which is essential if the challenges of demographic change and an ageing society are to be met.” That paragraph gets right to the nub of the issue. I very much hope that the committee might think of performing a standing role of vigilance on this issue. I think that the committee has an important locus in that respect. I look forward to seeing the Government’s formal response and listening to the rest of the debate. The issue will straddle several Governments and several sessions of Parliament. It is vital that, in Scotland, we try to get it right.

I am delighted that the motion has been selected for debate, and I thank everyone who has supported it. The street stuff project has been operational across Renfrewshire for the past four years. The project is core funded, managed and co-ordinated by Renfrewshire Council’s education and leisure services, and it is delivered in partnership with environmental services, St Mirren Football Club, Engage Renfrewshire, Strathclyde Police, Strathclyde Fire and Rescue, and McGill’s Bus Service. I want to thank and pay tribute to all those partners as well as to the main drivers of the project: Councillor Eddie Devine; Stephen Gallacher, who is the project’s co-ordinator and a St Mirren member of staff; Carolanne Robertson of Renfrewshire Council environmental services; and Fiona Watson, who is the sport and health services manager for the council. Every member in the chamber will have experienced the thrill of excitement and hope that arises from coming across something completely unexpected that has success written all over it. I remember vividly my first visit to street stuff. On a rather damp evening in a not very accessible part of Renfrew, I had been invited to inspect the box. I had repeatedly got lost and I was totally unprepared for the animated enthusiastic young people who welcomed me with open arms. They could not wait to tell me about the project and show off the box, which is a fitted-out and heated metal shipping container. They told me how proud they were of the project and how much they enjoyed being able to meet up with one another, and they entertained me with some song and dance. The enthusiasm and passion of those young people are matched in equal measure by the people whom I have already mentioned and by the other supporters and volunteers, whose commitment to the young people is unwavering. My second visit, on the cold frosty night of 7 December, was just as inspiring, and it included a visit to the Inchinnan bus depot to see the two specially adapted buses. What is the project all about? Street stuff is a youth diversionary scheme that aims to give kids in local communities something to do in the evenings as an alternative to hanging around the streets. The project has helped dramatically to reduce youth crime and antisocial behaviour. Let me just give some of the facts: between 2007-08 and 2011-12, the number of incidents of vandalism and youth disorder fell in Paisley North from 3,150 to 1,768, in Paisley South from 2,356 to 998 and in Renfrew and Gallowhill from 2,668 to 1,312. I do not know about other members, but I call that inspiring and impressive. How does it work and what happens? Working with disaffected and hard-to-reach young people aged between 10 and 18 in some of the most deprived areas of Renfrewshire, the project seeks to do the following: with the local police, identify youth disorder hot spots; engage directly with diversionary activity; inform the young people of the opportunities open to them; support referral to the local employment initiative; provide training and volunteering opportunities; encourage the young people to participate in local youth clubs or sports clubs; and deploy a range of mobile equipment, including four mobile football pitches, a youth bus, a gym bus and the box to which I have referred. All of that happens six nights a week for 48 weeks of the year, with additional facilities being provided during school holiday periods. The box is a multipurpose entertainment unit kitted out with computer games and dance mats. The two buses are very impressive. The youth bus offers information technology equipment, including computers and a Wii game. The gym bus has been fitted out with state-of-the-art gym equipment. Obviously, both buses are mobile, and McGill’s both garages and maintains the vehicles and provides drivers as required. But there is something else. The kick and collect programme, which is run by street stuff, encourages youngsters to take part in voluntary work in the community, for which the youngsters are rewarded with prizes. They learn about mutual respect and they learn about the community. That is real hands-on community engagement, and it works. The kick and collect programme continues to engage with young people who are willing to volunteer in their communities. In partnership with environmental services, a range of clean-ups, litter picks and graffiti removals have taken place across Renfrewshire. Each time a young person volunteers for a clean-up or community activity, the young person’s kick and collect card is stamped. Once the young person has collected a number of stamps, the card can be redeemed for a reward. To date, all rewards have been donated by a number of local organisations and businesses, including Renfrewshire Leisure, Xscape, Domino’s Pizza, Filshill and Showcase Cinemas. The rewards and experiences provide an opportunity to participate in activities that are potentially out of the reach of very vulnerable young people. Not surprisingly, street stuff has been recognised for innovative practice and has received 12 awards over the past 18 months. The project has been cited as a model of best practice in Scottish Government publications, and it has been shortlisted for a 2013 Convention of Scottish Local Authorities excellence award. Street stuff is a huge success, and I believe that the initiative could be rolled out across Scotland. Street stuff staff have told me that they would be very happy to share their experiences. Perhaps the minister could encourage that. I urge her to go and see the project for herself. She will find it an uplifting and informative experience. Street stuff is an exemplar of organisations working in partnership with a team of dedicated individuals who are all committed to making a real difference to young lives and to their local communities. I wish everyone who is involved in the project the very best for the future, and I sincerely hope that the initiative can be rolled out across the rest of Scotland.

I welcome the opportunity to speak on this important topic, particularly on Scotland’s responsibility to protect the rights of its citizens and promote a similar approach abroad. There is certainly a strong element of consensus on the topic across the chamber and, despite the minister’s natural reservations, I believe that it extends across the United Kingdom. All major political parties are signed up to the importance of human rights. However, there is scope for debate on the best way in which to enforce and interpret those rights, and I will return to that point later. It is equally important that the framework of human rights must enjoy the support and confidence of the public. That positive perception is essential and a negative perception is deeply damaging. What the public might support in theory, which is good, does not necessarily translate into support in practice, which is bad, so I will develop the theme. I agree with the general tenor of the motion, which my party will support, and I welcome the opportunity for the Parliament to reaffirm its commitment to human rights. I also support Jenny Marra’s amendment. However, when reading the motion, I reflected on the use of the term “inalienable”. Every member of the Parliament is signed up to human rights as a set of fundamental rights that every person can expect to enjoy. Nevertheless, all rights are subject to interpretation and, crucially, they all interact with one another. It is legitimate to explore that aspect, so I pose the question—I do so genuinely—of how we reconcile the absolute rights of, say, a victim, with the absolute rights of an assailant. Those are opposing rights. One person’s rights to a fair trial and to liberty are balanced by the other’s rights to security of person and freedom from ill-treatment. In that case, granting absolute or inalienable rights to the two individuals seems to me to be potentially irreconcilable. The use of the term “inalienable”—perhaps the minister could have picked an easier word to pronounce for the motion—therefore ignores the fact that fundamental rights can sometimes be in conflict and does not recognise that with rights come responsibilities.

I am very tight for time. I am sorry, but I want to develop my point. I hope that the member will forgive me. Interestingly, the European convention on human rights recognises that potential conflict and very few of its articles are absolute rights—they are actually qualified by consideration of the greater good. It is no secret that the general public’s opinion of human rights is not as positive as it could or should be and certainly as we would want it to be. A YouGov poll that was published last year found that 72 per cent of the public thought that “human rights have become a charter for criminals and the undeserving”. A similar poll that was published the year before found that 75 per cent of respondents believed that the Human Rights Act 1998 was “used too widely to create rights it was never intended to protect”. We should not ignore that or just brush it aside, because it is in the interests of those of us who champion fundamental human rights to bring the public on side and to improve that perception. As I said earlier, that negative perception by the public is deeply damaging. It is right that the UK Government is considering reform of the human rights regime. For the benefit of the minister, I will say that it is absolutely not the case that the UK Government wants to repeal the human rights act—it is looking at replacing it with a new bill of rights, and, 15 years on from the human rights act, it is appropriate to consider whether reform could strengthen the human rights regime. Perhaps we need to look at whether there is a requirement for a shift in emphasis to achieve a balance—to get rid of that irreconcilable element as regards the rights of those who do wrong compared with the rights of the victims. It is a paradox that lawbreakers can demand as a right a voice in lawmaking when they showed scant regard for upholding the law in the first place. That illustrates a dilemma and it illustrates one of the reasons why, sadly, the public apparently has a poor impression of the human rights framework. By considering reform, we have the opportunity to strengthen that framework and to win over the public, both of which are good for human rights in Scotland. As I close, I hope that I can adopt a more consensual note. I know that everyone in this chamber remains absolutely committed to the importance of human rights in Scotland, in the United Kingdom and worldwide. A modern, democratic Scotland, as part of the United Kingdom, has a responsibility to promote good practice abroad. Closer to home, I note with interest the work of the Scottish Human Rights Commission on developing Scotland’s first national action plan for human rights this year. I understand that action plans have already been drafted in around 30 countries across the world and I am sure that the national action plan in Scotland will represent a significant step towards informing and educating people about human rights as well as identifying any gaps in good practice. I certainly wish the drafters of that action plan every success. My party will support the motion.

Given the First Minister’s response to Lewis Macdonald about civilian staff and the escalating numbers of police officers who are being placed on restricted duties, how will there be room for all those people in the back offices of police stations the length and breadth of Scotland?

4. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the adequacy of the number of police officers carrying out duties in communities. (S4O-01752)

In 2008, my party forced the Scottish National Party Government to commit to 1,000 extra police officers. However, I have been informed in a response to a freedom of information request that the total number of officers at their desks on restricted duties has risen from 560 in 2006 to 1,412 in 2011. As that will clearly have a dramatic impact on the number of police officers in our communities, what is the cabinet secretary going to do to restore that number?

I should explain to the chamber that my colleague Margaret Mitchell has been involved in all the proceedings on the bill. Sadly, her mother died recently and she is unable to take part in the debate today. That might ensure that my contributions are marked by brevity. We are not without sympathy for the amendments in the name of Jenny Marra. I note in particular her desire, in amendment 9, to compel the Scottish civil justice council to provide advice to ministers. That is the nub of the issue. To me, it would be much more interesting to compel the advice not to be given but to be taken. However, no statute is ever going to achieve that. We should accept that the body, as constituted, is a responsible body. We feel that the proposal in amendment 9 would introduce an unwelcome encumbrance and an additional obligation that we think is unnecessary, as other sections of the bill seek to cover the issues that Jenny Marra is concerned about. For those reasons, we will not support her amendment.

I have listened with care to Jenny Marra but find it difficult to support what she is seeking to achieve. However well intended, her amendments become restrictive and introduce inflexibility and, given that they are all roughly in the same vein, my party is not minded to support any of them. Although I have every sympathy with what Jenny Marra is trying to achieve with her amendments on a gender quota, I simply do not think that that is an appropriate measure to introduce with regard to the council. Female talent in Scotland, particularly in the legal profession, is manifest. I am sure that that will become obvious and that the Lord President will be particularly mindful of his obligation to ensure true representation on the council.

It is only right that Jenny Marra’s persistence, tenacity and fortitude be rewarded, so it is with pleasure that I intimate that my party will support amendment 22. Jenny Marra makes a good point. As far as I can see, the thrust of part 1 of the bill is about transparency, openness and involving other people. If it is the case that the Scottish Government’s excuse in not accepting that is a lack of accommodation, that seems less than lame. Bring the council here—it would be lovely to have it and we could all watch the proceedings.

I will speak to the minister’s amendments 1 and 2 and speak to and move Margaret Mitchell’s amendment 24. First, on amendments 1 and 2, I am glad that the cabinet secretary has yielded to his metaphorical beating over the head and made what was a poor situation somewhat better. My party will support those two amendments. Amendment 24 seeks to protect individuals on low incomes who happen to have a spouse or partner. The policy memorandum to the bill makes it clear that the resources of spouses and partners will be taken into account when financial eligibility is assessed, in most cases. As the minister said, there will be exceptions where the spouse or partner has a contrary interest in the case—they could be a co-accused or a witness—or where they are living separately and apart. However, any practising solicitor will tell us that ascertaining a spouse’s or partner’s income accurately and swiftly can present formidable problems. My colleague Margaret Mitchell’s amendment prohibits regulations that would allow a spouse’s or partner’s income to be taken into account when disposable income is calculated, thereby simplifying the process for any accused who seeks criminal legal aid. I move amendment 24.

I will speak to amendment 25, in the name of Margaret Mitchell, and briefly to amendment 23, in the name of Graeme Pearson. I have a lot of sympathy with what he is trying to achieve, but my reservation is that his amendment does not go far enough—certainly not as far as the amendment in my colleague Margaret Mitchell’s name. My basic concern about Mr Pearson’s drafting of his amendment is that I am at a slight loss to know how any court would interpret the phrase “it is in the interests of justice for the contribution to be refunded.” My first question is this: Whose justice would that be? Would it mean justice for the accused or for the taxpayer, or would it relate to the administration costs of the court system? Because of that concern, my party will abstain on amendment 23. Amendment 25, in the name of Margaret Mitchell, would require that contributions be refunded in all cases of acquittal. Her amendment calls on the Scottish ministers to make, by regulations, “arrangements for any contribution for criminal legal assistance due or paid by virtue of this Act to be remitted or refunded in a case where proceedings are concluded without the person from whom, or in respect of whom, the contribution was due or paid, being convicted.” It is interesting that, if Parliament were to accept amendment 25, it would put us much more in line with England and Wales. I do not know why Scotland should be in an entirely different position. I ask Parliament to support amendment 25.

By any measure—as has already emerged from today’s debates, in particular from Malcolm Chisholm’s speech—the bill is, at the very least, controversial. We know that it has raised passions outside Parliament and within it. Amendment 26 seeks to require Scottish ministers to lay before Parliament a report on the impact on solicitors of requiring them to collect contributions under the bill. Under the amendment, a first report would be required soon after the introduction of the requirement to collect contributions, with subsequent reports being required every three years. Amendment 27 would introduce a second, wider review provision, which would require Scottish ministers to lay before Parliament every three years a report on the operation and effect of part 2 of the bill. The amendment is framed in such a way that the period would begin on the day on which the provisions of part 2 first came into force. Amendments 26 and 27 have been triggered by universal concern about aspects of the bill, including how it has been drafted and the requirements that it will create. There has been reaction from many sectors of society outside Parliament—not least, from the legal profession and, in particular, from those who are at the coalface of giving advice to clients under our criminal justice system. Amendments 26 and 27 are a welcome breath of fresh air. To be frank, I cannot see what the Scottish Government is afraid of. If, as the cabinet secretary has asserted, the bill is a Rolls-Royce vehicle for the administration of criminal justice in Scotland, he can anticipate glowing responses to the reviews. On the other hand, if he has got it wrong and all is not well, at least the amendments will afford an opportunity for Parliament and the rest of Scottish society to take a view on what is happening. If the responses to the reviews were negative, that could trigger appropriate action in Parliament. I urge Parliament to support amendments 26 and 27, which are in Margaret Mitchell’s name. I move amendment 26.

The cabinet secretary’s response is predictable, but not persuasive. On his concern about the wider income of solicitors or firms of solicitors, amendment 26 is specific in that it is about collection of the contributions. The cabinet secretary fails to understand the widespread disquiet that has surrounded the bill and the specific need to reassure not only solicitors who practice criminal law but broad sectors of civic society in Scotland, especially people who may be victims of the proposed legislation when they find themselves as accused persons without the means of paying for their defence at the inception of proceedings—a critical time at which they need to do that. The difference between accepting and rejecting amendments 26 and 27 is the difference between slamming the door shut on fresh air blowing through the process, and keeping the door open. I urge members to support the amendments and to keep the door open.

I restate my position as a former practising solicitor in Scotland who is no longer a member of the Law Society or on the roll of solicitors. Although I intend to focus my comments on part 2 of the bill, I will briefly mention part 1. Part 1 implements a key recommendation of the Gill review and it is a welcome step towards updating Scotland’s civil court rules. The council will have a remit to review the wider civil justice system. We should be in no doubt that the council will be a powerful organisation that will exercise considerable influence. I noted the cabinet secretary’s assurances at stage 2 that the council will act in an open and accountable way and that appointments to it will be made in an accountable manner. It is unfortunate, however, that the amendments in relation to the activities of the council lodged by Margaret Mitchell at stage 2 and Jenny Marra’s amendment 22 debated today, which my party supported—amendments that sought manifest openness and transparency; I do not see how people could object to that—were rejected by the Scottish Government. I will turn to part 2 of the bill, which I find problematic. Part 2 has had a difficult time. Indeed, I understand that the Justice Committee came close to rejecting part 2 at stage 1, but had a change of heart at stage 2. We have heard from Lewis Macdonald the reaction from the legal profession. Notably, 12 bar associations, including Edinburgh and Glasgow, remain opposed to the legal aid reforms, and the Law Society of Scotland, while accepting the Scottish Government’s compromise offer, maintains opposition to the collection regime. My party has attempted to support efforts to improve the efficiencies of the bill. Certainly, the increase in the disposable income threshold above which contributions will be made, and the agreement that the disability living allowance, its replacement personal independence payments, and war pensions will be disregarded is welcome. It is also right that no contributions will be required for offenders in custody or in police stations, which at least means that access to legal advice at a critical time will not be restricted. The rejection of Margaret Mitchell’s amendment 24, which sought to exclude the income and capital of spouses and partners, which would have been a lot fairer to an accused who desperately needs advice and may need financial help, was unfortunate. Margaret Mitchell attempted to secure a wider debate on the question of contribution refunds; Mr Pearson spoke about that, too. That wider debate is needed and I hope that the Scottish Government will consider that and perhaps reflect on what might be done. Part 2 of the bill is underpinned by the presumption that those who can afford to pay for public services should do so. I support that general proposition and I welcome the cabinet secretary’s conversion to the Scottish Conservatives’ way of thinking. However, that presumption must be weighed against the specific situation in which it is to be deployed. When that situation is the administration of justice and the fundamental right of an accused to legal advice, it is the responsibility of the state to ensure that those unable to pay for that advice are not denied it. That is where, for me, the bill hits a brick wall, because either the Government discharges that responsibility with a cohort of state-funded public defence solicitors or it creates a workable criminal legal aid system. The overall provision of public defence lawyers would be very expensive and much more inflexible to administer than a criminal legal aid system. In this bill, the Government has failed in its attempt to deliver a workable criminal legal aid system. When an accused is unable to meet privately the cost of legal defence, the legal aid system must work on the basis that the accused can access advice without immediately being confronted by demands for money that he or she might not have. Equally, at that critical point the solicitor should have confidence that the legal aid system will resolve what the accused is due to pay and when, so that the solicitor can proceed without impediment to give advice. The bill fails those fundamental tests. It presents the spectre of an anxious accused who desperately needs advice and is expected to scrape around to find sufficient funds to unlock the advice, and a solicitor who departs from the role of adviser and assumes the mantle of debt collector to hound the accused for money. If at that point the accused does not have or cannot produce the money—shoes for the children or food on the table might have taken precedence—the solicitor is placed in a professional and moral dilemma about what to do. That is not a workable criminal legal aid system. It is a dog’s breakfast and an affront to decent standards of fairness and the fundamental right of an accused to representation. The bill raises significant questions about access to justice. What is predictable is that individuals who are accused of crime will be scared of seeking advice, might not be able to muster the funds to pay for advice and might end up representing themselves. That helps neither them nor the courts. I welcome the reforms to the civil justice system in the bill, but the criminal legal aid system that part 2 will deliver is unfair and unworkable and will betray the most vulnerable. For that reason, my party is unable to support the bill.

Christine Grahame makes a perfectly valid point, but the financial circumstances of a partner or spouse can be exceedingly complex, and the point is that they cannot be quantified or confirmed either swiftly or accurately. I have had experience of such situations as a solicitor, and I am sure that Christine Grahame has, too. That is a concern when we have an accused person who needs advice.

This has been an illuminating debate. I do not underestimate the challenges confronting the Scottish Government, but something has been shied away from. Lewis Macdonald said that there are two entirely different subjects in the bill, and Alison McInnes alluded to that, too. I agree with that. The reform of the civil justice system is proceeding on the basis of an extensive and authoritative review by Lord Gill. There has been a well-informed process to justify our decisions as to how we might embark upon the civil justice reforms. In that respect, that bit of the bill has been proceeding on a stable basis. We want more efficiency and broader civic involvement in the Scottish civil justice system, and that will be achieved through the Scottish civil justice council. The amendments from Margaret Mitchell and Jenny Marra that were discussed this afternoon would have improved openness and transparency, and it is a great pity that the Government did not accept them. We could have had a standalone, solid, consensual civil justice bill. Criminal legal assistance is an entirely different matter. As I have said, I do not underestimate the challenging proposition involved, but would not the whole process have benefited from broader consultation and a separate bill resting on what that broader consultation produced, with the aim of trying to unite people? That matters to Scotland, not just to civic Scotland and those who are accused of committing crimes. It matters that we have a solid, confident, competent, professionally capable legal profession. At the moment, we have a legal profession that is split into pieces. I do not need to explain that to the cabinet secretary—he knows it for himself. I agree with Lewis Macdonald that the profession is divided. That is unfortunate, because the best way forward for the reform of criminal legal assistance would have been to have information, real discussion, a meeting of minds and a genuine attempt to chart a way forward. At the heart of any civilised state is the right of the accused to legal advice. That is an important tenet, as is the presumption of innocence. I agree with Malcolm Chisholm that such fundamental principles cannot be driven by money alone. The Scottish Government has failed to demonstrate how those two basic principles are supported, protected and delivered by part 2 of the bill. Let us consider the position of an accused person with limited income, no knowledge of their partner’s or spouse’s income, who is facing a criminal charge and urgently needs advice. As regards that individual’s disposable income, the amount concerned might represent an electricity bill or a pair of shoes for a child. What is the accused to do? Represent himself or herself? Go to a money lender? Try and pawn something in order to make the contribution? Knowing himself or herself to be innocent—this is a really alarming prospect—should they plead guilty just to bring the matter to an end? Those are all entirely predictable consequences of the provisions of the bill.

I cannot, as I am in the final minute of my speech. In a situation in which the client presents an explanation that constitutes a defence and has to make a contribution but does not have the money, what is a solicitor meant to do? For a one-off, the solicitor might offer pro bono services. Those who have been in practice have often done that. However, that is not sustainable if the majority of the solicitor’s clients are in that position. Are they to be turned away? Is the solicitor to try to subsidise the inadequacy of the criminal legal aid system? That is why I think that the Scottish Government has failed to demonstrate exactly what it thinks should be happening and how on earth it thinks that the proposed system is meant to work in the interests of justice and fairness. As it has failed to satisfy me on that test, my party will not be supporting the bill.

Yes, but part 2 of the bill is about people who are accused of crime and their right to be legally represented and how they achieve that.

It is entirely predictable that a fund distribution body such as Creative Scotland will never find it easy to satisfy potential recipients of funding but, given the very public spat that Creative Scotland generated, will the minister clarify what the main criteria are that Creative Scotland should apply in deciding who receives funding?

I, too, thank Malcolm Chisholm for bringing such an important issue to the chamber for debate. When the first ever zero tolerance campaign was launched in Edinburgh in November 1992 it was a watershed moment, as Malcolm Chisholm so eloquently described. Yet 20 years on from those pioneering campaigns, regrettably violence against women is still with us and it remains high on the political agenda. Violence against women is a pervasive social problem that affects every neighbourhood throughout Scotland; it can be found in every social background. Against that bleak backdrop, Zero Tolerance is a torchbearer that works to tackle the causes of men’s violence against women. It works with individuals, communities, women’s organisations, schools, the media and others to address the causes of violence against women and bring about change. Starting the new year with this debate, just over a month since Jamie Hepburn’s members’ business debate on the white ribbon campaign, is a good way to drive forward that change. We need to reassure victims that abusive behaviour is not normal. It is repugnant, disgusting and unacceptable, and victims must be supported in understanding that they are not to blame. We need to send an uncompromising message to the perpetrators of abuse—the cowardly bullies who frighten, threaten and hurt—that they will be exposed, their names will become public and their squalid little secret will be out. In the December debate, I said: “Violence against women is unacceptable and abhorrent, and it has no place in Scotland.” I referred to the statistics, which are very depressing: “In Scotland, nearly 60,000 incidents of domestic abuse were recorded by the police in 2011-12, which is a 7 per cent increase on the 2010-11 figures. Since 2002-03, there has been a 67 per cent increase in recorded incidents of domestic abuse, and there are currently 163 incidents of domestic abuse recorded by the police each day.”—[Official Report, 4 December 2012; c 14293.] The greatest protection available to the perpetrators of that misery is silence. That silence is malign, which is why domestic abuse must be reported and, when reported, tackled. As it is vital to make help available to women who are fleeing violence, we should, as other members have pointed out, recognise the valuable work of many voluntary groups in that regard. I recently visited organisations in my area that carry out excellent work to support and protect women and their children suffering from domestic abuse. My most recent visits were to Renfrewshire Women’s Aid and Inverclyde Women’s Aid, which provide fantastic support to women and their families. We must never forget that children can also be victims; for example, they might be present when incidents of abuse occur or might themselves be subjected to direct violence. I was heartened to hear, as I think Malcolm Chisholm mentioned, that the Zero Tolerance Scotland website contains a link to a website for younger people, safe hub Scotland, which provides information and guidance to younger people who have experienced domestic abuse. I was also interested to learn that this invaluable tool was designed for young people by young people who have experienced such abuse. In this age of technology and social media, we have a huge opportunity to inform, reassure, share information with and give guidance and advice to victims.

The member makes a valid point and any measures that can be taken to discourage and deter the portrayal of violence as something that is routine or, in the minds of some, acceptable—obviously, the chamber itself would condemn it—would be worth while. I know that the cabinet secretary’s colleague Mike Russell has become the first MSP with an application that can be downloaded but I wonder whether the Scottish Government might consider having an app specifically for children who are living in a situation of abuse. It could provide help and information, could be accessed discreetly and would prove to be an enormous support. In conclusion, I pay tribute to excellent organisations such as Zero Tolerance and Scottish Women’s Aid. Clearly the united will of Parliament is to keep violence against women at the forefront of our agenda, to keep talking about it and to keep providing encouragement and support. I congratulate those organisations, which work so tirelessly to support those who are so desperately in need of their help.

I thank Christina McKelvie for bringing this important issue to the chamber, and I thank Sandra White for her opening speech. I support the motion. In my remarks, I want to concentrate on Scotland. Historically, Scotland has been a country of net out-migration, but over the past 45 years that has greatly reduced. Indeed, in every year since 2002, Scotland has experienced net migration gains of at least 19,000 per year. In 2010-11 there was a net migration gain of 27,000, which was the highest since estimates began in 1951. Some of the most recent and reliable data and information on migrants in Scotland is contained in the Scottish Parliament Equal Opportunities Committee’s fifth report in 2010, which followed its inquiry into migration and trafficking in Scotland. The committee made the following findings. It said that Scotland has demographic problems, and its report noted that the “Demographic projection of an ageing population and an increase in the ratio of workers with dependents has led to the view that Scotland will need to attract migrants in order to support the economy.” The committee was prescient, because we have learned from the 2011 census results that were published yesterday that, for the first time, there are more pensioners than young people in Scotland. That has huge implications for a range of policies, but foremost among them must be that of achieving a sustainable economy. The migrant population’s importance to the economy was—rightly—underlined by the committee’s report in 2010, and it is highlighted by the census data that was published yesterday. That is why the committee’s other findings are significant. The committee said that there is a lack of reliable data. That must be addressed. We need to know the extent to which the economy depends on the migrant workforce, the skills and experience that are being deployed and the sectors in which they are being used. The committee pointed out that the public perception of migration in Scotland is negative—some members have referred to that. I think that we all agree that that is utterly unacceptable. People need to be educated about the asset that is our migrant population; our economy would not function fully without them. The committee observed that there is a lack of awareness about migrants’ entitlements and that migrants lack knowledge and awareness about public services, rights and entitlements. That is also unacceptable. In this day and age, with the benefits of technology, surely we can make a far better fist of providing such basic information—this is not a large country. The committee said: “it is vital for information to be made available to migrants on their arrival in Scotland so that they know what their legal and civic rights and entitlements are, and to assist them in sourcing help and information so that they can have access to the full range of public services that will assist them and help make their transition to life in Scotland as straightforward as possible.” I agree with that. How do we make that happen? In 2009, the Scottish Government commissioned a report into migration in Scotland, which found that “there is evidence of poor employment practice ... for example breach of regulations on working hours. Migrants have been found to have limited awareness of their employment rights. Many migrants are over-qualified for the low-skilled and low paid work in which they are predominantly employed.” The findings in that report also highlighted the need for more robust data about Scottish migration. I would welcome the minister’s comments on the Equal Opportunities Committee’s report and the Scottish Government’s 2009 report, with an emphasis on progress to date. The migrant population is an asset to Scotland and we need to do everything that we can to recognise and support that asset.

This is not the occasion to go into the pros and cons of immigration reforms. I am genuinely interested in what the minister says about engagement. It seems to me that we lack specific, compelling data about where our migrant population works and what skills and experience it brings to the economy. A forceful argument on that could be made to the UK Government and I would support the minister in making it.

I thank the Deputy First Minister for prior sight of her statement. It is a triumph of optimism and evasiveness over hard-headed fact and reality because it poses far more questions than it answers. The Deputy First Minister says that the process of negotiating Scotland’s place in Europe will take just 18 months. How is that possible when the fastest-ever process—that for Finland—took nearly three years? Does she even know—[Interruption.]

Does she even know whether she will be granted a meeting with President Barroso? Does she even know when that meeting is likely to be? What questions will she ask him, or will she just tell him how it will be? I am afraid that that is the clear implication of this risible statement, because she actually says that she will outline the process to President Barroso. Poor man. [Laughter.]

If she knows exactly what the process is, why does she not share that with the rest of us? Most laughable of all, we are expected to believe that an independent Scotland will be in the same position as a bankrupt failed state such as East Germany. That really will take—[Interruption.] It is in the statement. [Interruption.]

That really will take some explaining to the people of Scotland.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. If I may clarify, I am here as my party’s representative on the Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee, an undertaking that, I think, everyone in the chamber recognises to be significant and important. I thought it appropriate, in that role, that I should sit where I am sitting.

As the Conservative member of the Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee, I say that it is a pleasure for me to take part in the debate, as it was a pleasure, with colleagues on the committee, under Bruce Crawford’s capable convenership, to tackle the first part of our work, which was scrutiny of the draft Scotland Act 1998 (Modification of Schedule 5) Order 2013. Not for the first time, a title that looks slightly dry in the abstract turned out in practice to be extremely interesting. The role of the Scottish Parliament committee, as its convener said, is important because, although the order is a United Kingdom statutory instrument, it can proceed to law only if it is approved by resolution of both houses of the UK Parliament and the Scottish Parliament. Therefore, there is already enough material to provide a paradise for constitutional lawyers and other gurus and aficionados of parliamentary process. I share the convener’s admiration and appreciation of the experts in those fields, who provided useful evidence to the committee. In their absence, we would have been like shepherds without a star, to use a seasonal metaphor, although I sometimes felt that I was looking at a number of stars and was slightly dazzled by them all. However, that evidence was extremely helpful and provided useful pointers to the committee not only for the essentially very technical process of scrutinising the draft order but in giving a backdrop to the broader process of the bill and the paving legislation for the proposed extension of the franchise, both of which are to follow. Let me deal with the simple technical issue of the draft order. Procedurally, of course, it can only be approved or rejected, so a relatively straightforward choice lay before the committee. Given the prelude of the Edinburgh agreement between the UK and Scottish Governments, approval by the committee was, arguably, predictable. The only factor that might have precluded such an outcome would have been explicit evidence that the order was incompetent or materially flawed as drafted. No such evidence was provided, and the committee unanimously approved the order. Members are invited to do the same this evening. I would like to cover the broader issues that the scrutiny process flagged up, the first of which is the status of the Edinburgh agreement. Paragraph 22 of the committee’s report notes: “There was broad consensus among oral witnesses about the significance of the agreement—which the Secretary of State described as ‘historic’. For the Deputy First Minister it was ‘a watershed moment in Scotland’s home-rule journey’.” Whatever the different political destinations that the two Governments desire, it is clear to me that both have confidence in and respect for the agreement, and that they both wish the ensuing process to be conducted in the spirit of the agreement. That is vital to ensure public confidence in the whole process. Indeed, as paragraph 23 of the report makes clear, that was underpinned by the secretary of state and the Deputy First Minister. I welcome Nicola Sturgeon’s clarity in saying that the Scottish Government is “honour-bound politically and morally by the Edinburgh agreement, which makes it clear that, where appropriate, the rules and certainly the spirit of PPERA will govern the referendum.”—[Official Report, Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee, 15 November 2012; c 85-6.] It is important that the spirit of the agreement and what it sets out to do are mirrored by the subsequent actions of politicians. It is therefore worth repeating the criteria set down by the agreement for the referendum, which were that it should have “a clear legal base; be legislated for by the Scottish Parliament; be conducted so as to command the confidence of parliaments, governments and people; and deliver a fair test and a decisive expression of the views of the people in Scotland and a result that everyone will respect.” I welcome the convener’s observations in relation to the Electoral Commission. The politics and debate around the referendum will be furious and passionate. In deference to the people of Scotland, let us ensure that the process is pure and above reproach.

Although short, the debate has been positive and constructive. I will pick up where I left off on the question of process. I was reassured by many of the speeches and give praise where praise is due. Willie Rennie was right to say that the atmosphere had become quite febrile, and it is appropriate to pay tribute to Michael Moore, my colleague David Mundell, Bruce Crawford and Nicola Sturgeon for the roles that they played in gathering the evidence and constructing the basis of the edifice of the process, which is the Edinburgh agreement. It is interesting that, in the course of the debate, a number of members have recognised that the integrity of the process is vital. One part of the operation is the passion and the politics that will be the hallmark of the campaign and the debate, which I am sure will be engaged in with fervour, enthusiasm and energy on all sides, regardless of which view we support. I am encouraged to see, however, a recognition that it is important that the other part of the operation is ensuring that the process remains unimpeachable. Without that, there will not be the necessary degree of confidence among the public. A number of members commented on the role of the Electoral Commission, and I thought that the report was very helpful in that respect. Many witnesses in the committee laid great emphasis on the importance of the role of the Electoral Commission in ensuring that there is the necessary fairness to reassure the public that no one set of politicians is trying to hijack the process for a particular end. The Electoral Commission will, of course, also have an important task in assessing the intelligibility of the question. I was struck by what one of the witnesses, Alan Trench, pointed out. I quote paragraph 34 of the committee’s report, in which we are told that he said that, “since the Electoral Commission was not mentioned in the section 30 Order itself, it would in principle be possible for the Parliament to pass a Bill that gave the Commission a more limited role than that envisaged in the agreement.” However he warned that “such an approach would ... carry significant legal and constitutional risks, and also political risks, as it would jeopardise the perception of fairness that was so important to securing respect” for the process. That view was pretty well agreed by Professor McHarg. It has been helpful to hear, in the course of the debate, acknowledgement by the Deputy First Minister, Linda Fabiani, Richard Baker and Willie Rennie that we have a task before us in ensuring that we attain the highest standards of fairness and transparency that everybody—regardless of what side of the argument they are on—wishes to see. That is vital to the integrity of the process. We understand that passions will run high and that politics will play a momentous role in the debate, but I hope that it will be possible to conduct the debate with a degree of mutual respect and courtesy. The people of Scotland deserve that, and we de-serve them if we do not acknowledge that obligation that is on us all.

There are not many more important debates than this one about how we, the Scottish Parliament, respond to the findings and recommendations of the Leveson inquiry’s report. As we have heard, the inquiry was set up by the Prime Minister following the uncovering of a phone hacking scandal, which, we all agree, shocked the British public to its core. The inquiry exposed unethical as well as illegal conduct by some elements of the press—that is the dry technical description. To the broader public, it laid bare squalid practices and unprincipled, shameless behaviour that all reasonable people find repugnant. The inquiry went further. It demonstrated the elementary failure of the current regulatory regime and a fundamental failure of our political system over the past two decades to tackle an intensifying problem. In that context, Lord Justice Leveson asked what the Roman poet, Juvenal, asked near 2,000 years ago: “Quis custodiet ipsos custodes?”—who guards the guard dogs? Well, Lord Justice Leveson has published his findings and recommendations. In among the responses and the commentary, one feature has emerged: the problem is not simple and whatever we do, we should do with caution. In many respects, the debate has captured that mood and there have been some measured and reflective contributions from across the chamber. Dennis Robertson’s speech was particularly courageous and, from a different perspective, Margo MacDonald’s was very thought provoking. Yes, we need to do something, but we should be mighty careful about what we do. The Leveson inquiry took place against the background of the democratic tradition: the freedoms and values that we cherish in our open society. Those freedoms are the envy of oppressed peoples around the world. Thomas Jefferson said: “The only security of all is in a free press.” He added that it was necessary to “keep the waters pure”. Lord Justice Leveson echoed those sentiments when he said: “a free press is the lifeblood of a mature democracy”. That is not something to be sacrificed or lightly put at risk, although that does not mean that the freedom of the press is unlimited. There are legitimate boundaries within which the press must operate and an effective system of regulation is essential to ensure that those limits are adhered to. Today, we have heard many members add their voices to the debate. Although at times they may have been in disagreement with one another, we should remember what we all agree on. First, we as a Parliament have a duty to consider these findings and recommendations—although I observe that responding does not necessarily mean legislating. Secondly, the status quo is no longer a tenable option. Lord Justice Leveson rightly criticised the current regulatory system. The Press Complaints Commission made the press judge, jury and executioner in its own case, which was inherently flawed. In its place, Leveson recommended an independent self-regulatory body to remedy what he sees as a “profound lack of any functional or meaningful independence from the industry”. Under his model, appointments would be independent and representative of the public interest, as would be the setting of standards of conduct. He also detailed a speedy complaints-handling mechanism with significant remedial powers as part of a new regulatory system.

I am sorry; I have a lot to get in. I ask Ms Grahame to forgive me. Those are the central recommendations of the report, which my party accepts and endorse to this Parliament. However, we do not believe that statutory underpinning is necessary to give effect to the main findings of the report. It is interesting that Lord Justice Leveson—I do not know whether Ms Sturgeon and Mr Swinney share this view, but if they would listen, they might learn something about the report—identified that very tension. He noted: “a balance must be struck between the use of statute to deliver independence ... and the risk that the use of statute might introduce some element of state control of the press which is clearly unacceptable.” My party’s view is that any form of statutory provision that enacted the “requirements”—that is Leveson’s language—that a regulatory body must fulfil would inevitably introduce the risk of political interference in the freedom of the press. That cannot be helped. Such statutes control the press. Governments pass statutes, and there is the rub. To introduce such legislation on to the United Kingdom’s statute book or the Scottish Parliament’s statute book would be an unprecedented step. I want to end my contribution by returning to what my colleague Ruth Davidson argued in her speech. A two-system solution, as the First Minister has proposed, whereby the rest of the UK goes one way and Scotland goes another is unrealistic and unnecessary, because almost all the largest titles and media groups in Scotland either trade throughout the United Kingdom as a whole, are based in England, or are owned by non-Scottish proprietors. Newspapers are used to dealing with differences in Scots law day in, day out; they are also used to operating under a unified UK regulatory system, albeit that that system was imperfect. Given that context, a Scottish solution will mean having to sign up to two systems. I presume that that also means paying for two systems, and I do not think that there is an appetite for that. Indeed, Leveson even noted that in his report in recognising that there is no reason why a new regulatory system could not easily apply across the various legal jurisdictions of the United Kingdom. I return to Juvenal. His friends advised him to adopt the following plan: “Bolt her in, constrain her!” The free press and its crucial role are of such paramount importance that we cannot follow such an approach lightly. Bolting in and constraining through statutory provision that is susceptible to political meddling is only the answer of very last resort. Let us move forward together. Let us take the key principles of the report and together find a way to deliver them on a single, UK-wide basis.

I congratulate Jamie Hepburn on bringing such an important issue to the chamber. Violence against women is unacceptable and abhorrent, and it has no place in Scotland. The international day for the elimination of violence against women and the 16 days of activism against gender violence demonstrate the solidarity of women around the world, which is to be commended. I also commend the white ribbon campaign, which is a campaign for men in Scotland who want to end violence against women. It is part of an international campaign in more than 55 countries, which is the largest effort in the world by men who work to end violence against women. I say well done to Jamie Hepburn for lodging the motion and for bringing the debate to the chamber. The statistics are depressing. In Scotland, nearly 60,000 incidents of domestic abuse were recorded by the police in 2011-12, which is a 7 per cent increase on the 2010-11 figures. Since 2002-03, there has been a 67 per cent increase in recorded incidents of domestic abuse, and there are currently 163 incidents of domestic abuse recorded by the police each day. I noted from one of the local papers in my area, the Kirkintilloch Herald, that “more women are killed ... as a result of male violence than car accidents, cancer, malaria and war combined.” That fact drew me up short and shocked me. There are also women who do not report crime because they believe that it is a private family matter. We have to encourage them to believe that it is nothing like that at all. They must have the courage to come forward and report such unacceptable behaviour. There are women who are frightened that reporting the violence will make it worse. We need to encourage them and let them know that the only thing that will make it worse is not reporting it. When it is reported, it must be tackled. It is vital that help is made available for women who are fleeing violence. We should recognise the valuable work of many voluntary groups in that regard. Members have already paid tribute to some of them, and I have recently visited organisations in my own area that do excellent work to support and protect women and children who are fleeing from domestic abuse. My most recent visits were to Renfrewshire Women’s Aid and Inverclyde Women’s Aid, who do fantastic work to support women and their families. I also pay tribute to the Women’s Support Project. That is a feminist voluntary organisation that is recognised as a Scottish charity. It works to raise awareness of the extent, causes and effects of male violence against women, and works for improved services for those who are affected by violence. A lot of positive work is being done out there. We must never forget children, and some members have already alluded to them. Tragically, children can also be victims because they are often present when incidents of abuse occur. On my visit to Inverclyde Women’s Aid, I was delighted to learn that it is running classes in schools about healthy relationships to try to reverse the trend of domestic abuse and explain to children that things can be done in a different way and there is a different way to live their lives. Domestic violence is a stain on Scotland. We must tackle it, encourage women to come forward, and support them when they do. As Dennis Robertson said, we must change this pernicious culture because it still exists. All credit to Jamie Hepburn—tonight’s debate is testament to the political commitment in the Scottish Parliament to providing that encouragement and support.

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

I am grateful to the cabinet secretary for her graciousness in permitting me to intervene. I know that the cabinet secretary does not care for the impact of history but the fact is that within this enduring union, which receives my approval although it may not receive hers, Scotland has actually achieved many great things—distinctively Scottish things, but as part of that union. I cannot believe that the cabinet secretary would not want to reflect that. That would seem uncharacteristically churlish.

On seeing the title of today’s debate, I was reminded of a time when the St Andrew’s day debate was confined to members’ business. It is now elevated to the status of a Scottish Government debate, which is entirely appropriate. I hope that the Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs is not too stunned by my acquiescence. As members are aware, I believe in the United Kingdom and in Scotland’s place in that union. A person need not be a member of the Scottish National Party to be proud of Scotland and her achievements. No one in the chamber has a monopoly on patriotism. Patricia Ferguson made that point well; I thank her for her support of my amendment. The Scottish Conservatives welcome the opportunity to celebrate Scotland and the St Andrew’s day tradition. On a mechanism for enhancing the celebration, I say to Margo MacDonald that I celebrate it by just being myself; I think that that is what an awful lot of people in Scotland do. St Andrew was, of course, the first apostle. He was a fisherman on the northern shores of the Sea of Galilee. However, it was not until the end of the first millennium that St Andrew’s links with Scotland were established, when he was made the patron saint of Scotland after some of his relics were brought by St Rule to St Andrews, where they remain to this day. Other relics can be found in Patras in Greece—I have viewed them there—in Amalfi in Italy, in Warsaw in Poland and in St Mary’s Roman Catholic church in Edinburgh, so he was well travelled in death. St Andrew was no less well travelled in life; he preached along the southern borders of today’s Ukraine along the Black Sea, as well as along the Dnieper and Volga rivers, which is why he became a patron saint of Russia, Romania and the Ukraine. However, the temporal reach of St Andrew does not end there, with his patronages in sainthood extending from Luqa to Esgueira, and even as far as Barbados. The global reach of St Andrew is not limited merely to countries that enjoy him as their patron saint. This year alone, individuals of all nationalities will gather, from Australia and New Zealand to the USA and Canada and from Bonn to Brussels to celebrate the saintly feast day. The cabinet secretary asked me about UK celebrations of St Andrew. I am quite surprised by the request, because in her motion she notes that many events will take place in the rest of the UK. However, to help her out I can confirm that many Scots will congregate in London, Cambridge, Bedford, Dorset and other parts of England to celebrate St Andrew’s day.

That is what many people in Scotland—hundreds of thousands of them apparently, according to recent polls—feel instinctively is part of their identity. They do not have a problem with it. I appreciate that the cabinet secretary has a problem with that, but it is not a problem that is shared by the majority of people in Scotland. St Andrew and his saltire are by no means the property solely of Scotland, let alone of the Scottish National Party or of any other form of nationalism. The debate calls on us to celebrate Scotland, which I genuinely always welcome the opportunity to do, because we have a great deal to celebrate. We have a distinct culture and history, and our contribution to the world at every level cannot be overstated. I celebrate all those attributes as a Scot, but I also—alongside hundreds of thousands of other Scots—celebrate them as a citizen of part of the United Kingdom. Remember: 800,000 Scots live elsewhere in the UK. From a union that was inspired by pragmatism and rationality, one of the world’s most wonderful and remarkable democratic countries has developed and grown. Of course Scotland, England, Wales and Northern Ireland have many individual successes to extol, but I believe that our greatest successes—those that we can celebrate the most, and those that define who we are as people and what we are as a nation—are those that happened not by acting alone and looking inward but by acting together and looking outward as part of the remarkable union that is the United Kingdom. I remind Parliament that it was together, as part of that United Kingdom, that we led the fight against slavery and delivered huge social reform and the universal franchise, which were made possible by acts of the Parliament of the United Kingdom, so we can all—Scots and English alike—take pride in that.

I am getting a little tight for time, Ms MacDonald; I have referred to you in my speech.

My point is that it was a United Kingdom Parliament that put an end to slavery and that Scotland was part of that. It was also as part of the United Kingdom that we led the fight against totalitarianism in all its insidious forms, from fascism to communism. Patricia Ferguson quite rightly reminded us of the STUC’s role every year in ensuring that we never forget the importance of that fight. It was together, as part of the United Kingdom, that we created what is perhaps the most respected public health institution in the world—the national health service, which continues to ensure that everyone in the United Kingdom, regardless of status, receives the health service that they need free of charge. It is interesting that it was also together, as part of that United Kingdom, that we brought a common market to the nations of our union a century before Europe did. That common market brought unparalleled prosperity to the partners of the UK. However, it is clear from listening to members on the SNP benches and to the cabinet secretary’s speech that there is a belief, which we hear about with increasing frequency, that Scotland—they claim—is hampered by the union. We are, they insist, somehow held back because we are part of the UK. Only with independence, they assert, can we really be a successful nation. However, that incantation is nothing more than tilting at windmills, because we did not achieve those defining successes alone. Rather, we accomplished them together as a union of nations. In doing so, we crafted who we are as people as well as who we are as a people. Nationalism, with its instinct to look inwards, neglects that fact. In a globalised world, separatism cannot be the answer. At exactly the time when we should be working together to face the difficult challenges and uncertainties that abound in our modern world, I must question how separation can help that. The difficulty with separation is the risk—I am not saying that the SNP is culpable; I am just saying that it can happen—of introspection and marginalisation. St Andrew’s reach throughout the United Kingdom as well as the world shows us how interconnected are our identities, cultures, histories, successes and—most important of all—our futures. I add my name to those who proudly celebrate Scotland, speaking out for the majority of Scots who celebrate our successes not alone, but as part of an enduring union. I move amendment S4M-04970.1, after “culture” to insert: “, as well as Scotland’s place in, and shared history, identity and culture with, the UK,”.

The member might have misconstrued what I said. I was clear in paying tribute to the cabinet secretary, who, as Margo MacDonald pointed out, listed many welcome and positive activities as part of the celebration of St Andrew’s day. I merely observed that hundreds of thousands of Scots believe that we cannot look at the issue in a complete vacuum and that there is a shared history and culture. I think that it is right to reflect that.

In this debate, I have tried to illustrate that I believe that we can be Scottish and British. I and an awful lot of other people do not have a problem with that. I am just sorry that other members in the chamber seem to find it completely repugnant.

Ms McAlpine makes a legitimate contribution to the debate, but I point out two things. First, I have never in any way indicated that I feel that I have to apologise for being Scottish. Margo MacDonald, to her credit, acknowledged that. I am as proud as anyone can be to be Scottish. Secondly, I think that Joan McAlpine will acknowledge that the Jamaicans to whom she refers, at least in the UK, can vote for a Westminster Parliament. They are not sitting in isolation but making a contribution to the broader sense of fellowship.

4. To ask the Scottish Government when it will publish the cost and cost benefit analysis of the high-speed rail project between Glasgow and Edinburgh. (S4O-01509)

On 12 November, the Deputy First Minister announced, amid clouds of rhetoric, the intention to cut the train journey time between Glasgow and Edinburgh to under 30 minutes by 2024. That was all very exciting, but the distinction between a realistic aspiration and pie in the sky propaganda is a fine one. In 2007, the Scottish Government costed the project at £7 billion. Is that figure still relevant and, if not, by how much is it irrelevant?

I too thank Nigel Don for bringing the debate to the chamber. Scotland has a wealth of artistic talent, especially when it comes to TV and film production, and it was my pleasure to cover some of that territory in the recent members’ business debate on “River City”. Mr Don is correct to refer to the importance of that creative presence in Scotland. Our creative industries employ 60,000 people across more than 9,000 businesses, and approximately 15,000 people are employed in Scotland’s screen industries alone. We currently attract £20 million to £25 million a year in location spend from production companies that are shooting films and television productions here. The annual production spend on the screen industries in Scotland is £243 million. All of that is a significant contributor to the economy, and it also benefits tourism. Interestingly, film tourism accounts for 10 per cent of the total value of tourism to the British economy, and it is vital that we tap into that. The forthcoming film of “Sunset Song”, the Lewis Grassic Gibbon classic, is an exciting prospect for Scotland. I note Mr Don’s specific concern about there being no “long-lasting legacy or benefit” from that production, but in that regard I am perhaps where John Mason was in the final part of his contribution. It is correct that we should never take anything for granted, but I wonder whether Mr Don’s pessimism is entirely justified. In the past 60 years, Scotland has starred in and benefited from many film classics that have been shot in various locations and have showcased the beauty of our country. Epics such as “Whisky Galore!”, “The Maggie”, “Geordie”, “The Thirty-Nine Steps”, “Gregory’s Girl” and “Local Hero” are written into film legend, and undoubtedly created a positive impression of Scotland, enhancing visitor interest.

That is a very helpful contribution to the debate and it bears out what both Mr Mason and I are saying. Recently, the Harry Potter films, “Brave” and the new Bond film, “Skyfall”, have all generated widespread interest in Scotland and there are good examples of Scotland capitalising on that. Following the release of “Brave”, VisitScotland has launched a movie map that “allows visitors to explore the castles, culture and myths of Scotland - where legends come to life.” It highlights the castles, myths and landscapes that inspired Disney Pixar during the making of the film. VisitBritain is mounting its biggest ever film tourism campaign to cash in on the release of “Skyfall”. Its initiative is aimed at persuading families to holiday in Scotland who might have been deterred earlier in the year due to major events such as the London Olympics or the Queen’s diamond jubilee. VisitScotland is not participating in that £3 million campaign, although scenes were filmed in Glen Coe. However, VisitScotland is screening adverts in trailers before “Skyfall” across the country as part of its autumn surprise yourself campaign. The one intervention that poses a question mark above the enduring attraction of Scotland as a film location is of course the ubiquitous presence of wind farms but, thankfully, city locations are proving popular. We know that the use of Scotland as a film location can bring a myriad of lasting benefits. That has been happening over the years and we know that there are strategies to capitalise on that. It may be that more can be done in the post-production area to cement that legacy, and Nigel Don is right to highlight that potential. We shall look forward to “Sunset Song” translating into a film classic that showcases the north-east of Scotland and the rest of our country.

5. To ask the Scottish Government if it is satisfied with the choice of drugs available to cancer patients. (S4O-01463)

As the cabinet secretary might be aware, earlier this month the skin cancer drugs Zelboraf and Yervoy were approved for use in England. That those drugs are not available to skin cancer patients in Scotland is distressing and incomprehensible. Will the cabinet secretary ask Professor Routledge and Professor Bill Scott to consider how greater flexibility might be introduced into the system in order to avoid such anomalies occurring? It is a question not just of their occurring across Scotland, but of their occurring across the border.

I apologise to Mr Adam for bringing the debate back to Scotland, but does the member think that there is any logic to a college in Greenock merging with a college in his home town of Paisley and another college across the Clyde in Clydebank? If the cabinet secretary’s logic is sustainable, we might as well close all three and have a new college at the Erskine bridge.

I thank the Scottish Government for bringing forward this debate. Putting it into a timeframe will provide a helpful perspective. The new strategy was the product of budget negotiations between my party and the Scottish Government in 2008. Prior to that there was no strategy; methadone was a management tool. I remember saying then, with reference to the road to recovery: “That road will be challenging and in places very rocky, but at least we are on it.”—[Official Report, 4 June 2008; c 9282.] That remains important. Four and a half years on we need to examine the pace of progress in delivering the strategy, as we also constantly need to explore fresh options and initiatives that may support that delivery. The general backdrop of the prevalence of drug abuse in Scotland is still very troubling. For example, we know from official figures that the number of drug users has increased substantially over the past decade. Reference has already been made to drug-related deaths and a depressing statistic in the 2011 figures was the confirmation that, for the first time, the number of methadone-related deaths exceeded heroin-related deaths. However, that might be down to a reduction in heroin users, who are moving on to harm reduction programmes. We know that the stubbornly high level of drug finds in prison continues to present a challenge. Recent figures disclose that, last year, there were more than 1,700 finds and, for the nine months up to 30 September this year, 1,322. We also know that in 2011-12 the number of drug offences recorded by the police increased on the preceding year. However, as the minister said, progress is being made among younger people and I have to ask where we would be had the strategy never been put in place. It is instructive to remind ourselves of its main components. It was about making a fresh start, preventing drug use, promoting recovery and ensuring that a range of appropriate treatment and rehabilitation services was available locally. Nevertheless, as the figures I have cited illustrate, we still face a major challenge. In that light, we need to investigate the disclosure that there is unused rehab capacity throughout Scotland. The very welcome review mentioned in the motion would be a sensible move, hence the first part of my amendment. We should also note that since 2008-09 the overall number of residential drug treatment centres in Scotland has fallen from 29 to 23, which is regrettable given that such centres work. Let me now try to put the issue of methadone prescribing into context. It is very unhelpful—

Much of the evidence is anecdotal. However, having spoken to rehab facilities in my area, heard first-hand accounts from those who have recovered and seen the positive and clean lives that they are now leading, I think that such centres are impressive. Polarising the debate is very unhelpful in any discussion of methadone prescribing. At one end of the spectrum, there is the view that methadone is harmful and expensive and should not be prescribed to anyone; at the other end, there is the view that it is a positive intervention that delivers a crime-free life of stability to the patient and should in no circumstances be interfered with. The true position is somewhere in between. I accept that, depending on the individual, methadone might provide a bridge from the chaos of illegal using to a more stable existence. I have to say, though, that I consider sensationalist articles in tabloid newspapers to be unhelpful. That said, given that the road to recovery anticipates a range of options, I would also consider it unfortunate if someone seeking help who did not want to be prescribed methadone was given no alternative. As has been indicated, we know that methadone prescriptions—and their costs—have increased significantly. However, information on the number of patients who are on methadone is not available and we do not know how many have come off methadone or have had their prescriptions reduced. It will be quite difficult to make any objective assessment of the range of available options implicit in the strategy if we do not have the basic data. However, I expect prescribers and their patients to be engaged in a judgment as to whether a prescription could be reduced or ultimately ceased. Methadone patients who are constituents have told me that they have found it difficult to engage in such discussions; indeed, some have been discouraged from even embarking on them. That such discussions can be usefully pursued is evident from the methadone cessation pilot in North, East and South Ayrshire, which comes under the alcohol and drug partnerships and is aimed at supporting long-term methadone users. The only conclusion that anyone who reads the report of the pilot can reach is that it has had a whole host of positive outcomes from cessation and reduction of scripts to the people in question moving into education or even employment. Given the levels that methadone prescriptions have reached, given that we know how many patients wish to discuss their programme and given the success of the cessation pilot, I feel that the review could examine how more information could be provided to patients—hence the second strand of my amendment. I also want the review to be open-minded about other replacement therapies. Might, for example, neuroelectric therapy, which is available in Scotland, play a role? How well does it work? What is the experience of it? Is there any evidence on it? There are many other positive areas that the review could explore. However, underpinning all of this is the presence of a solid strategy that has the capacity to make a huge difference, and I thank the minister for bringing the debate to the chamber. I move amendment S4M-04719.1, to insert at end: “; believes that the success of the national drugs strategy derives from flexibility of approach toward and availability of options for those seeking recovery from problem drug use, and considers that these objectives would be usefully served by inclusion in the review of an inquiry into why there is underused capacity in rehabilitation facilities and consideration by the review of how more information might be made available to methadone patients about their treatment programme.”

9. To ask the Scottish Government what steps have been taken since the introduction of the road to recovery programme to monitor the number of patients on methadone who have either had their prescription reduced or have ceased taking it. (S4O-01394)

I thank the minister for what was possibly the fullest answer that I have ever received to a question of this type in the chamber. I welcome the fact that the data are to be produced, although it is unfortunate that we will have to wait until December for them. Will the data specifically include a treatment regime for methadone patients whereby they are entitled to know the clinical advice about the duration of the programme and whether there is any possibility, at their request, of having their dosage reduced?

There are few more important subjects than our criminal justice system, because at the heart of any society is the public’s confidence that those who break the law will be dealt with fairly and without prejudice and that justice will be done. The victim expects that, the accused is entitled to it, and the public interest requires it. Those fundamental tenets must be kept to the fore in any debate about our criminal justice system. Above all else, as other members have indicated, the criminal courts do not exist to provide public entertainment or media gratification. That is the umbrella that I want to hoist up before I consider in more detail the important issues that have emerged during the debate. It is not surprising that the main elements in the debate have focused on the Contempt of Court Act 1981 and the possibility of extending the televising of criminal court proceedings. Let me therefore deal with the 1981 act first. The 1981 act was passed in a communications environment that was dramatically different from what we know today, but the underlying principle of the act remains important and relevant: to ensure that the course of justice and court proceedings could not be seriously impeded or prejudiced by the publication of material and that a person who created a substantial risk of such impediment or prejudice would become strictly liable for such publication of material, thereby committing a statutory contempt. There is also a common law contempt, which requires the proof of mens rea—an intention to prejudice the court proceedings. The whole reason for the underlying principle of avoiding impediment and prejudice to justice is to ensure that the guilty are convicted and that, in so far as possible, the conviction is safe from challenge. Although the world of communication has been transformed by the advent of the internet and social media, which has brought a new raft of challenges to preserving justice in criminal court proceedings, we must not lose sight of the fundamental principle of protecting and preserving justice. That is paramount when we consider any reform. There are two prerequisites that the Justice Committee might consider before any amendment to the 1981 act is contemplated. First, research should be carried out to gather empirical evidence about the impact of the internet and social media on juries. As my colleague John Lamont said, accessing information online is not the same as being influenced by that information, but we need data on the issue. Secondly, there is a need for official guidance now on the use of live communication devices from the court. The Lord Chief Justice of England and Wales last year issued guidance on the issue. Can there be some indication as to whether the Lord President in Scotland has reflected on that guidance? The convener of the Justice Committee may wish to clarify that point direct with the Lord President. I will now reflect on televising court proceedings. As others have indicated, a limited facility already exists, but it is interesting that it is restricted to hearings that do not involve witness testimony. Those who support extending the scope of televised proceedings believe that it would strengthen the principle of justice being seen to be done and better serve the public interest. I am very clearly of the opinion that exactly the same criteria as apply to determining contempt of court and what is acceptable communication from the court apply to televising court proceedings: those who break the law will be dealt with fairly and without prejudice; justice will be done; the guilty will be convicted; and, in so far as possible, the conviction will be safe from challenge. As I said, the courts exist to deliver justice, not to provide entertainment. The current—and in my opinion correct—emphasis on fairness, impartiality and transparency does not derive from some abstract tenet of benevolent philosophy to make everyone feel good; it exists to minimise the possibility of prejudice, oppression and collusion resulting in unsafe convictions and miscarriages of justice. That is because the public interest and the victim expect that convictions should be sound and safe against challenge. It is completely flawed to confuse the principle of justice being seen to be done with the notion that every man and his dog requires to view the minutiae of court proceedings. Mary Fee and Colin Keir alluded to that aspect. The reality is that the average man and his dog could not give a toss about the detail of court proceedings and court procedure. He may be interested in the identity of the accused, the charge against the accused and a summary of the evidence—all of which he can learn from news reporting. Indeed, that will also be sufficient to alert a member of the public that he or she may have evidence relevant to the case. None of that requires detailed viewing of the proceedings. In relation to the particular issue of the public interest, I think that it is very clearly defined. It is a confidence that the guilty will be convicted and that the conviction will not be vulnerable to challenge because of prejudice to the accused or a lack of impartiality, or because nervous and frightened witnesses were unable to give clear evidence. Graeme Pearson referred to that aspect. I can see the public interest being disserved by any significant expansion of televised court proceedings, especially if that intrudes on occasions when witnesses are giving testimony. Media coverage will distort the court environment. The accused, who may be innocent, could look shifty and edgy; witnesses who are already nervous could become agitated and confused; and bold, but lying witnesses could look confident and convincing. That has the makings of a parallel trial. The one aspect of public interest that I do not agree with is the view that, because the taxpayer pays for the judges, the courts and the legally aided solicitor, the public is entitled to know what is going on. By that analogy, because surgeons, nurses and theatre porters are paid for by the public, we would have viewing galleries in the operating theatres of our hospitals. There are perplexing issues in relation to the media’s role, and it is healthy and encouraging that the Justice Committee is looking at those issues.

I urge the utmost caution in contemplating the extension of televised court procedures because I would have serious concerns were the coverage to include witness testimony.

Maybe I will not be eligible for a lanyard, but if one comes I will be happy to accept it. Given the importance to the areas surrounding Glasgow of the impact of any successful bid, will the minister engage with other local authorities—for example, those in Renfrewshire and, on the north side of the Clyde, in Dunbartonshire—to consider what input they might have and what contribution they might make?

I am pleased to have the opportunity to add to this important debate on the future of the Gaelic language in Scotland. Unlike the minister, who spoke fluently in Gaelic, but perhaps luckily for members, translators and Gaelic speakers across Scotland, I will not attempt to deliver any of what I have to say on the national Gaelic plan in our ancestral mother tongue. To say that I would mangle that beautiful language would be an understatement. I am pleased to take the opportunity again to pledge the Scottish Conservatives’ support for the Gaelic language. As members of different parties have pointed out in the Parliament on a number of occasions, it was the Conservatives who ignited the Gaelic revival, in the early 1980s, by delivering £16 million of funding support for that purpose. We continue to work in co-operation with our partners to ensure that that impetus is sustained. As we heard, the Gaelic language forms an intrinsic part of Scotland’s history and culture. The temporal reach of Gaelic is not limited to the past; the language connects us to our future and informs the evolution of our society, our identities and our characters. Gaelic was a thriving language with more than 230,000 speakers in the late 1800s, but the number of speakers dwindled to just under 60,000 at the most recent count. Although the Gaelic decline has been less pronounced over recent decades, the language’s designation by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in 2009 as a world-endangered language adds a new level of importance and urgency to the Gaelic debate. When it comes to language, there is very much one guiding principle: use it or lose it, as the minister himself said. The national Gaelic plan underlines that simple truth and correctly identifies the key role that education plays in the survival of Gaelic. In that connection, I wonder whether it is worth exploring nursery education. I vividly remember visiting a nursery in Paisley some years ago where children were learning elementary French from an early age. The children had the most remarkable, sponge-like capacity to absorb words and phrases. Knowledge acquired at that age sticks with us—just as nursery rhymes do. In many communities, there are older Gaelic speakers who might be interested in contributing their knowledge at that level. Perhaps the minister will reflect on that. It is encouraging that Bòrd na Gàidhlig has said that it will play a crucial part in Gaelic teacher recruitment as well as improving “workforce planning ... and education of Gaelic teachers.” However, that is not in itself a fully formed strategy; it is merely a statement of how things should be and how we would like them to be. Time and again in the national Gaelic plan, essential detail about the realisation of the stated outcomes is missing. Therefore, I ask the minister to elaborate on what the board’s new role in teacher recruitment, planning and education will entail and what will be done to achieve the board’s ambitious outcomes of doubling the annual Gaelic-medium education intake to 800 by 2017, increasing the number of pupils who are engaged in Gaelic learning education and expanding the availability of Gaelic-medium subjects in secondary schools. Education in itself is by no means sufficient to save Gaelic from further decline, as the minister acknowledged. UNESCO has noted that “the most crucial factor is the attitude of the speaker community towards its own language.” Gaelic speakers must therefore be encouraged to optimise the use of Gaelic and to foster its growth outwith as well as within their communities. With there being more than 90,000 people in Scotland with an ability in the Gaelic language but only 60,000 who actually speak it, the Government and the board still have plenty of work to do in harnessing the unrealised potential of that silent 30,000. Identifying strategic priorities and listing outcomes that are to be achieved show ambition and are part of an important strategy, but we need creative collaboration between communities and Government, and inventive solutions for how best to engage those who have an interest in learning the language. Once again, the detail on how that will be achieved is made conspicuous by its absence from the plan. It is also imperative that the ambitious language of the proposed strategy and the outcomes that are identified in the plan translate into tangible achievements. That is particularly true given the increased cash funding for Gaelic that was announced in last month’s budget. That is welcome, but in times of limited budgets and scarce resources the Scottish Government as well as the board must be able to show that money is being spent wisely and effectively by delivering material outcomes. That might mean focusing spending on areas and in communities in which increased teaching provision matches identified interest from learners, so that the combination of the two can reasonably be expected to contribute to an expanded awareness and use of the language. It is for that reason that the Scottish Conservatives have lodged an amendment that the Government should devise a mechanism to measure whether the national Gaelic plan is delivering the specific outcomes that it identifies and that we all want to see. Although the board will monitor the implementation of development activities, the importance of the issue—not to mention the considerable sums of public money that are at stake—requires the Government to undertake an assessment of how the board and the plan are working. Our amendment is intended to be constructive, and I hope that it is seen as such. I end by underlining the fact that we in Scotland do not exist in isolation, and the problems that the Gaelic language faces are by no means exclusive to Scotland. UNESCO’s endangered languages programme supports communities and Governments in promoting endangered languages by providing services such as policy advice, technical expertise and training, and a platform for the exchange and transfer of innovative ideas and good practice between countries that are threatened with the loss of a language. We should take full advantage of that expertise, and I invite the minister to comment on the role that he envisages for international collaboration in the implementation of the national Gaelic plan—the plan is silent on that. Although the national Gaelic language plan should not be seen as a panacea for all the Gaelic language’s woes, and although it is imperative that words on the page are translated into tangible outcomes, the plan is to be welcomed for charting a course in the right direction to ensure the continued survival of Gaelic. That is what we all want. I support the motion and I move amendment S4M-04313.1, to insert at end: “and that the Scottish Government should devise a mechanism to measure whether or not the strategy is delivering improvement against the outcomes and priorities that it identifies in the plan.”

The debate has been interesting, if somewhat familiar. Last December, Parliament debated the Carloway review recommendations; nine months later, the Scottish Government has failed to advance the debate, because we are now considering a consultation that largely replicates the recommendations in the report, despite extensive criticism surrounding the proposed ending of corroboration. Although it is understandable—as the cabinet secretary said—that the controversial proposal to abolish corroboration has been the focus of comment and debate during the past few months, another important element has been overlooked: the fact that the review recommendations that relate to arrest, detention, custody, investigation and the interrogation of suspects all go to the very heart of compliance with the European convention on human rights. We must do all that we can to avoid the situation that arose out of the Cadder case, when Parliament was forced to debate emergency legislation to ensure that Scots law complied with basic human rights. That failure lay with the Scottish Executive of the time. It did not, as the First Minister and Cabinet Secretary have suggested in the past, lie with the Supreme Court. However, there is clearly a debate to be had surrounding the abolition of corroboration; one has only to listen to the contributions from members this afternoon—including, encouragingly, from some Scottish National Party back benchers. The abolition of corroboration might mean that more people can be prosecuted, but that does not mean that more people will be convicted. Experience suggests that where the burden of proof is reduced for the prosecutor, reasonable doubt may loom larger for the jury. If a jury is in doubt after hearing all the evidence, because non-corroborated prosecution evidence is simply denied by the accused, the jury will acquit or find not proven. I have to say that I thought that Christine Grahame made a robust and courageous speech in that respect.

In support of the point that I have just advanced, I remember the review of sexual offences that was published in 2006. It made 50 recommendations that were designed to improve the investigation and prosecution of rape and other sexual crimes. All 50 recommendations, including a number on decisions to prosecute and evidential requirements, were implemented by the summer of 2009. However, convictions for rape and attempted rape still remain very low—indeed, they were at their lowest level in 2010-11, when the proportion of reported rapes and reported attempted rapes leading to conviction was 3 per cent. A number of members—including Colin Keir and Sandra White—rightly signalled their concerns. I urge the cabinet secretary to listen very carefully to those concerns. It is also the case that if a jury does convict, an equally alarming consequence of the abolition of corroboration is the prospect of miscarriages of justice, particularly if—as some members have indicated—related aspects of Scots criminal law are not also considered. The SNP has undergone something of a change of heart on the issue. The Cabinet Secretary now describes corroboration as a rule “that stems from another age” and appears to be hell-bent on abolishing it, regardless of what the experts say. However, I observe that he is the same individual who thought it appropriate to claim that two of Scotland’s most senior and universally respected judges in the Supreme Court had gained their knowledge of Scots law through visits to the Edinburgh festival. The cabinet secretary has previously castigated the Cadder decision as being one that “overturns decades of criminal procedure in Scotland, a proud, distinctive, justice system, developed over centuries, and predicated on fairness with many rigorous protections for accused persons.” Those are bold and stalwart words that I entirely support. The irony is mocking: by “rigorous protections” the cabinet secretary was, of course, referring primarily to—yes—corroboration; a principle of evidence that he robustly supported when lambasting the evil Supreme Court. The Law Society of Scotland, the Faculty of Advocates and Justice Scotland have all warned against implementing the corroboration recommendation in isolation. This is not about the establishment resisting change—this is about effecting change that makes things better, not worse. We are talking about getting a major change to a criminal legal system right and not reforming it in a higgledy-piggledy and illogical fashion. Removing the requirement for corroboration without seriously considering introducing other safeguards against miscarriages of justice would not only be dangerous; it would also be a missed opportunity to consider related matters. Some of those matters have been referred to this afternoon; for example, majority verdicts, and the burden of proof in criminal cases being beyond reasonable doubt. Should Scottish judges be able to warn juries about the reliability of a single piece of evidence, as is the case in England and Wales? What about the not proven verdict? The Scottish Government’s consultation has given only passing consideration to those questions. It is, perhaps, unsurprising that Lord Carloway did not recommend a full-scale review of Scottish criminal procedure. That was not his remit, as Christine Grahame rightly observed, but the proposal to abolish corroboration in isolation is causing widespread unease, which is clearly shared by members of Parliament across the political parties. In December last year, the convener of the Justice Committee, Christine Grahame, listed no fewer than seven concerns that she had heard against removal of the requirement for corroboration without wider reform. Stewart Maxwell has called for a debate on majority verdicts, and Colin Keir has said that now is the appropriate time to re-examine the three verdicts. Almost a year on, it is worrying that the Scottish Government has failed to listen to such legitimate and reasonable concerns, many of which have been echoed by the cabinet secretary’s own colleagues during this afternoon’s debate. Although I appreciate that the cabinet secretary wants to press ahead with the useful reforms that Lord Carloway has proposed, I urge him to exclude corroboration from the forthcoming criminal justice bill. The issue needs to be part of a wider debate and it needs to be informed by the very sort of evidence that Mary Fee, to her credit, confessed she did not have, and which Christine Grahame quite rightly indicated is an essential part of informing the debate. For that reason, although I have found today’s debate to be genuinely interesting, I support my colleague, Margaret Mitchell’s, amendment.

I want to test the member’s presumption. In my speech, I referred to evidence that shows that the significant changes to the way in which we prosecute rape, attempted rape and sexual offences have not led to an increase in convictions. How can the member assert that simple abolition of corroboration will ensure more convictions?

I am grateful to the cabinet secretary for outlining to the chamber the eminent origins and the genesis of this important principle, but if it was rubbish—as he seems to think—why has it endured for so long?

Does the cabinet secretary accept that increasing the number of accused brought to trial will be a complete chimera if we do not increase the number of convictions based on persons presented for trial?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to deal with the reported increase in binge drinking at home. (S4O-01276)

In Renfrewshire and Inverclyde, the police are increasingly being called to attend at very violent incidents that arise from binge drinking in the home. Usually, the perpetrator has a history of antisocial behaviour that is known to the landlord. Will the cabinet secretary ask his colleague the Minister for Housing and Welfare to consult housing associations on how engagement with local police might be earlier and closer when such antisocial behaviour becomes apparent, to avoid its escalation into the troubling pattern of violence that is emerging?

3. To ask the First Minister what safeguards exist to protect taxpayers against improper use of public funds by Government agencies. (S4F-00870)

Scottish Enterprise has been demonstrating its own imaginative approach to stimulating economic growth in Scotland and protecting the taxpayer, with junior employees withdrawing thousands of pounds on the organisation’s corporate credit cards for personal use. How some businesses would love that kind of flexible friend. If that is the experience at Scotland’s enterprise agency, heaven knows what may be going on elsewhere in the public sector. Will the First Minister instruct an urgent investigation into use of corporate credit cards by his Government agencies, to ensure that more robust safeguards for protection of the taxpayer are applied across the board?

I, too, thank Christine Grahame for securing the debate. The great Polish map of Scotland that was conceived by General Maczek and Jan Tomasik is a remarkable and enduring tribute to the warm relationship between exiled Polish forces and the people of Scotland that was prominent during the second world war. It is also a tribute to the skills of the young geographers from the Jagiellonian University of Kraków who, in 1975, created the map on the site of the former wartime tactical map that their Polish predecessors had designed on the putting green of the hotel. It would be regrettable if this unusual tribute and memorial were to risk sustained deterioration. It is encouraging that, in 2010, the Mapa Scotland group was formed to restore the map fully to its original condition and to promote it as a heritage monument, educational resource and visitor attraction. The £20,000 grant from the UK Heritage Lottery Fund is a welcome boost, as is the co-operation of the hotel owners, to which Christine Grahame referred. I congratulate them and Mapa Scotland on their endeavours. The recently conferred listed status should afford further protection. Of course, the great Polish map of Scotland is just one development that reflects the long-standing relationship between Scotland and Poland. I will broaden out the debate to explore and comment on that. Polish immigration has enriched Scotland’s culture and has strengthened our economy over many years. If I may be permitted a little self-indulgence, I note that one of my favourite composers is Frédéric Chopin. He is widely regarded as perhaps the greatest Polish composer and is among the greatest composers of all time for the piano. An important influence on Chopin’s life was his Scottish pupil, Jane Stirling. With her encouragement, he visited Scotland in 1848, staying at Calder house, near Edinburgh, and at Johnstone castle in Renfrewshire, my home area. While he was in Edinburgh, he spent time residing at the home of a Polish doctor, Adam Lyszczynski, by whom he was being treated. By contrast, Renfrewshire must have seemed slightly forbidding, as Chopin wrote to his friend, Wojciech Grzymala: “The weather has changed and it is dreadful outside.” Some things do not change very much. The connections between Poland and Scotland are of long standing. In 2012, although not a lot has changed about the Renfrewshire weather, the social climate for our Renfrewshire Polish community is very positive. In February, the Renfrewshire Polish Association was established to bring support to the Polish community living in Renfrewshire and to promote Polish culture in the area. The association’s activities are directed at various age groups, and it aims to provide access to the widest possible part of the Polish community but with a focus on Renfrewshire. Its objectives are to organise events for children, encouraging their development and integration with peers and teaching them the Polish language; to organise events related to Polish traditions and culture; to hold events that allow the Polish minority to integrate with the Scottish community and other national minorities in Renfrewshire; to encourage self-development and improve self-confidence within the Polish community; and, importantly, to assist with the acquisition and improvement of work-related qualifications and language skills. Given that Polish immigrants face many challenges, the Renfrewshire Polish Association, with its committed volunteers, is doing excellent work both to support my local Polish community and to enhance Renfrewshire. I thank the association for that invaluable work. Given the abundance of musical talent in Renfrewshire, perhaps the Renfrewshire Polish Association would like to consider a Frédéric Chopin celebratory event in memory of his visit to Johnstone 164 years ago. Without doubt, any problems of weather would be more than eclipsed by the beauty of his music. I thank all our Polish residents, wherever they are in Scotland, for enriching our Scottish communities.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what proposals it has to revive town centres. (S4T-00029)

In the previous parliamentary session, my party secured the popular town centre regeneration fund and I welcome any review that will contribute to sustaining such regeneration. However, the Scottish Government is charging ahead with proposals to tax empty property for which there is no market demand and, in doing so, is getting egg all over its face. Will it hold back that legislation until the review group has reported, to ensure that what the minister, Derek Mackay, said in the Parliament in June will happen—that rates reform is not implemented in isolation—does so?

Although I am grateful to the minister for her response and am enticed by her argument, will she not accept that the sensible thing would be to allow the review group, which is commendable in all respects, to report and then to reflect on whether the proposed tax on empty property is a meaningful or sensible way forward?

It is a great pleasure to open this debate, which is the first Thursday lunch-time members’ business debate in our new parliamentary timetable—I am sure that the residents of Shieldinch will be captivated by such change. I thank everyone who has supported the motion and extend a warm welcome to any visitors in the public gallery who are connected with “River City”, although I rather think that the interest of colleagues has less to do with political inquisitiveness about the cultural genre of soap and more to do with the condition of aspirant luvvies. I still remember my reaction to the early instalments of “River City” back in 2002. I was so impressed that I thought that it should be abolished. Indeed, I shared my thoughts with the then controller of BBC Scotland, John McCormick, who—quite rightly identifying that he was conversing with someone whose grasp of screen culture was slender—informed me that a soap needed time to bed down and that a second series had been commissioned. After I had recovered from the shock of that unwelcome announcement, I thought, “Well, it’s so ghastly it will probably self-destruct, and we shall all be rid of the whole unhappy affair.” I could not have been more wrong, because I decided to watch the new series and I was hooked, as were a lot of other people. Now, the Tuesday programme has an average audience of 420,000, and, when the Sunday repeat and the BBC iPlayer catch-up are factored in, that figure rises to around 500,000 a week, which is no small achievement. That all adds up to a significant drama success for BBC Scotland, a positive contribution to Scottish culture, an impressive showcase for our Scottish acting talent and an important economic boost for Dumbarton and the wider Scottish economy. That is why I think that it is important that the Scottish Parliament should acknowledge and celebrate the 10th anniversary of this Scottish success. I have not constructed this speech along the lines of a “River City” script—that might have held members’ attention, but they would have needed a lie-down afterwards. However, it is worth looking at some of the facts behind the entertainment—I thank the BBC for the provision of this helpful information. Including dailies and casual labour, the drama, which is filmed in Dumbarton, employs up to 200 people over the course of a year, with a core of 90 crew when in production, 25 main cast, 60 guest cast, four child actors and 150 extras, 90 per cent of whom are local. It films all year round, but the programme is prepared during only two 14-week periods, which enables the crew to work on other productions, encourages a healthy turnover of production talent and enables productions such as “Garrow’s Law”, “The Eagle” and “The Deep” to utilise the facilities at Dumbarton. That leads me to the economic impact. The programme uses local supporting artists, equipment is hired locally and the crew shop locally. According to a draft report on the economic impact of BBC Scotland’s Dumbarton studios that was prepared by Strathleven Regeneration CIC, the cumulative regional gross value added to Dumbarton is around £140 million, and the cumulative national gross value added is around £45 million. As Shellsuit Bob might say to Deke, “Nae small money that, pal.” Let us move on to deal with the entertainment component of this much-loved soap. “River City” has gripped the public imagination, pulled the heartstrings and brought tears of sorrow and laughter to the watching eyes of Scotland as we have shared the highs and lows of life in Shieldinch. With 500,000 fans viewing each week, BBC Scotland has found a winning formula that encapsulates urban life and the distinctive grain of Scottish character. However, with hard-hitting and gritty storylines, it has also created a social commentary that many people can identify with. To me, that is a tremendously important part of its success, reassuring people that they are not alone in the challenges that confront communities and individuals and providing useful signposts for help—all of that, of course, brought alive with vibrancy and pace by gifted actors, compelling scripts and the highest professional standards of direction and production. The BBC is to run an online vote to let the drama’s fans choose their favourite moment from the last 10 years of the programme. There will be no shortage of suggestions. Challenging issues have been taken head on, including drugs abuse, alcoholism, prison, gangland mafia, marriage breakdown, stillbirth, unemployment, homophobia, Alzheimer’s and the embezzling lawyer. Those are just some of the issues, but all the programmes have been skilfully scripted, sensitively acted and superbly directed. Another important dimension is that “River City” has evolved into a significant social medium. As members of the Scottish Parliament, we know the raw side of human nature—the frightened, the wronged, the lost, the abandoned and the lonely. Sometimes, one of the most difficult decisions for an individual to make is to speak to someone—to anyone. “River City”, by representing those difficult issues in a realistic way and then offering, either within the script or at the end of the programme, signposts towards help, is doing something invaluable. That is not an argument for people to live their lives through a soap; it is recognising that, for some people, vital companionship and communication can be provided by a soap, and there is a world of difference between the two. Of course, there are lighter moments. Who would want Molly as a mother-in-law or Scarlett as a daughter-in-law? We have to admire that fierce defence of family against all comers, because it strikes a chord with us. Kelly-Marie, Madonna, Shellsuit Bob and Big Bob really have a formidable duo of matriarchs looking out for them. Of course, I have my own views about what Shieldinch might want to embrace in the future. Surely, it cannot remain immune from the constitutional debate. Eileen must have an opinion, because she does on everything else. Will Lenny be part of the yes campaign and, if so, does it want him? Is Liz a confirmed unionist? What does Scarlett think of the curriculum for excellence? I fear for Mike Russell if she ever expresses a view. Who knows what will unfold in the Oyster Cafe and the Tall Ship in the coming months and years? I thank and congratulate the BBC and everyone who is involved in “River City”, who make the programme the gem that it is, and I send very best wishes to Shieldinch for the future.

I, too, thank George Adam for securing the debate. His motion eloquently celebrates an event that is of great historic significance to Paisley, and it highlights the wider benefits of such occasions to all communities. I observe, in relation to our visitors in the gallery, that proceedings in Parliament can be very unpredictable. Who knows what might unfold during the debate? When I was a small child, my parents regularly pointed out to me the circle in the Paisley street where the charred remains of the last perpetrators of witchcraft were buried, and that became part of my local folklore. As both George Adam and Graeme Dey have said, the unfortunate individuals had allegedly bewitched an 11-year-old Bargarran girl, Christian Shaw. Bargarran lies between my home village of Bishopton and the town of Erskine. She was supposedly a smart and lively girl. Well, we are all like that in my area—the people in the public gallery this evening are testament to that. She alleged that she had been cursed by the servant Catherine Campbell, as a consequence of which poor Christian took fits, saw strange visions, levitated and claimed that others were torturing her body. We have not seen any of that in this Parliament—at least, not yet. As George Adam and Graeme Dey said, an unhappy fate awaited the perpetrators. One miscreant—James Reid—hung himself in his cell and the remaining six were strangled at the stake on the Gallow Green in Paisley, after which their bodies were burned on a blazing bonfire. Afterwards, their charred remains were buried at Maxwellton cross at a site that is marked by a horseshoe and the circle of cobbled stones to which I have referred. All that is gruesome, ghastly and ghoulish but is, in its own way, a rich cultural legacy. What became of young Christian? She went on to become a successful businesswoman and manufacturer of thread. She and her mother became the founders of Renfrewshire’s textiles industry. On Saturday 9 June 2012, Paisley town centre returned to 1697 and every citizen of Renfrewshire was invited to dress in historical attire, come into town and join in the re-enactment of the event. The Renfrewshire witch hunt 1697, which was spearheaded by the Paisley Development Trust, involved schools, businesses and community groups. Our visitors in the gallery this evening are an impressive representation of the event. I believe that such community-based events are vital to community spirit. They encourage pride in the local area and nurture relationships across all sectors of society. Whether it is the witch hunt in Paisley, the annual papingo shoot at Kilwinning Abbey, Bishopton gala day or a street party for the diamond jubilee, I congratulate everyone who is involved in such community activity and who demonstrates such community spirit. Far too often, we are told that community spirit is dead, but that is certainly not what I see. There are countless examples of it to be found in the west of Scotland, from the events in Paisley to community fairs, gala days, school fêtes and other charitable events. There are also the volunteers who clean up beaches, villages or urban spaces or who just give of their time to help others. I have recently visited Age Concern in Largs, Engage Renfrewshire, the Renton Community Development Trust, Volunteer Centre East Dunbartonshire and the Hessilhead Wildlife Rescue Trust treatment centre—all of which are made possible by volunteers. I congratulate and support the Paisley Development Trust and everyone who is involved with the Renfrewshire witch hunt 1697 event, including our visitors to the gallery this evening. I also congratulate all the people in our local communities who go that extra mile to support their local heritage and identity, to sustain their local culture and to foster community spirit so that their communities can flourish.

For the many people who were left with unpaid bills from homecoming 2009, there is still a bad taste in the mouth. Has the Scottish Government any plans to mitigate the unfortunate legacy from that previous failure? Does it have any plans to reassure people who are going to be involved in the homecoming 2014 that those who provide goods and services will be paid?

The bill is a very important piece of legislation. As points of conflict and debate have tended to surround the new structure for the police force, I will focus my remarks on that. Other members have eloquently commented on the single fire and rescue service. The debate about a national police force is not new; it has surfaced over the years. After all, we have a national health service and a national water and sewerage service, so why not a national police service? I have always felt that a country’s law enforcement body occupies a unique position. Given the nature of what it does and the power that it has, there should be a respectful and respectable distance from the political process and a public confidence in how it discharges its role. Interestingly, since devolution began, there has been discussion about how complaints against the police are handled and how we balance the sensitive and challenging job that we ask the police to do with the legitimate interest of the public, if police conduct gives rise to question, in having that concern addressed. The present structure of several forces with a complaints investigatory function and a police complaints commissioner has provided that distance from the political process and served the public interest. However, the bill creates a very different beast. Graeme Pearson correctly described it as a national police force, and that is what it is. I do not instinctively shy away from that beast. Indeed, as my colleague John Lamont said, my party supported the principle of a single police force, subject to two important conditions. Those were that the savings from such a proposal, having been costed in detail, would demonstrably preserve the presence of front-line officers, which my party were instrumental in securing, and that the distance from the political process and the public confidence in the ability to challenge any abuse of power would be protected. That second condition is of paramount importance when there is a single law enforcement body. At stage 1, the bill as drafted did not allay the concerns of my party, and we chose to abstain at that point. It is disappointing that the strenuous attempts by Graeme Pearson and my colleague John Lamont to address some of those fundamental concerns and to improve the bill have been rejected. The general tenor of the debate suggests that some of those fundamental issues of public interest are not fully recognised. Sarah Boyack made an important point in that regard. Speaking to a very senior police officer who had genuine concerns about the proximity to Government, I found that there was a legitimate anxiety about how the bill would work in practice. Roseanna Cunningham suggested that we are being cynical about the ability of politicians to behave with integrity and probity. My view is that, when we are dealing with something so sensitive, we should create a system that anticipates that every barrel can have a bad apple and that identifies and deals with that possibility, rather than waiting for some disaster to happen and saying, “Goodness—why did we not do something better when we framed the legislation?” I say with reluctance that, under the bill, the principle of a single police force—which my party supports—does not translate into practices that are safe or healthy. Therefore, with regret, I say to the chamber that my party feels unable to support the bill and we will abstain in the vote at decision time.

The minister refers to the interesting period since 2007. Did the minority SNP Scottish Government listen to others because it had to?

I, too, thank Patricia Ferguson for bringing this debate to the chamber. Members’ business debates have traditionally been consensual, but I think that this one is unlikely to be so. However, I harbour a hope that, across the chamber, we can perhaps coalesce around some areas that might point the way towards a better direction of travel. My starting point is a reflection on our Scottish colleges of further education. Historically, they have been unsung and underrated. Of course, the reality was different. Colleges were the accessible, physical presence of further education, providing essential skills in a wide range of trades and occupations and offering school leavers the opportunity to develop and expand on existing educational attainment. Indeed, since being given autonomy of governance, Scotland’s colleges have made an outstanding contribution to education and are to be warmly congratulated on doing so. In Scotland, we have many colleges straddling the country and demonstrating that vital component of local access, and many local economies are crying out for the trades and occupations for which colleges can educate people. It is important that colleges can also, as we know, be the entry point for transition to higher education that can, again, offer affordable local access. I am in no doubt about the vital and flexible educational role that our colleges play or about the importance of their local accessibility. Even with distance learning, that physical presence matters. That is my starting point, and I hope that there is universal acceptance of those virtues. I think that it is generally understood that our young people have a particular reliance on college education. Indeed, Patricia Ferguson, Drew Smith and—to be fair—Bob Doris commented on that. The Scottish Government seems to accept the propositions that I have outlined. Certainly it was, in the most recent election campaign, supportive of the National Union of Students’ reclaim your voice campaign, which among other things was committed to protecting graduate numbers and college places. However, the pledge on student places is one thing, but I fear that the reality is different and troubling. According to Scotland’s Colleges, the reduction in the further education budget will lead to an estimated 20,000 student places being lost. In 2011 alone, approximately 1,000 people were made redundant in the college sector. So, unless they had been twiddling their thumbs, which I am sure they were not, that must have had an impact on college places.

I am very short of time, but I will briefly give way.

I note the minister’s assertion, but I think that what troubles the rest of us is what is actually happening throughout college campuses at the moment and what projections from informed sources suggest is going to happen. To expand my argument, the difficulty for the Government is that it has reduced the current support budget for bursaries and general student support to £84.2 million from August of this year. That is another aspect that is hitting young people and their ability to contemplate going to college. I am not diminishing the challenges that confront the Scottish Government—which I accept are significant—but it needs to clarify its focus on the further education sector and its strategy for the sector. The Government knew the state of the public finances when it made pledges that it cannot now afford, and it has even failed to protect the budget share going to further education, which has gone down from 2 per cent to 1.8 per cent—its lowest share in years. The Government has refused—it has its own political reasons for doing so—to find more resource for higher education through a graduate contribution. I think that that is why it has been forced to do a smash-and-grab raid on further education. Quite simply, at this time our colleges are living from hand to mouth and the Scottish Government needs to do better by them.

I do not want to preach, but I have personal experience, which perhaps the minister does not have. I have been the owner of office property that was unoccupied for the simple reason that companies had amalgamated. I was desperate to find a purchaser for the property, as were my partners. We did not leave it empty out of choice; we could not find a purchaser. We still had to pay rates. Mr Brown talked about property owners who are in such a position. What message is the policy sending about the Scottish Government’s understanding of business or its desire for Scotland to be regarded as a business-friendly location?

20. To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to increase the provision of internet access to GP services. (S4O-01178)

By 2015, patients in England will be able to book GP appointments, obtain repeat prescriptions, procure their test results and access their medical records online. It all sounds absolutely marvellous. When will that facility be available to patients in Scotland?

I am delighted, as a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee, to take part in the debate, and I am very pleased that time has been found for it in the parliamentary schedule. The inquiry that the committee will undertake into women and work is, in my opinion, extremely important for three reasons. First, there is an issue and everyone can see that. Secondly, there is a valuable opportunity afforded by the debate to identify and highlight the areas and the aspects of the issue that we as a committee need to explore. Thirdly, our committee and the parliament have the opportunity to inform thinking and practices not only in Scotland, but in the rest of the UK and beyond. My starting point is that the economy and society benefit when women are at work. That means work in all the widely recognised fora that are workplaces; it also means women playing their full part at all levels within workplaces. The number of unemployed women in Scotland is not just worrying and disturbing in its own right, but it suggests that during recession and times of financial challenge women are more vulnerable, which is an issue that Ken Macintosh alluded to. Much of that is down to inherent structural weaknesses in the employment pattern. Evidence suggests that women are predominant in low paid, insecure and short-hours jobs. That certainly is the view of Save the Children, which provided a helpful briefing for the debate. The reasons for that situation are multiple and some are more obvious than others. I certainly like to think that if our committee inquiry can lay bare those reasons and investigate sensible solutions to address them, we shall achieve two very important objectives: we shall accelerate the pace of women playing their full and proper role in the workplace and we shall strike at that structural employment vulnerability that is so damaging. As has been indicated in the debate, some of the reasons are specific and obvious: lack of affordable childcare has already been identified as a major issue. However, that deficiency does not explain why some women fail to acquire skills to enter the workplace or, having acquired skills, seem to hit obstacles in career progression, or fail to be recognised as meriting consideration for public appointments, to which issue Mary Fee alluded; nor does it explain occupational segregation. On the matter of skills, we like to think that with a combination of education, training opportunities and modern apprenticeships we do a lot to prepare young men and women for the workplace—and we do—but let me share an experience. Last week, I visited a successful manufacturing company in an area of significant unemployment. Much of the work requires full-time, skilled sewing machine operators. The company has vacancies, but it cannot fill them. Young people with those skills are not coming forward. I am taking the matter up with the local council to see what has happened to the teaching of such basic skills at school level, but I find that kind of mismatch in this day and age alarming. The issue of the obstacles confronting women with skills was partially touched on in last week’s debate, as Mary Fee indicated, when the bizarre sparseness of women on many of our public sector boards of governance was highlighted. We all agree that the paucity of female presence has absolutely nothing to do with the unavailability of female talent, so there must be a question over attitudes and appointment procedures. In fairness, I have detected a willingness by the Scottish Government to take that on board. The private sector, however, does not have too much to shout about either in that regard. The most recent labour force survey figures show that in skilled trades occupations 93 per cent of employees are men and 7 per cent are women; and in the realm of process, plant and machine operatives, 87.7 per cent are men and 12.3 per cent are women. The survey also shows that of 212,000 managers, directors and senior officials, only 36 per cent are women. I believe that the whole scenario has to be probed. The minister was wise to say that no one has a monopoly of knowledge, wisdom or solutions on the issue. However, something is getting in the way of women getting on. Is it prejudice? Is it inadvertence? Is it attitude? Is it historic legacy? Is it lack of skills or lack of confidence? Is it lack of help with family responsibilities? In some cases, is it down to the individual choice of the woman? We need to find out. I hope that this debate will throw more light on what we need to explore, examine and challenge.

The debate has been short, but extremely useful. Mary Fee set the tone with an eloquent critique of the broad issues and rightly referred to the evidence that the committee took on 21 February, in trade union week. After that, it seemed to me that issues came in thick and fast from a variety of contributors. Perhaps it is not surprising that issues such as childcare, the pay gap and occupational segregation have been covered by members, including the minister, Jean Urquhart and Alison McInnes, as has the challenge of family responsibilities, of course. As many other members have done, I welcome the minister’s confirmation that there will be a summit in September. Claudia Beamish raised the specific issues that confront refugee women. It is easy to feel quite gloomy about the issue sometimes, but I think that all of us, having listened to the debate and sensed the degree of purpose to do something about it, now feel a sense of optimism. Margaret McDougall articulated that feeling very well when she spoke about having positive aspirations, although she tempered those remarks with her comment about the stigma that is attached to some part-time jobs. Some interesting things are already happening. I was struck by the reference to the relevance of quality part-time jobs and flexible working. The evidence that the committee received on 21 February was supported by written submissions, including one from a member of the public who outlined her own experience of part-time working. She was clear about the lack of quality part-time work and—interestingly—about the difficulty of making the transition from full-time to part-time work. She also noted the challenge of having limited opportunities for training and promotion. A number of members have spoken about the pay gap, but there is also a gap—which is different, but nonetheless important—between flexible working policy and its implementation. We are clear about the challenges in front of us, but we are also clear that we can approach the task as a committee with—as I just said—a tremendous sense of purpose. Our approach will be greatly assisted by the speeches from members in today’s debate. The committee will want to look at examples of good practice, because there are such examples out there. Mary Fee mentioned her experience in the retail industry. I was made aware of a charity in Edinburgh called Women Onto Work, which supports women who are trying to get back into the workplace. I was very struck by what it does: it gets self-referrals from individual women who are seeking help, and it does so without using any marketing or getting any referrals from service partners. It has supported clients into employment, further education and even self-employment. One of the most successful dynamics for change involves using the experience and example of successful women. I hope that the committee can explore that area and identify women who could make a positive contribution to our deliberations. With no disrespect to the Presiding Officer, I regard every woman in the chamber as a successful woman. We have counterparts throughout Scotland in every area of life: we need to take the success of those successful women and thread that into the warp and woof of the web of the Scottish workplace.

I shall try not to be provocative or patronising and I shall do my level best to be passionate. I thank Jenny Marra for bringing this important issue to the chamber for debate, because that is the point—there is an issue and we should try to construct a consensus around it. If we can unite in that purpose, we will do a great deal to address the concerns that Jenny Marra, absolutely rightly, is highlighting. Women are resilient, capable, adept and determined. They are excelling in educational attainment and they are making headway—particularly in careers that were once the preserve of men. That is certainly happening in the House of Commons—perhaps not at the pace that we would like, but there is a direction of travel. Indeed, at the Scottish Parliament, 40 per cent of my party’s MSPs are women. That compares well with the other parties. However, there are still significant issues and Jenny Marra indicated quite rightly where they lie. In particular, she highlighted the position of public boards in Scotland. I looked at the comparable situation for company boards. I noticed that in 2010, women made up only 12.5 per cent of the members of corporate boards of the FTSE 100 companies. That was up from 9.4 per cent in 2004. However, the figure for all FTSE-listed companies was only 9.6 per cent in 2010. That is why I say that there is an issue. It is not just peculiar to the corporate world. It is—as Jenny Marra indicated—also to be found in the public sector. I am interested in exploring the reasons behind that. Is there a ceiling that women cannot break through, or is it down to other factors, such as the lifestyle or career choices that women make? In 2010, a Department for Business, Innovation and Skills report recommended that the chairmen of FTSE 350 companies should set out the percentage of women that they aim to have on their boards in 2013 and 2015. That is a way of getting the issue on the radar screen, which is where I want it to be. That approach is the best way to get this issue looked at sensibly and effectively. I say to Jenny Marra that the report went further—it also recommended that FTSE 100 boards should aim for a minimum of 25 per cent female representation by 2015. However, it is interesting that the report did not recommend the introduction of legal quotas and apparently only 11 per cent of the responses received recommended the introduction of quotas.

I am very tight for time, will the member forgive me if I try to use my five minutes as best I can? Although I certainly broadly sympathise with the thrust of what Jenny Marra is seeking to do, my experience suggests that both men and women can provide the necessary skills for any job and sex does not somehow or other eliminate that. In my experience, where women emerge in fora that have been traditionally male-dominated—whether a university court, a board of directors, a body of trustees, or even leading a political party, all of which I have done—they bring their own unique characteristics to bear. I say to Jenny Marra that in my experience in dealing with David Cameron, I could not have found a more enthusiastic advocate for promoting the cause of women in politics. I accept that I was perhaps the first political auntie he had ever acquired and that that might have been a reason for his kind treatment. Jenny Marra mentioned Norway. Although it has made progress, that success—and I accept that it has been a success to some extent—has not altered the fundamentals of how women progress through organisations. Non-executive director appointments account for most of the increase in representation. Quotas have not tackled the issue of women coming through their own organisation’s pipeline, because apparently in Norway women still make up only 2 per cent of chief executive officers and 10 per cent of executive committee members. It seems that the increase in the number of women board members was partly achieved by an increase in board size, rather than replacing significant numbers of existing members. That leaves me uneasy. I want—as I think every woman in the Parliament wants—Scotland to be a place where women and men can succeed, but that has to be on the basis of skill and talent. I want that to happen in a positive, organic and incremental fashion. From my experience, I think that it can happen. That is why I am unable to support quotas, which Jenny Marra seeks to impose. However, I thank her for bringing the debate, which I welcome. What matters is that the issue does not now come off the radar screen.

The debate has had currents of tension and passion. In some respects, that has been unfortunate, but I feel that the debate has been useful. I pay tribute to Jenny Marra for gripping an issue that has to be addressed. She has undoubtedly, to use a phrase that I used earlier, got it on to the radar screen. Having listened to the debate, I am encouraged, because I think that there is a genuine desire across the chamber to recognise that there is an issue and to build a consensus around how we address it. To anyone who is in any doubt that there is an issue, I say that I think that the matter is self-evident. Jenny Marra, John Park, Alison McInnes, Christine Grahame and other members spoke eloquently about that. Jenny Marra was absolutely right to focus her attention on public bodies in Scotland. I, too, looked at that area. I remind members that Quality Meat Scotland seems to have a female-free board—it has a 12-person board with not a woman on it. Who, may I ask, is likely to cook most of the meat? The Lands Tribunal for Scotland has four blokes on its board. The Water Industry Commission for Scotland has a Gordon, a David and a Charles. Jenny Marra mentioned the Scottish Police Services Authority—there is only one woman on its seven-member board. Some of the other quangos that are low on female representation with one female board member are the Crofters Commission, VisitScotland, David MacBrayne Ltd, the Scottish Law Commission, the Local Government Boundary Commission for Scotland, Highlands and Islands Airports Ltd, Children’s Hearings Scotland—that is particularly worrying—and the Scottish Local Authorities Remuneration Committee. The tale does not get much better. By any assessment, there are other public bodies that are, in my opinion, in a similarly deficient state of composition—in fact, one might be tempted to say decomposition. Frankly, that is a gloomy catalogue of female exclusion. It would be tempting, in looking at the issue, to call for a cure by quota. However, I have to say to Jenny Marra that I am not convinced by that approach. There are legitimate concerns, which Christine Grahame and Graeme Dey eloquently alluded to. Although it is tempting to call for a cure by quota, getting more women is not synonymous with getting better talent. Getting more women on to a board may look good in numerical terms, but the test must always be how best representation on that board can serve the public interest. There is no doubt that there is an issue, and there is no disagreement whatsoever that that issue must be addressed. When it comes to the boards of public bodies in Scotland, it seems to me that there is a ray of sunshine: an appointments structure over which we have collective control and input. The minister’s contribution in that regard was extremely helpful. The most important feature of the debate is that Jenny Marra has brought the issue into the public domain. Whether we agree or disagree with her proposed solution, the issue will not now go away, and the most important consequence of the debate is the united will to do something about it.

I am not instinctively a regulator. I am sorry.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. My normal challenge when speaking is to ensure that audiences remain awake. I fear that, if I speak more slowly, the situation can only deteriorate. I welcome the opportunity to debate what can be done to improve services for victims and witnesses. For too long those people have been the silent and voiceless presence in our criminal justice system. They should be at the heart of it. Our criminal justice system needs to prioritise those who have been wronged and those who are prepared to stand up in court for those who have been wronged. Their voices must be heard. I therefore welcome the publication of the Scottish Government’s consultation. Although it is overdue, it includes a number of important measures. The six objectives of the victims and witnesses policy are: that they should know what is going on in cases that affect them; that they should know what to expect; that they should feel confident that their personal safety will be protected; that they should be able to contribute effectively to cases; that they should have access to appropriate support; and that offenders should pay for injury, loss or distress caused. Those six objectives are eminently sensible; that will, I think, also be the overwhelming view of the public. The Scottish Conservatives fully support the objectives, but it is cause for concern that such rudimentary objectives are not already being met by our criminal justice system. On the proposals in the consultation, I agree with many of the key suggestions. Taken as a whole, they appear to address the legitimate interests of victims of crime and witnesses, and they represent a sensible discussion on how to improve public confidence in our criminal justice system. For example, allowing victims to make oral representations to The Parole Board for Scotland will give them an important say in decisions about releasing prisoners. The creation of a duty on relevant public agencies to set clear standards of service for victims and witnesses is also sensible—although it must not turn into a box-ticking exercise. I welcome the aspiration to improve the way in which cases are managed so that victims and witnesses are much clearer about stages and timings. Too many people who are involved in criminal cases experience delay after delay in court. It makes them angry and frustrated and saps their confidence in the whole system.

That certainly seems to be illogical. The proposal could—with tweaking—go a long way towards addressing the needs of victims. The situation might then be adequately addressed. On delays in the system, I have been a victim of crime and have had to watch the progress of the prosecution system. Even I found it frustrating and difficult to ascertain, at any one time, what stage the case had got to. Like the cabinet secretary, in my time as a practising lawyer I did some criminal work, and I know that professionals find it equally frustrating to not know exactly what to expect when attending court. We have been talking for years in Parliament about delays in court, so action is timely. On compensation to victims, a victim surcharge has been in operation in England since April 2009. What have we been doing up here? Compensation to victims is important, but I argue that just as important is the reassurance that the perpetrator is being appropriately punished and rehabilitated and that active steps are being taken to stop reoffending. That leads me to what is missing from the consultation document. What is surely as important to victims as having a say in proceedings, being properly informed about what is going on and being compensated when appropriate, is the knowledge that the punishment that is handed out reflects the crime that has been committed and, crucially, that the sentence that is imposed by the court will be the sentence that is served by the offender. Currently, offenders who are sentenced to a term of less than four years are automatically released after serving half their sentence. Prisoners who serve longer sentences are released at the halfway point in their sentence, or after they have served two thirds of it. As the cabinet secretary knows, the Scottish Conservatives have repeatedly called for the ending of automatic early release of prisoners. To its credit, the Scottish Government appears to agree, because the Scottish National Party included that policy in its 2007 and 2011 manifestos, but it has failed to act on that promise.

Thank you very much, Presiding Officer. In response to Christine Grahame’s intervention, the building programme is, I presume, precisely what her party took into account when committing the policy to its manifestos in 2007 and 2011. If it did not, why was it misleading the public? One of the best ways of standing up for the victims of crime would be to scrap automatic early release so that victims would know, at the time of sentencing, for how long the perpetrator will remain in prison. Paragraph 110 of the consultation document states that “The Scottish Government is committed to giving victims an input into sentencing policy”. I am pleased to tell the cabinet secretary that the Scottish Conservatives have already asked Scots what they think about automatic early release of prisoners. In 2009, we commissioned a poll of 1,183 adults, which found that 95 per cent respondents were against automatic early release.

I am sorry, but I am pushed for time and I have already taken an intervention. Automatic early release of prisoners is a discredited anachronism that perplexes judges, betrays victims, bewilders witnesses and angers the public. The Government must act to end that unpopular policy, and that is why I have lodged the amendment in my name. Unless we address automatic early release—I gather from the sedentary chatter from the SNP that that is a hot spot—we will leave a massive void in how we support victims. I move amendment S4M-03278.1, after “support for victims” to insert: “believes that the best way to stand up for the rights of victims and witnesses would be to establish honesty in sentencing by ending the automatic early release of prisoners.”

Will the member give way?

I thank Christine Grahame for taking my intervention anyway. Does she accept that sometimes the scenario that she has described has been induced by the defence counsel saying to the prosecutor that they are minded to plead to a lesser charge?

I am listening with interest to the point that Mr Don makes, which is certainly worth exploring. My experience was that the victim information service was very good. Was his experience similar?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I reassure Jamie Hepburn that I have publicly declared, including in this chamber, that a Conservative Government in the 1990s introduced automatic early release. It accepted afterwards that it had got it wrong, which is why it enacted, before 1997, a statute to terminate automatic early release. However, the incoming Labour Government did not implement the act. The point is that we have an opportunity in this devolved Parliament to discuss such issues. I say to Jamie Hepburn that I think that it would be remiss of me, as an Opposition politician, in a debate about victims, not to raise an issue that I think goes to the heart of public confidence in the justice system and is certainly an issue that perplexes the public. That said, the debate has been interesting and largely consensual, in that members agree that more must be done for victims and witnesses. The Scottish Government consultation document contains a number of sensible policy suggestions and is therefore to be welcomed as informing the drafting of legislation. However, as I said, I am not here to agree with everything that the Scottish Government does and I think that the proposals are slightly deficient in urgency and ambition. As a number of members have said, it has taken rather a long time for the Government to consider the issue. The SNP’s 2011 manifesto included a commitment to introduce a victims’ rights bill, but it was not included in the Government’s subsequent legislative programme. It has taken over a year to publish the consultation document, so we are unlikely to see a draft bill until much later in this parliamentary session. To his credit, the cabinet secretary acknowledged in 2010 that support for victims was an issue. However, the pace is ponderous and I share Lewis Macdonald’s concern about how to make the progress on the issue that I think we all want. I support his desire for a timetable in that regard. I must also raise some questions about the Scottish Government’s ambition in this area. As I stated earlier, the six objectives for victims and witnesses identified in the consultation document seem to me to represent what victims and witnesses should at the very least expect from a criminal justice system. Throughout the consultation document there are references to the draft EU directive on establishing minimum standards on the rights, support and protection of victims of crime. The directive, indeed, informs many of the Government’s proposals. The Scottish Government boldly claims: “These emerging international standards raise the bar internationally and challenge us to raise our game here too.” However, rather than raising the bar, the EU directive is a set of expected minimum standards for victims. Is it really the Government’s aspiration for Scotland that victims and witnesses should be given only the minimum level of support? Let us try to be a little more ambitious than that. There have been some compelling and thoughtful contributions to the debate. I noted particularly those made by Duncan McNeil, David Stewart, Willie Coffey and Nigel Don, who made an important point about whether we could bring the forum of justice to where the people are in the community. I think that there is a precedent for that in the form of the Scottish Land Court, which is a mobile court that convenes where a problem has arisen. In my days as a lawyer I was involved in its proceedings when we met on an island. There is therefore a precedent to consider in that regard, on which the cabinet secretary might want to reflect.

I was just trying to help. I have some points on the consultation document that I urge the Scottish Government to consider. Perhaps the minister could address some of them in her closing remarks. I note the document’s reference to the importance of information sharing among justice organisations, which I think we would all agree with. Can the Government confirm whether it has considered that issue in relation to the soon-to-be-established single police force? Is the information technology system for the new force being developed to ensure compatibility with the systems of existing organisations? The Government proposes the introduction of a mechanism whereby those who carry out assaults on police officers will be required to pay to support the specialist non-NHS services that treat or assist the victims of those assaults. That is a commendable and laudable principle, but I wonder whether it is logical to extend that type of support to police and yet exclude from that support other public sector workers at risk, such as fire officers and NHS workers. I merely make that observation. I cannot help but notice that the consultation proposes to extend the definition of a child witness to someone up to the age of 18. That would certainly extend automatic entitlement to support to 16 and 17-year-olds. It would bring Scotland into line with England, Wales, Northern Ireland and indeed the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, so it appears to be a sensible suggestion. However—forgive me for being mischievous—how is that policy consistent with the SNP’s position that 16 and 17-year-olds should be given the vote in the forthcoming independence referendum? I hope that this debate and the Scottish Government’s consultation are the first steps towards producing robust, workable legislation that will seek to give victims of crime a strong voice at the heart of Scotland’s criminal justice system. However, I reiterate, despite the reservations of Mr Hepburn, that however worthy many of the proposals are—and they are worthy—the elephant in the room is sentencing and automatic early release. If we do not address that, we diminish everything else that we try to do for victims and for witnesses. I ask members to recognise that and to support the amendment in my name.

How much more expensive is the proposed new system?

I am for change, but not just for the sake of change—only when the case for change has been established. That is why I want to examine some of the proposals objectively. I will go back to some of the founding watchwords of the Parliament. It was to be family friendly, modern in practice, and certainly it was not to replicate the sitting practices of Westminster. As a devolved Parliament of 129 MSPs, it was to balance the needs of constituents, public interest, representation and parliamentary function with allowing MSPs and staff to operate as parents and components of family. I am signed up to that. I warmly support the concept of family, and that breadth of representation has made this Parliament, as an elected forum for MSPs, accessible by people of all ages, not least those with parental or other family responsibilities. From 1999, the beneficial effect of that influence has been obvious and it has enhanced the breadth of contributions to debates and committee proceedings. Presiding Officer, you are being vigilant and sensitive when you express the desire to ensure that the Parliament is responsive to developments and meets the needs of the people of Scotland by ensuring topicality and relevance in its deliberations. There are two sets of circumstances that did not apply in 1999, but which now give an added piquancy to such a desire. One is the overall majority of one party in the Parliament, and the other is the significant additional powers conferred upon the Parliament by the Scotland Act 2012. The former calls for a heightened emphasis on accountability and the latter places an even more onerous obligation upon our committees. I shall address that latter aspect in more detail in a moment. I have never taken the view that the more MSPs sit, the better they get on. Indeed, for such a notably garrulous grouping as politicians, the opposite is probably the case. Hugh Henry is absolutely right to say that we should not be dealing with parliamentary sittings and committees in silos. What matters to me is why we sit, whether in the Parliament or on a committee, and what we do when we sit. If the extension of parliamentary sittings is to provide flexibility in dealing with topical issues and more accountability by debate and use of ministerial questions, then the time is spent usefully. If the extension of sittings is cosmetic—the “Well, it looks as though we’re working harder” approach—then, frankly, we are kidding ourselves, we are failing the Parliament and we are failing our constituents. The extended sittings can be justified provided that they are manifestly for the purpose of satisfying topicality and accountability. I have one profound concern about the mechanism for asking questions, which operates utterly by chance on the outcome of a ballot, with the exception of First Minister’s question time. In my case, that has meant that over the past few months, I have been selected for questions on health, transport and justice. That is all very interesting, but the area for which I am the spokesman is culture. I last asked a culture question three months ago. If we are really serious about accountability, surely the MSPs best able to ask ministers questions, to challenge them and to put them under the cosh, are the shadow spokesmen in the opposition parties. They know about the portfolio in depth and they are briefed by external organisations about issues. However those MSPs—the ones who are most likely to give ministers a hard time—have to rely on chance to be able to ask a relevant parliamentary question.

Hugh Henry alluded to that point and it is an important one. The current structure cannot possibly serve either topicality or accountability. Surely it is not beyond the wit of man—or woman, Presiding Officer—to change that structure. We must never forget the unique importance of our committees in a unicameral Parliament—Hugh Henry made that point powerfully. Their scrutiny of legislation is vital and their ability to do that thoroughly and robustly is essential. That role cannot be adequately discharged without oral evidence. The committee structure is not there to suit us—it is there to be accessible to and by the public, not least to witnesses. We need to ensure that witnesses are not deterred from giving evidence by an inconveniently timed committee meeting or by the brevity of the proceedings, because neither will serve the integrity of this Parliament’s committee structure well. Given the founding watchwords of this Parliament, I was startled to find out that no equalities impact assessment had been carried out on these proposals at an early stage. There are implications for MSPs and for Parliament staff who are parents or who have other family responsibilities. Any regression in that respect would be a negative development for this Parliament. My party supports change, but the changes that we make must be closely monitored and measured. They should be subject to a probation period of six working months—Paul Martin is correct about the need for review. The test must always be not what suits us because we happen to be here, but what serves the people of Scotland best—wherever they are.

I would like to put the issue beyond doubt. Is the minister confirming that, in the absence of amendment 6 being agreed to, innocent purchasers will continue to be in doubt—even after the conclusion of their missives—about whether and when they can get a clear title?

As I mentioned at stage 1, I am now a retired solicitor, but when in practice I undertook conveyancing work over many years. As my colleague Murdo Fraser commented, the issue is extremely technical, and I realise that neither the subject matter nor myself is likely to set the minister’s heart a-beating. However, I hope that he may heed some of what I have to say in my subsequent observations. Like other members, I thank Murdo Fraser and his fellow committee members for their thorough work in scrutinising the bill. That scrutiny, coupled with subsequent amendments, has ensured that the bill is in a better state now than it was at the beginning of the process. The bill’s purpose is to ensure that the registration of title to land in Scotland is fit for 21st century purposes, and that the transition from sasine to land register title is accelerated so that, in the not-too-distant future, all titles will be registered. That is a sensible aspiration, and the bill maps out the route to achieve it. However, under what may look like a calm surface, there are still some reefs in the water that require careful navigation. At stage 1, I expressed a slight misgiving about how rapidly voluntary registrations would proceed without some encouragement to the landowner in the form of reduced fees. I see that the minister has been entirely unmoved by my entreaties, so, aside from a strong sense of personal slight, I will just have to endure his indifference. On a serious note, as the whole purpose of the bill is to make sasine titles a thing of the past, will the minister at least instruct the keeper to monitor progress over the next five years? I was interested in the minister’s remarks in his speech about the target for 2017. If we do not see the necessary pace of change on the numbers of titles and the land mass being transferred to land registration, he needs actively to investigate some form of discounted fee to encourage action.

Yes. My remarks were prompted by the minister’s specific comments about 2017 in the debate. The critical period of five years is significant. I share the concerns that my colleague Murdo Fraser expressed in speaking to his amendment 6. The position in law to which the minister referred in respect of inhibitions striking only at voluntary disposals is correct, but apparently the keeper is not reflecting that position in current practice, and I think that that is causing delays and uncertainty. I urge the minister to engage in urgent discussions with both the Law Society of Scotland and the keeper to ensure that the keeper’s practice reflects current law. Section 108 of the bill was the section that troubled me and others most. I voiced my concerns at stage 1, and wish to place them on the record today. I am aware that, through lodging amendments at stage 2, my colleague Murdo Fraser endeavoured to give some sense of proportion to section 108, but those amendments were not agreed to. I note with some alarm that the Government amendment at stage 2 to remove section 108(4)(c) from the bill as introduced, which was agreed to, leaves the defined person under section 108 even more vulnerable. Currently, when legal experts and the keeper cannot agree on legal issues surrounding aspects of land registration, it is clear that what may be deemed to be materially misleading in the opinion of one lawyer may be deemed to be innocent representation in the opinion of another, and what may constitute reckless disregard for one lawyer may reflect due diligence and adequate professional service for another. The difficulty is that, where a client or an adviser to the client other than the solicitor, or a third party who is dealing with or for the client gives erroneous information to the solicitor with malign intent and is determined to deceive the solicitor to induce a fraudulent land registration, the hapless solicitor is the easy target and could be subjected to the nightmare of a technical criminal prosecution that is made possible by the section. As I observed during stage 1, existing law covers such dishonest or fraudulent activity, and the Scottish Law Commission did not seek a new criminal provision in its original bill, the provision was not consulted on pre-legislation, and it did not find support from witnesses who gave oral evidence to the committee. The one exception was the Solicitor General; I might suggest that the Solicitor General’s office naturally relishes a growth industry in new criminal offences. I would have thought that all that would ring serious alarm bells for most people. I am sorry that the Scottish Government is not among them. With those reservations, I accept that the bill makes good progress towards an objective that we all want to be reached and my party will support it.

Having been in the Scottish Parliament since 1999, I suppose that I should not be surprised by this debate. As many do, I feel that the SNP independence project has been around for a long time: but then, it has been around for a long time. I recall the SNP rhetoric of the past four decades—much of which has been colourful—not to mention the cocktail of slogans. “Free by ’93” sticks in my mind. That did not happen. In 1997, it was “Yes, we can”. Well, they did not. Then there was “It’s time”, but when or for what never became entirely clear, and that slogan was ditched. When the SNP formed a minority Government in 2007, at least we got the pledge of a referendum bill, but that was ditched, as well. It would be tempting to yawn and say, “Here we go again. The 10 Salmond assertions for a better Scotland—number 1 being independence.” However, this time it is real. There will be a referendum. Scotland will be asked to make a massively important decision and slogans alone will not be enough. There must be an informed and mutually respectful debate. If I may say so, the First Minister’s somewhat vainglorious contribution earlier this afternoon does not augur well. The SNP has one not inconsiderable difficulty. Whether it likes it or not, people know how the UK works. They know how Scotland benefits from that partnership, and according to a recent YouGov poll they overwhelmingly support that arrangement. The SNP has a lot of explaining to do, a lot of information to provide and many questions to answer. That means that, when legitimate questions are asked or legitimate concerns are expressed, they cannot be sneered at or dismissed with scoffing contempt. I have observed with concern that, when anyone poses such a question or expresses a reservation about delay in the referendum or about separation itself, an SNP lexicon comes into play. No answer is given, but people are accused of blundering into politics or their suggestions are described as being “ludicrous”, as “scaremongering” or as “fanciful”. I have never rubbished the idea of a separate Scotland. Theoretically, Scotland could be independent, but to me the real debate is about what serves Scotland best. Is it our remaining within the tested and enduring partnership of the United Kingdom, or is it separating from that partnership and being an independent country? Drew Smith made that point well. It is known that I support our remaining in the United Kingdom. I shall fight that corner over the forthcoming months, but I will try to do so by seeking to make informed comment and to ask legitimate questions, which must be answered before voters can make an informed decision at the ballot box in the referendum. Let me illustrate the problem. If Nicola Sturgeon and Alex Salmond say that they are confident that Scotland, if we separate from the UK, will have a place on the Bank of England monetary policy committee, that is assertion, not fact. It will become fact only when the Bank of England confirms that it will happen. We should remember whose bank it is; it is not the bank of Scotland and certainly not the bank of Salmond but the Bank of England, which will, post-independence, be a foreign country. The assertion is meaningless unless Alex Salmond can show that he has discussed the matter with the Bank of England, and the assertion remains just that unless the Bank of England agrees with it. Alex Salmond asserts that an independent Scotland will seamlessly, on separation, become an independent member of the EU. He bases his assertion on legal opinion. He is perfectly entitled to do that, but he should explain that what that really means is that one judge supported that view in 1992, a director general of the EU fisheries directorate supported the view in 2007 and a former secretary general of the European Commission has supported the view. What is not mentioned is that numerous organisations and entities, legal luminaries and constitutional experts—14, the last time I counted—disagree with that view. Therefore, for the moment the SNP’s stance on the EU is assertion, not fact, and unless Alex Salmond has raised the issue with the Commission and had his assertion accepted, assertion it remains. Like Drew Smith, I do not mind debate. I do not dismiss the SNP’s right to make its argument; it is entitled to do so. I have never objected to rhetoric and knockabout, which I enjoy as much as anything. However, at the end of the day, this debate cannot proceed without substantive information and reliable facts. Any attempt to dodge that, eliminate it or gloss over it not only does a true disservice to this Parliament, but does a profound disservice to the people of Scotland. In the days of slogans, soundbites and rhetoric, much fun was enjoyed. Those days are over. Slogans, soundbites and rhetoric alone will not wash; they are not enough. We are moving on to informed argument and fact, and it is high time that the SNP provided both.

2. To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made to ensure the continued independent monitoring of prisons. (S4O-01030)

Currently, the independent monitoring of prisons is significantly enhanced by prison visiting committees, which provide cost-effective access for prisoners to independent advice. Can the cabinet secretary reassure me that the new arrangements will embrace those twin virtues of cost effectiveness and independence, and that those will be protected?

Does the cabinet secretary agree that the festivals’ undoubted potential for remarkable activity in the arts would be enhanced by the presence in Edinburgh of a medium-sized concert hall? I do not expect the cabinet secretary to wave a magic wand, but will she keep the matter on her radar screen?

I, too, congratulate Jenny Marra on securing the debate and thank her for her motion. It is not only timely, given deaf awareness week in May, but it deals with a condition that affects many families in Scotland. I, too, pay tribute to the many charities that support individuals who suffer a degree of hearing loss, and their families. Those charities, many of which have been mentioned today, do excellent work and really make all the difference. We have come a long way since deafness was regarded simply as an unfortunate fact of life, with little more than primitive and obtrusive hearing aids being available for those who suffered from deafness. My initial awareness of the condition was due to the fact that, in her early 30s, my mother experienced significant loss of hearing. Only as I grew older did I realise how isolating and discriminatory deafness was for her. I realise now how frustrating it was for her when shopping, travelling or just leading her everyday life. Her deafness blocked communication; when communication is blocked, it is frightening. Further, there is the embarrassment of asking someone to repeat what was said and, on repetition, of still being uncertain what was said, and there is the feeling of a lack of confidence about one’s ability to cope. It was only as my mother got older that I really understood how isolating deafness can be. She tended to shun company because of being unsure whether she could hear, and because background noise, which was amplified by her hearing aid, made the situation more difficult. I welcome the positive changes that have taken place over several decades, even in the years since the inception of Parliament. The dramatic improvement in visual signs on public transport and elsewhere makes an enormous difference, and the prominence of British Sign Language is another major step forward. It is marvellous to see it being deployed in Parliament this evening to benefit the members of the public who are attending the debate. The specific support that is now available to deaf children from charities such as the National Deaf Children's Society is inspiring. Thanks to influencers like that body, much good work is being done and will be done. I applaud its efforts to ensure that early-years professionals in health, social care and education understand the need to remain vigilant about emerging hearing loss in children.

I do, and I think that Kezia Dugdale’s testimony is poignant and makes the point extremely well. If hearing loss can be isolating for an adult, it can be devastating for a child. However, there have been steady improvements in our schools. Personally, I would always prefer it if a child with a hearing impairment were able to attend mainstream education. As has already been pointed out, there are important preliminary steps that can be taken prior to designing a new school. Neil Findlay spoke eloquently about that, and I have supported his motion on the matter. Next month, in my own area, I am scheduled to visit the Lenzie headquarters of the charity Deafblind Scotland, which works with adults who are dual sensory impaired. It will be difficult for most of us to imagine what that must be like but, as Jenny Marra rightly pointed out, barriers still exist. Today, as I strolled through Regent Road park on my way to Parliament, enjoying the lovely sunshine, I felt richly blessed to watch a wren on a low branch and to listen to an animated group of long-tailed tits. Let those of us who can see and hear never forget how fortunate we are and whether in politics, driving a bus, selling train tickets, serving in a shop or dealing with the public in some other way, let us show patience and understanding to those who face challenges that we know nothing about.

1. To ask the Scottish Executive how it will improve access to mental health services for carers with mental health issues. (S4O-01009)

The latest figures show that there are 657,000 carers in Scotland. According to a recent study by the Princess Royal Trust for Carers, six in 10 carers have suffered a mental health illness. A majority of all the carers who took part in the poll had never sought help or support. Should we not ensure that the national health service takes a much more proactive approach to supporting carers, and that information about what help is available and where to find it is prominently displayed in health centres and libraries?

When I read the bill as introduced, I had genuine doubt as to the status in law of the proposed new entity. The existing governance was clear: there was a statutory board of trustees, with obligations that were defined by trust law. The successor body’s status was more vague, so I am glad that an attempt has been made to clarify it. However, a slight paradox remains. Section 1 says explicitly: “The body corporate known as The Trustees of the National Library of Scotland, established by section 1(1) of the 1925 Act, continues in existence and is renamed the National Library of Scotland”. Section 1 therefore reaffirms the existence of a body of trustees. That is good, because trustees have independent duties and obligations and operate under a well-developed framework of law—they know what their responsibilities are. Is it not then inconsistent of the bill never again to refer to trustees? Schedule 1, which deals with the entity that is the NLS, talks about “members”, not trustees. To guide us in the interpretation of the bill, it is confirmed that “the 1925 act” means the National Library of Scotland Act 1925, which schedule 3 to the bill will abolish. Will the minister clarify whether the NLS is to be run by trustees, as defined by the 1925 act? If that is the case, would it be wise to retain section 1(1) of the 1925 act, rather than to abolish it? I understand that that could be done by adding to the relevant provision in schedule 3 the words, “with the exception of section 1(1)”, and that that could be effected by a holograph amendment. My other profound concern is the provision for ministerial intervention. I am vexed that the Scottish Government could not support Mr McArthur’s amendments. If the minister desires to retain ultimate power of last resort to intervene in the event of gross incompetence, malfunction or dishonesty, the intervention power should be appropriately qualified. Otherwise, the potential for conflicts of governance and unreasonable intrusion by Government is manifest. The cabinet secretary should be more explicit about how the power could be used. If she is not explicit, what she is saying to us is analogous to saying, “I won’t run you down in my motor car and I won’t boil you in oil, but I might put arsenic in your tea or shove you off a cliff.” That is not reassuring. It is also relevant to observe that ministerial powers of intervention are less forbidding if the devolved Administration is a coalition or a minority Government, as was always thought would be likely in the Scottish Parliament. In the case of an Administration that has an overall majority, the opportunity for checks and balances is greatly diminished. As Liz Smith said, we support the bill. It is necessary, and it is timely that we take account of circumstances that are vastly different from those that prevailed in 1925. However, I would like the minister to address my observations about the legal status of the new entity and I await her expanding on how she thinks the ministerial powers will be used.

6. To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is satisfied with the level of morale among NHS staff. (S4O-00974)

I accept that the cabinet secretary replies in good faith but, for the Scottish Government, ignorance is, indeed, bliss because, in response to my recent parliamentary questions about whistleblowers in the NHS, it did not know how many whistleblowers had raised issues, what legal costs had been incurred in dealing with such issues or how many NHS staff had been released with severance payments and associated non-disclosure agreements—that is shorthand for getting rid of whistleblowers. It appears that none of that information is held centrally. How can the Scottish Government have a clue about what morale among NHS staff is like without that essential information? What does the Government intend to do to get hold of it?

I thank the minister for bringing the motion to the chamber for debate, and I am pleased to speak in the debate because I, too, want to pay tribute to the breadth and variety of cultural talent throughout Scotland. I do not dance, I do not sing, I do not act and—this will astonish members—I do not do ballet. However, I certainly enjoy being a member of audiences who enjoy all those activities, so I want to thank the people in Scotland who nurture and encourage those cultural assets—not least the people who work in Scotland’s national performing companies. Scotland has a rich cultural life and we are fortunate to have such talent to enjoy. Further, as Patricia Ferguson and the minister have said, the growing international profile of the activities not only enriches our cultural scene, but opens up a broad range of opportunities. The activities of the individual companies show energy and innovation. I was intrigued to see that, since its inception, the National Theatre for Scotland has played to more than 710,000 people in 160 productions. The RSNO continues to offer high quality varied fare and has been reaching out to new audiences with initiatives like “Naked Classics”, for which there is a £10 ticket. I have not attended a performance, but I am reliably informed by a friend that they are very good. In 2010-11, Scottish Ballet danced to more than 56,000 people, and the Scottish Chamber Orchestra continues to delight audiences in Scotland and abroad with varied programmes. Also, Scottish Opera—the largest of our national performing companies—has continued to woo the younger audience with its £10 tickets for the under 26s and, as the minister said, with the intriguingly entitled “BabyO”, which is a performance for infants and their parents. It is with regret that I note that I am ineligible for either category. As well as performances in Scotland, the national performing companies have delivered acclaimed productions to audiences around the globe. As I mentioned earlier, that has an important dimension beyond the arena of culture. I was interested in the minister’s announcement about the RSNO’s proposed trip to China and I wish it well with that. It is right that we recognise the work that the national performing companies do and the benefits that they bring to Scotland, and that we congratulate them on that, but it is also right that we are objective and question whether there are areas of concern. Debate demands that we do not just accept the status quo as being the best that we can do: we can always improve. The NPCs are in the fifth year of a direct-funding relationship with the Scottish Government. I will look at three issues that are appropriate to that. I note that in the 2010-11 annual report, the cabinet secretary takes pride in—she pointed this out earlier—the number of performances having increased by 31 per cent, from 692 in 2009-10 to 904 in 2010-11. That increase is a cause for celebration, but it must be put in the context of the somewhat difficult year that the NPCs had in 2009-10 and—which is perhaps much more important—the four-year trend since the establishment of direct Government funding for the NPCs. Although performances have increased by 30.5 per cent between 2009-10 and 2010-11, the performance figures for 2010-11 represent an 8 per cent decrease from the number of performances in 2007. That scenario is worrying, when set against the overall budget situation. I ask the minister, when winding up, to confirm what discussions the Scottish Government has had, or is having, with the NPCs about the situation, and what the Government proposes to do. Patricia Ferguson raised the issue of audience numbers and I listened with interest to the minister’s response. However, once again—to go back over that four-year period—the audience numbers in 2010-11 represent a 10.5 per cent decrease from attendances in 2007-08. The minister was helpful in expanding further on that to Patricia Ferguson, but that is exactly the area on which content is needed in the annual report. It would be helpful. If there are genuine explanations, such as activity abroad that has drawn audiences of which we may be unaware, and which has affected domestic performances, that is fine, but what is going on should be known. The report would benefit from such detail. On a separate front, educational events are up a staggering 69.7 per cent since 2007-08, which is impressive progress that represents the efforts in the past five years of the NPCs to promote cultural arts education. I am all for that. However, in the same period the number of people attending has risen by a somewhat disappointing 23.5 per cent. I fully accept that those figures do not take into account the qualitative aspect of the performances or the cultural yield per event, but if we assume certain fixed costs for putting on events, surely the more people who attend them, the greater the educational return and the greater the growth potential for new adult audiences. Perhaps the minister will allude to that in her closing remarks. I applaud the work of the national performing companies and, as the minister and Patricia Ferguson did, I congratulate all those who are involved in the wonderful productions, which delight audiences. I hope that my observations can be taken on board. I want to help and strengthen the NPCs, but we will do that only if we are realistic about challenges and if we show willingness to address them. I note the plea that I fill a generous six minutes. I do not know whether I have served you well, Presiding Officer, but it was an unusual request as I am accustomed to obeying you by observing brevity. I support the motion, and I support the amendment in Patricia Ferguson’s name.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Some errors made in the chamber are justifiable and acceptable, but others are much more difficult to thole.

The debate has been interesting and genuinely helpful. What our creative industries and NPCs do for Scotland and our economy has been universally recognised; indeed, Clare Adamson made a most impressive cultural contribution of her own. As I listened to what has been a positive debate, some lines of Wordsworth came to mind. I am quoting from memory, so I may not be word perfect: “For oft, when on my couch I lie In vacant or in pensive mood, They flash upon that inward eye Which is the bliss of solitude; And then my heart with pleasure fills, And dances with the daffodils.” We have heard from many speakers about their daffodils—the enduring and memorable impact that a particular play, ballet or opera has made upon them, which they remember with great pleasure. However, contributors to the debate have been frank in expressing some concerns and raising some issues. The issue of audience numbers for performances, coupled with the somewhat disappointing increase in education participants despite a substantial increase in educational events, is disturbing, given the consistent increase in cash-terms funding that NPCs have received under the Scottish National Party Government in recent years. I note Sandra White’s warning, which I do not dismiss. However, we have to note trends. The trend between 2007 and 2011-12, in terms of the Scottish Government core funding grant, is interesting. The grant has increased by 8.1 per cent in cash terms, which is an average of just more than 2 per cent per year. Despite that, as we have seen, audience numbers are down from five years ago, performances are down, and education participants have not increased proportionately to the number of educational events. I merely articulate that as food for thought; it is not a trenchant criticism of any of the companies. On a positive note, Patricia Ferguson and Jenny Marra made some interesting suggestions about young people and how we might look at that cohort. To return to the funding figures, there is another statistic that I find slightly troubling. Since becoming heavily dependent on central Government funding, two of our five NPCs have become more dependent on Government core grant. For the RSNO, the core grant in 2010-11 represented 59 per cent of its turnover, which was up from 57 per cent in 2007-08. For the Scottish Chamber Orchestra, the figure was 50 per cent, which was up from 49 per cent over the same period. Admittedly, those figures are not earth-shattering, but there is a trend. We should not lose sight of the fact that, since the establishment of direct Government funding, two fifths of our Scottish NPCs have increased their dependency on that funding. I want to raise another point with the cabinet secretary. According to the 2010-11 annual report, there has been a stagnation in the level of sponsorship and funding for NPCs overall. That is not to diminish the vital role that sponsors perform, nor the invaluable commitment of fund-raisers, which are to be commended. However, I note from the report that the proportion of NPC funding that comes from sponsorship and fundraising “remained at 8%”. There is no further attempt to explain that figure.

I thank the cabinet secretary for that observation. I value what the sponsors and fund-raisers are doing; I simply point out that, if we cannot explain that trend nor how we might address it, the destination is troubling. It is right that we discuss it. The general trend of future Government funding for NPCs underlines the need for those companies to be ever-more resilient and innovative, and to develop alternative business models and funding structures precisely because of the challenges to which the cabinet secretary referred. The NPCs cannot act in a silo: they must be enterprising and actively seek to leverage funding from other sources. Patricia Ferguson made an interesting point about the possible role of local authorities. By way of being positive, I observe that there are a number of important events coming up in Scotland. We have the Commonwealth games and the Ryder cup, and a short time ago we debated tourism, which is one of Scotland’s economic success stories. I would like there to be made widely available a published strategy from the NPCs on how they intend to use those events, engage with the buoyant tourism industry to promote their aims, harness the business opportunities and try to benefit from the opportunities that such activities present. The cabinet secretary’s annual reports and activities are instructive, but I would like more information about NPC development and a contribution from the NPCs in writing parts of the report. We want the reports to reflect what those companies are doing, what they think and what their vision is. The debate has made clear that I and others applaud the work of the national performing companies. I want those companies to thrive and develop, and to continue to wow audiences in Scotland and further afield. I genuinely hope that the issues that members have raised today will be regarded constructively and taken on board by the cabinet secretary, and I hope that we can all help to steer the companies towards a more sustainable footing.

It is a privilege to take part in the debate. There have been many excellent speeches. I congratulate Dame Elish Angiolini not only on producing a well-researched and robust report but on her clear and uncompromising message that action is necessary. Her insistence on that point is relevant and timely because, having been a member of this Parliament since 1999 and having spent part of that time as convener of the Justice 2 Committee, I know that the issues of the rehabilitation of offenders, male and female, and the complete inadequacy of the preparation for their release from prison and of the support that is available to them on their return to the community have been regularly raised and discussed. Others have made that point. Significantly, as we heard from Margaret Mitchell, in 2009, the Equal Opportunities Committee produced a thorough and comprehensive report, “Female offenders in the criminal justice system”. Looking at the general thrust of the Angiolini report, I see that it recognises and addresses many of those issues in a thoughtful and practical manner. I commend her for that. I certainly sympathise with Elish Angiolini’s call for action, because progress to date has not been impressive. Elaine Smith, Richard Simpson and Margaret Mitchell made that point. Indeed, Elish Angiolini’s report and the report of Her Majesty’s chief inspector of prisons beg two pertinent questions: what has the Scottish Government been doing over the past five years; and, much more significantly, what has the SPS been doing over the past 13 years since devolution began? The SPS has witnessed the discussions, debates and expressions of concern since 1999, in this Parliament and beyond, it has heard the calls for improvements, innovation and change and it has seen the disturbing levels of reoffending, yet it has looked lumbering and unresponsive and has displayed glacial progress when reacting to events. The minister should feel distinctly uneasy about that culture of inertia. Maureen Watt and Alison McInnes clearly share my unease about it. I observe that many of the recommendations in the report apply equally to male and female prisoners. It is important to recognise that the approach to criminal justice in Scotland needs to be changed and improved across the board, and I hope that the Scottish Government will be sensitive to that and cognisant of it in taking the report forward. That said, the report rightly identifies that there are specific circumstances and challenges that are common among and particular to women prisoners. Many members commented eloquently on that, and it is an important distinction to make, particularly when the women are mothers. To me, addressing the needs of the children is every bit as important as addressing the needs of the prisoners, and often those needs are mutual. I therefore feel positive about service redesign involving community justice centres, multidisciplinary teams and supported accommodation. However, let us be clear about how they will engage with community justice authorities and let us ensure that we eliminate duplication or replication of function or service. On that issue, I share Alison McInnes’s concerns about some of the proposals for further bureaucracy. The proposals for new national bodies need to be examined carefully. We have a Scottish Parliament, a Scottish Government and a Scottish Prison Service, and it seems to me that they—particularly the SPS, if it is functioning effectively—ought to be able to embrace many of the responsibilities. I warmly welcome the focus on mental health services, the recognition of borderline personality disorders and the need for improved and timeous psychiatric reports. The proposals in those areas have potential to deliver huge benefits. Mark McDonald made a thoughtful contribution in that respect. I am not hostile in principle to alternatives to prosecution, which might play a useful role, but they must not become the automatic, default position for all classes of lower-level offending simply because of a balance-sheet-driven approach. The public interest might require that some offenders are still prosecuted and, on conviction, imprisoned. The alternatives to remand deserve serious consideration, and improvement to community reintegration is years overdue. I fully support the recommendation that, on release, a woman should have immediate access to benefits and safe accommodation. Without those fundamental supports, it is irresponsible to release her from prison. I have left the issue of prisons to the end. It is genuinely perplexing. First, and importantly, the report states explicitly: “There are women who should be in prison to protect the public and to mark the seriousness of their crimes.” The report acknowledges that by proposing a new national prison for women offenders. It anticipates that the facility will be smaller than Cornton Vale. If many of the changes that are proposed in the report work, pressure on prison capacity will reduce, but, as my colleague David McLetchie said, there is still a significant challenge. Recent figures show that the numbers of women who commit non-sexual crimes of violence—that is homicides, attempted murders, serious assaults and violent robberies—are extensive, and we must be sure that we have the prison capacity for that cohort of serious offenders.

Finally, do we need to investigate whether Cornton Vale can be modernised, partially rebuilt or reconfigured? Perhaps it is so defective that those things cannot be done, but I would be grateful if the minister could clarify that. I support the report and look forward to the Scottish Government’s progress report.

3. To ask the Scottish Executive how many people aged between 60 and 65 claim concessionary travel. (S4O-00901)

My goodness. My optimism is unbridled. [Laughter.] Given the Scottish Government’s 17 per cent cut to the bus service operators grant, why does it not revise its policy on concessionary travel and raise the qualifying age to 65? That would release funds to improve the level of the operators grant and potentially extend concessionary travel to community transport services and essential support individuals, such as carers.

I thank Christine Grahame for bringing the issue of community radio to the chamber. Today, she has almost become a chamber community broadcaster in her own right, so it is entirely fitting that she has spoken to a motion on the issue. Community radio stations provide an important voice for communities across the UK. I must confess that I was not particularly knowledgeable about them, but I made it my business to find out more about them. I am hugely impressed, because they not only serve geographic communities but reflect the diverse character of communities and their cultures. They are manned by committed and enthusiastic individuals, and they provide a wealth of local information to their listeners. It is important that much of the content of their broadcasts is popular with, and relevant to, a specific local audience and may not be covered by commercial or mass-media broadcasters. Because community radio is run on a not-for-profit basis, all the profits are invested back into delivery of future local radio services. Benefit to the community is at the heart of its activities. Interestingly, community radio aims not to talk at the local community, but to engage with it, which is an attractive aspect. I was struck by the passion of Christine Grahame and Dennis Robertson for politicians getting involved in it, but I sound a note of caution, in that listeners might not have the same enthusiasm for such participation as they would have for pet owners being reunited with their long-lost pets, which Elaine Murray mentioned. Another virtue of community radio stations is their diversity. Some concentrate on a particular area or a particular genre of music or culture, while others aim to attract younger audiences, religious communities or the Armed Forces and their families. Interestingly, according to Ofcom, to date 228 community radio licences have been issued in the UK and around 11 million people can now tune in to community stations across the UK. That shows just what a popular medium community radio is. The Scottish community broadcasting network, which was established in 2007, supports community radio projects in Scotland. As Christine Grahame said, there are currently 18 community radio stations across Scotland. I think that I featured on Glasgow’s Sunny Govan Community Radio; I certainly recollect that it was a great experience. In my regional constituency area, 3TFM Community Radio for Health broadcasts to the people of Stevenston, Saltcoats and Ardrossan. With a primary focus on promoting health, 3TFM takes volunteers from the three towns and surrounding areas who are interested in different aspects of broadcasting and it provides training in presentation, radio production and administration. 3TFM has a wide and varied schedule and regular shows include “Manic Mondays”, “Musical Spirit,” “Community Sounds” and “3TFM Jukebox”. It all seems to me to be a great example of broadcasting innovation and community commitment. Pulse 98.4 is another community radio station in my area. It is a not-for-profit community radio station that is based in Barrhead, in East Renfrewshire. It broadcasts 24 hours a day, seven days a week. The original emphasis was on youth participation, but that has broadened out and it has a full-time community radio licence. It has a huge contribution to make, including in training. In my opinion, it is not just a medium for communication but a training provider and a presence that helps to knit the community together. Fiona McLeod comprehensively covered East Dunbartonshire Radio. I applaud all efforts to empower local communities, and community radio is an example of that as it provides local communities with a platform to discuss local issues and communicate with others in their areas. I both recognise and congratulate all the volunteers across Scotland who work hard to run the radio shows and to provide training to those who are interested in progressing in broadcasting.

I am pleased to be able to speak in the debate. I have made a note not to speak on trains. I say to Mrs Eadie that I am just relieved that what was overheard was so benign; it could have been a lot worse. Legislative consent motion debates may appear to be dry, technical, box-ticking exercises, but the motion that we are considering is anything but. Arguably, it is the most important LCM that the Parliament has ever debated, because the Scotland Bill significantly changes the face of devolution. It is also the culmination of the lengthy and comprehensive process of examination, investigation, consultation and evidence taking that the Calman commission carried out. I am grateful to Iain Gray for commenting in detail on that process, and I pay tribute to Wendy Alexander and the then Liberal Democrat leader Nicol Stephen, who, with me, were involved in its inception. The Calman process has been augmented and, in fairness, complemented by parliamentary process here and at Westminster and by the discussions between the Westminster and Scottish Governments, to which Mr Crawford referred. Back in 2007, I was clear that the devolution settlement was inadequate, and I think that that was universally recognised. At that time, the only constitutional alternative was the SNP’s separation agenda. Whatever the passion among the SNP’s ranks for that agenda, it is not universally shared throughout Scotland. There is an alternative and more dominant passion to keep Scotland within the UK with a beefed-up, dynamic and fiscally accountable Scottish Parliament, and that is what the Scotland Bill delivers. Back in December 2010, I said in the chamber that the Scotland Bill marked “a watershed in the life of the Scottish Parliament.” I observed that the bill did not tweak and tinker and that it was “not merely an MOT.” I said that it was a road map for our future, the purpose of which was to strengthen Scotland’s position within the UK, to make devolution work better and to respond to the wishes of the Scottish people. I said that if the powers in the bill were used properly, they would allow Scotland to become “a more dynamic and prosperous place.”—[Official Report, 9 December 2010; c 31363, 31365.] Those remain my sentiments. On the back of the Calman commission, the Prime Minister and the coalition Government at Westminster have delivered a substantial transfer of powers to the Scottish Parliament. Crucially, the real fiscal accountability that the Scotland Bill offers means that the Parliament and every MSP will have to think about how money is raised, not just about how it is spent. That is a critical discipline, the absence of which has diluted political responsibility and accountability to date. The Parliament has been the poorer for that omission. A number of members—notably Iain Gray—have referred to the important development of fiscal accountability but, interestingly, if my notes are correct, SNP members have not been among them. These powers will create exciting new political opportunities and will hopefully encourage political innovation and new ways of thinking. At my party’s conference in Troon, in March this year, the Prime Minister stated: “In the Scotland Bill we've got a huge transfer of fiscal powers. New borrowing powers. A cash reserve. A Scottish income tax. Indeed the proportion of the Budget that can be raised in Scotland will more than double … So this is a Bill delivered in Westminster, supported by the Scottish Government, consented to by the Scottish Parliament.” To me, that represents not only a significant constitutional development for Scotland and the Parliament, but respect in operation, because that is exactly what we have had. We have seen Scotland’s two Governments and two Parliaments working together—not always seeing eye to eye, which is accepted, but all seeing the need for progress and co-operating to achieve that. That, to me, is mature politics. As Iain Gray said, the Calman commission represented a genuine, cross-party, cross-border response to improving the devolution settlement. It has created a viable legacy and a basis for change. Unlike the SNP’s national conversation, the Calman commission was approved and validated by this Parliament in 2007. Its remit was to review the provisions of the Scotland Act 1998, recommend changes to the present constitutional arrangements that would enable this Parliament to better serve the people of Scotland, improve financial accountability and secure the position of Scotland in the UK. I argue that the Scotland Bill delivers that in spades. We are about to enter phase 2 of devolution and embrace an exciting new era for Scotland. That is why there is a legitimate and clear choice for the Scottish people. I seem to have an authoritative ally for that view in Bruce Crawford. The clear choice is between separation and leaving the United Kingdom, and strong devolution and staying in the United Kingdom. Linda Fabiani also seems clear about that choice and, apparently, she is confident about the outcome. So, what is the problem? Why the delay? Scotland should be allowed to make that choice, and to do so as soon as possible. The delay is unnecessary, unhelpful and corrosive to business confidence and stability. I urge the Scottish Government to let Scotland speak as soon as possible. I support the motion.

To provide some information, Presiding Officer, I say that Mr Neil might get on better if he took Rennies for indigestion, not for a headache.

6. To ask the Scottish Executive what structures the national health service has in place to assist people detoxing from methadone. (S4O-00864)

In Scotland, methadone prescriptions have been rising relentlessly over the past few years, and, in 2010-11, well over half a million prescriptions were issued, costing more than £28 million, yet neither the Scottish Government nor anyone else holds any reliable data on how many methadone patients either reduce their prescriptions or come off methadone altogether. How can such an uninformed and unmeasured approach be fair to the methadone patient, and how can it be justified to the taxpayer?

It is a challenge to bring some verve and spice to the issue of land registration. The subject does not brim with pulsating excitement. Things were a lot more colourful when buyer and seller exchanged clods of earth to reflect the sasine of acquired ground. I declare an interest as a former solicitor who practised conveyancing. All the complex, technical and rather dry environment surrounding registering a title to heritage in Scotland should not blind us to the important function of giving a purchaser or an existing landowner a good title in law, and a secured creditor a good security. Without those components being delivered in an efficient and cost-effective process, much domestic conveyancing could grind to a halt and, on the commercial front, Scotland could become an unattractive destination for doing business. In modernising and improving the function of land registration, an important balance has to be struck. My party accepts the need for that modernisation and, within the constraints of the time I have available, I will restrict my comments to the particular areas on which I would like the minister’s input. I also pay tribute to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee. I found its report to be very informative and helpful. The objective of completing the land register is essential and the statutory changes that are proposed to achieve that are positive. However, if voluntary registrations are cut off at the pass by excessive registration fees, progress will not be made. That is a fact. I urge the Scottish Government to produce the carrot in the form of voluntary registration fees that act as an inducement. There could be a trial charging regime for a fixed period to assess the response. If the fees in Scotland are significantly greater than those in the comparable process in England and Wales, that is not a good message. I accept that keeper-induced registrations are consistent with the ends of the bill, and the minister has sought to clarify the fee-charging mechanism, to some extent. I am still unclear about how the proposal will work in practice, so I urge the minister to spell that out in more detail. It is not only the involvement of the landowner that is significant; it is also about intimation to any secured creditor who has an equivalent interest. Without that clarification, the retention of section 29 will be problematic. Nothing could be more vital than the technical issue of the land register’s accuracy. There are problems with the scale of the Ordnance Survey map, particularly for remoter geographical areas. Interestingly, those problems also existed in the old sasine system, which depended on a combination of plans and a series of written descriptions of physical boundaries such as walls, hedges, burns and rivers. I suggest to the minister not only that such additional information should be a minimum requirement to accompany a land registration application, but that the documents should be retained by the keeper for the purposes of archive information and that they be accorded legal status. A professionally drawn surveyor’s plan that is fully measured to reference points of an area of ground is the most accurate description that the keeper can procure. An Ordnance Survey map cannot match that degree of accuracy. That additional information can only help the keeper and make the land register more robust. That is why, without legal status for such plans, the inherent weakness of title depending on an Ordnance Survey scale that is too small for purpose remains unaddressed. On electronic conveyancing—a bewildering concept to an old bird like me—I share the committee’s rejection of making it compulsory. The opportunities that will be provided by, and the potential of, proceeding with automated registration of title to land are obvious, and the committee was right to raise the twin issues of cost and safeguards. The provision that troubles me most is section 108, in which the theory of box-ticking usurping common sense seems to have manifested itself. I do not know who is responsible for the inclusion of section 108, because it does not seem to have many friends. It was not in the original Scottish Law Commission bill, it was not consulted on, and it did not seem to find support from witnesses or in written evidence to the committee. At present, any party or agent—whether purchaser, landowner, heritable creditor, solicitor, surveyor or other adviser to a land registration application—who is dishonest and who, through dishonest conduct, knowingly induces a registration of land, is committing a serious criminal offence and can and should be prosecuted under existing law. The proposed new law is unnecessary and grossly disproportionate. I urge the minister either to remove section 108 or to amend it heavily. Genuine error is a separate issue. I am concerned that section 33(1)(b) will give a power to the keeper that could be used excessively, to the detriment and prejudice of purchaser applicants and their heritable creditors. Rejection for a serious error or a material omission is one thing, but rejection on any other grounds seems to be irresponsible and could seriously prejudice a creditor’s interest. Finally, anything that replaces letters of obligation has to be very good. I still recall the spasm every time I signed a letter of obligation, knowing that I was personally guaranteeing the wellbeing of my partners and my firm—an onerous undertaking for which to be responsible. I welcome advance notices and support the motion.

It is difficult in an essentially technical debate to introduce ideas and concepts without risking repetition. I prefer to comment briefly on one or two points and leave the minister with more time to respond to the debate. That is not a cop-out on my part, because I was struck during the debate by a number of points that attracted attention from members on all sides of the chamber, not least the issue of voluntary registration and how we make people register, which is key to the bill’s success. I am pretty relaxed about targets. The much-vaunted target for tourism, for example, was set with the best of intentions, and now everyone keeps hanging their argument on it. The lesson to be learned is that, if the bill changes things for the better, we should assess the practical consequences of its implementation and consider whether adjustment or change is necessary. I was struck by some of the contributions on inducing greater voluntary registration. Hanzala Malik made an interesting point about large landowners such as the MOD. The MOD may well be amenable to an approach, and other larger landowners may take the same view. I noted that James Kelly and Paul Wheelhouse share my view that the charging mechanism could be the key, and I would like to hear the minister’s comments on that. On the accuracy of the land register, members such as Paul Wheelhouse made some good points about the genuine practical problems, particularly for remoter rural areas. Rob Gibson made an interesting point, but I am not quite sure whether I understood him completely. He seemed to be focusing on the OS map as the problem, and arguing that we should make that better. My concern is that, at present, I do not think that we can make an OS-based system better at dealing with issues relating to plots in rural areas on an appropriate scale. One line on an OS map may be a difference of several metres on the ground, which could be critical for the accuracy of title conferment and title interpretation. I go back to the point that we must ensure that the keeper is armed with all the ancillary information that she can get. There is a huge obligation on the registration applicant’s solicitor to provide as much information as possible. That may include professionally drawn surveyor’s plans and—as Mike MacKenzie indicated—information that is held in the old sasines system. Surely whatever informs the keeper about how to register a title is worth while only if it is given some type of legal status in the archive. Otherwise, where is the keeper to go when there is a subsequent registration application? I would like the minister to comment on that. It was no surprise to hear that a number of members on all sides of the chamber have profound concerns about section 108. Obviously, members of the minister’s own party were a little more circumspect in their observations, while others, such as myself, were a little blunter, but I would like to hear the minister’s further comments in that regard.

I am pleased to speak in the debate and I thank Fergus Ewing for lodging the motion. Tourism is a good news story. The debate has, by general assent, been positive, with a predictable element of unanimity. As members have said, our diverse Scottish tourism industry makes an important contribution to the Scottish economy. With an estimated total contribution of £11 billion, tourism encompasses numerous sectors and supports more than 240,000 jobs. Visitor spend in Scotland supports sectors such as transport and food and drink, as the minister acknowledged. VisitScotland has set out its objectives and priorities for the next few years, including tackling the challenge of seasonality, which is important, improving the quality of tourism jobs and making holidays in Scotland available for all. Those are welcome aspirations. A new phenomenon is emerging, which some members touched on: the staycation. Like so many modern terms, that is a bit jargony for my taste, but staycations are nonetheless important to our Scottish economy. Margaret McCulloch made that point. I hope that VisitScotland is engaging with all relevant Scottish agencies, travel operators, local authorities and accommodation providers to maximise the opportunities in that regard, because Scotland has much to offer the staycationer, be that the day visitor, the long-weekender or the residential holidaymaker. In my area, the west of Scotland, tourism is not only at the forefront of existing economic activity but offers untapped potential for more economic activity. Six out of the 10 Scottish Parliament constituencies in the west of Scotland are either bounded by the Clyde or include islands, such as Arran and Cumbrae. I wisely left Paisley to be dealt with comprehensively by George Adam. To see Arran, as I did on Monday, when I was holding a surgery and visiting the local secondary school on a glorious sunny day, is to witness something breathtaking. Arran is understandably called “Scotland in miniature”, but I never cease to be astonished at the number of people, many of them resident in Scotland, who have never visited the island. There is beautiful scenery, abundant wildlife, a wide range of accommodation, walking, climbing—all 874m of Goatfell, although I cannot vouch for that personally—and there are welcoming businesses and friendly locals. Even so, Arran’s economy is fragile. Tourism plays a vital role, and the island is accessible, with inclusive rail and ferry tickets to Brodick, but I ask the minister whether the ferry services are as flexible as they need to be if access to the island is to be maximised. The extension of the road equivalent tariff to the Ardrossan to Brodick ferry service will be important, but if that leads to more visitors, as we hope that it will do, a re-examination of ferry times could be required. Within the constraints of weather, the ferry service must suit the needs of the public and local businesses. I hope that the minister will confirm his willingness to consider the issues with CalMac ferries. Another Firth of Clyde gem is the combination of Largs and Cumbrae. Largs has undergone significant town centre regeneration, which is a positive development, and taking the short ferry trip to Cumbrae offers a marvellous day out. Again, both places are readily accessible by car and public transport and have a great deal to offer the day visitor and the residential tourist. Also crying out to be visited are attractive coastal locations such as Helensburgh and Kilcreggan, the latter being just a short ferry trip from Gourock, which is well worth a visit in its own right. Gourock has the unique heated seawater swimming pool, which is currently undergoing refurbishment but will reopen in summer. Who needs the balmy climes of the Med? That could be a delightful day out for the Ewing family. If one’s interest is culture and industrial heritage, which Stuart McMillan talked about so eloquently, Port Glasgow and Greenock have a lot to offer. Greenock has a beautiful esplanade and there is great ice cream at the cafe. If one’s taste runs to sandy beaches, West Kilbride, Seamill, Ardrossan, Saltcoats and Stevenston offer great choice and variety and are all accessible by public transport. Why would anyone want to go anywhere else? Those are all ideal staycation destinations, but we need a clearer strategy to recognise and promote the distinctive nature of staycations. I proudly trumpet the attractions of the Firth of Clyde as a tourist destination; other MSPs are equally proud to promote the beauty and attractions of their areas, as Siobhan McMahon and David Stewart did. They, too, will recognise the emerging opportunities of staycations, as Graeme Dey did. The future of our tourism industry is very important to us all. I think that, as well as focusing on the traditional and natural attraction of our country, it should look at the less obvious opportunities. Stuart McMillan’s speech was helpful in that regard. We have cultural tourism, to which the minister referred, wildlife tourism and archive tourism. Scotland is brimming with opportunity on all those fronts. As we look at the big events from which we will benefit—the Olympics, the Commonwealth games and the Ryder cup in 2014—it is important that we derive maximum benefit from the opportunities that they present. However, there is still more that we can do, and we must not lose sight of the less glamorous but still vital opportunities of staycations. I hope that the minister will comment specifically on that issue in his winding-up speech. I acknowledge and congratulate those who work so hard to make the sector vibrant and attractive to tourists. We look forward to Scotland enhancing its existing reputation as a world-class destination. I support the motion and the amendment.

I am pleased to speak in the debate, and I thank Humza Yousaf for bringing the issue before the Parliament. Gadburn school is outwith my region of West Scotland, but I am speaking on behalf of my colleague, Ruth Davidson, who is unable to attend. Ruth Davidson gave her support to Humza Yousaf’s motion after receiving correspondence from constituents who are concerned parents of children at Gadburn, and my colleague, Councillor David Meikle of Glasgow City Council, has written to the Scottish Government expressing his concerns. Gadburn is a non-denominational primary school, catering for children aged four to 12 years. It has a roll of 33, and meets the needs of children with additional learning needs, including some with autism spectrum disorder. I understand that the council proposes to close the school by August 2013, and to offer, as we have heard, additional support for learning provision in Barmulloch primary. There is clearly an apprehension that Glasgow City Council education department’s plans to shut Gadburn have been too hasty, and most parents are naturally fearful about the impact that integration with a mainstream primary will have on their children. In early 2011, the city council launched an official consultation into the future of the two schools, in which it outlined its plan to move the children at Gadburn to the new unit in Barmulloch primary. According to the consultation paper, measures would be taken to ease the transition, but it is instructive to note that of the 67 responses, only 15 supported the plan, while 45 were against and seven unclear. It is disappointing that the council then took the decision on 27 January of this year to close Gadburn school. The early years are an important time for children’s physical, emotional, educational and social development, Parents naturally want the very best for their children, including a schooling environment that supports their needs. Schools such as Gadburn aim to educate pupils who require additional support in a way that addresses those pupils’ individual differences and needs. That might include adapted equipment and materials, accessible settings and other interventions designed to help children who require additional support to achieve a higher level of self-sufficiency and success than if they were given access only to a typical classroom environment and education. Humza Yousaf’s description of some of the young people’s experiences is disturbing. “Gadburn School Handbook” states: “The pupils learn in a highly structured, ordered environment designed to reduce anxiety and prevent distraction. A clearly defined, predictable routine is followed throughout the day.” I can see, therefore, why Gadburn parents have genuine fears that a change in the school setting will be a seriously disruptive upheaval for their children. Ruth Davidson and I understand that the closure of a school, particularly one that provides additional support to students, is a sensitive subject. I know that the parents at the school have campaigned tirelessly to try to prevent the closure, and I sympathise with their concern about Glasgow City Council’s decision. There are significant concerns about the council’s decision-making process, and I urge the minister to listen to the parents’ legitimate concerns, heed these children’s very particular needs, and call in the decision. I support the motion.

6. To ask the Scottish Executive what it is doing to encourage parents to take their children to visit art galleries, theatres and museums. (S4O-00754)

I had no desire to wear the cabinet secretary out; I thank her for her response. She might be aware of an English survey of 2,000 parents of five to 12-year-olds, which reported last month that 40 per cent of those children had never been to an art gallery and 17 per cent had never been to a museum and that a quarter of the parents had never taken their offspring to the theatre. Is the situation the same in Scotland?

I, too, thank the cabinet secretary for bringing the important issue of human trafficking to the chamber. The debate has been well informed, and there has been much agreement on a range of points. Human trafficking—the recruitment, transportation, intimidation and incarceration of vulnerable persons—is deception and exploitation at their very worst, and it is to be condemned in the strongest possible terms. A simple Google search on human trafficking in Scotland in 2012 brings up horrifying headlines. There are details of victims of human sex trafficking in modern-day Scotland. Victims are threatened with witchcraft and subjected to torture and are vulnerable to death. Women are viewed as commodities and are forced to take alcohol and drugs. Trafficked women are forced to work for 16 hours a day and to have sex with numerous men. Those violations, including domestic servitude, occur throughout Scotland, not just in the shadowy back streets of our cities, and those abused individuals are not just physically captive; they are mentally shackled and controlled by traffickers. We must resolve as one to root out that evil and bring an end to that suffering. Law enforcement is important, and I welcome the cabinet secretary’s commitment to it. Jenny Marra was correct to say that quantifying the problem is difficult. As long ago as 2001, the International Organisation for Migration estimated that 1 million people were trafficked for sexual exploitation each year, and the United States Department of State claimed that 600,000 to 800,000 people were trafficked globally each year and that 80 per cent of them were female. That is simply a catalogue of incalculable human misery. The Equality and Human Rights Commission’s inquiry into human trafficking in Scotland was therefore timely. It was helpful that the Scottish and UK Government response was positively acknowledged, but it was still recognised that more could be done. As other members have indicated, it is disturbing that a low awareness of human trafficking was found among professionals and the public. It was also questioned whether authorities such as the police and health workers were sufficiently well attuned to spot or consider human trafficking issues. If that is allied with the conclusion that police and victim support services often did not work in co-operation and the fact that trafficking was observed to be an issue across Scotland, not just in cities, a troubling picture emerges. Given that the report recommended that the Scottish Government must be willing to take a leadership role in devolved areas and be proactive in its relationship with the UK Government over reserved areas, I am encouraged by the cabinet secretary’s response in holding this debate, and am encouraged by the motion and the intention to host a summit to refresh the strategic direction for policy and delivery. I say to the cabinet secretary that that should be sooner rather than later. I share Mary Fee’s and Alison McInnes’s anxiety about the possibility of trafficking increasing around the Commonwealth games. It is therefore urgent to frame a date and a structure for the summit. I hope that the minister will expand on that in her speech. The amendment that was lodged by my colleague Mr McLetchie underlines the need for cross-border co-operation. I thank Roddy Campbell for acknowledging the positive approach from Westminster. I realise that Christina McKelvie has a slightly less positive perception of the UK Border Agency, but I urge the cabinet secretary to share any concerns directly with the Home Secretary. I support that approach. Graeme Pearson also made that point. I have always found the Home Secretary to be reasonable and helpful.

I have a very tight time limit. If the member will forgive me, I want to expand on an important point. As other members have indicated, the report that Scotland’s Commissioner for Children and Young People published last year has also made an important contribution to the debate. It has some common themes with the report from Helena Kennedy, such as issues about awareness and training. We cannot disregard those conclusions, nor can we disregard the concerns that trafficked children are not identified when they come to the attention of agencies and that the capacity to investigate child trafficking is low. At Westminster, as my colleague Mr McLetchie indicated, the UK Government is taking steps to tackle trafficking and raise awareness. Much good work has been done there. Closer to home, there is one local weapon available to us in fighting this repugnant trade. As both reports confirm, awareness of trafficking is low. The justice system is supposed to prevent trafficking, but something has to trigger the intervention of the justice system and other agencies. Sadly, sex trafficking is very much a hidden crime and there are concerns about detecting the trafficking networks. These activities are covert; they are out of sight and in the shadows. The traffickers dread exposure. The prospect of being brought out into the light stops them in their tracks and brings an end to their nasty operations and their parasitic lifestyles. One weapon that we have is community intelligence. Individuals throughout Scotland need to be vigilant to report any suspicious activities. We are all observers and we can be the key to unlocking a trafficking network. I hope that the minister will reflect on that and perhaps indicate in her wind-up speech whether there could be a place for community representatives, in whatever form, at the proposed summit. Those horrid activities take place at community level and they can be uncovered and tackled at community level. I support the motion and the amendments.

Is the summit proposed for later this year?

I am pleased that we have the opportunity to debate prison visiting committees this morning. I thank Patrick Harvie for lodging a motion on 17 January that encapsulated admirably why this issue is so important. I had no hesitation in supporting the motion and I was not alone in doing so. To preserve that consensus, I have repeated the motion verbatim—I could not improve on it. I look forward to Patrick Harvie’s contribution to the debate. I use the word “debate” advisedly. The Scottish Government’s approach to this matter is less than perfect; indeed it is manifestly flawed. However, I have noticed since last May that although the First Minister and I disagree on many things, he has not regarded his majority as a mandate to steamroller through any Scottish National Party pet project. Indeed, where reasoned argument has been deployed and the possibility has emerged that the Scottish Government might not have got something right, he has deferred to the Parliament and shown a willingness to listen. I very much hope that this debate may allow that precedent to be observed today. I shall comment briefly on the role of our Scottish prison visiting committees and, in doing so, thank and pay tribute to the dedicated volunteers who organise and carry out those visits. They do something unique. In a captive situation, which is what a prison is, no matter how well intended the Scottish Prison Service and prison officers are, for prisoners they are part of the system—part of officialdom. Many prisoners feel unable to trust them or confide in them. The prison visitor, on the other hand, is something very different: a person who is independent, who has no axe to grind and who is not part of the system. It is no surprise, therefore, that prison visitors can establish a positive relationship with the prisoner in a way that is impossible for many prison officers. That is not a comment on the prison officer; it is simply a consequence of what prison is. There is ample evidence to suggest that a prisoner may speak to a prison visitor when they will speak to no one else. That is not supposition on my part: the HMP Addiewell prison visiting committee’s response to the 2011 consultation notes a variety of ways in which the prison visitor was able to intervene in important issues in an important way. The other aspect of prison visitors is that they do not inspect; they independently monitor, and they do so consistently. It is also acknowledged that they may be far better able to identify a potential suicide risk. It is not surprising, therefore, that prison visitors are regarded as helping and supporting the prison service in a very positive manner. That is certainly the private view of a number of governors and prison officers. Indeed, it would be bizarre for a prison officer to hold a different view, unless to such a prison officer a conscientious prison visitor was a tiresome inconvenience. Prison visitors enjoy an attribute that I would have thought would be irresistible to any Government: they are free, because they volunteer their services. The cost of training and operating the VC scheme annually is approximately £75,000, and the services that visitors volunteer for that modest outlay are impressive. I have mentioned the Addiewell example, but there is also the visiting committee for young offenders in Cornton Vale. According to its 2010-11 report, seven visitors made 205 visits in that period. I understand that each visit is six hours long. Interestingly, for pretty obvious reasons, the prison visitation scheme has never needed anyone to plead its case. The virtues have been self-evident, as was recognised in the 2005 review. The “Report on the review of prison visiting committees 2005” stated: “At the outset, the group tackled in depth the fundamental question of whether there was still a need for VCs paying particular attention to the existence of the Prisons Inspectorate and the Scottish Prisons Complaints Commissioner ... Discussions took place with the Chief Inspector of Prisons and the Complaints Commissioner who agreed that there was a distinctive and important albeit complementary role for visiting committees. Principally, the distinctiveness arose from VCs being representative of local communities, being independent of the prison service and in the sustaining of a continuing regular relationship with a particular prison.” Importantly, that review group concluded that visiting committees “should be retained”. Following that review, the then Labour-Liberal Democrat Scottish Executive accepted 32 of the 39 recommendations. In 2007, the incoming SNP Government endorsed that position. The Scottish Government then—for reasons that were at best opaque, because it had already endorsed the 2005 report—decided to undertake a further consultation last year. I say “opaque”, because normally a consultation is instigated when something is no longer working or is no longer relevant, or when external circumstances have dictated change. However, that was not stated to be the case in the consultation document. Tellingly, it said that the key driver for the consultation was the Scottish Government’s commitment to simplify the landscape of public sector organisations in Scotland. It was nothing to do with prisoners or prisons, with trying to replace a very good service with a better one or with the most basic of human rights. I support the principle of public sector reform, but not if that means trampling all over people’s human rights, and not if a very good service is replaced with a less good one at far greater cost to the taxpayer. Nonetheless, the consultation proceeded, and the results are most informative. Overwhelmingly, respondents voted and believed that the visiting committees should remain, and that they should complement Her Majesty’s inspectorate of prisons. The respondents overwhelmingly endorsed the 2005 review and overwhelmingly rejected integration of visiting committees with the Scottish Prison Service. Any view that the work of prison visitors could be undertaken by HM inspectorate of prisons was blown out of the water by HMIP itself, whose submission recognised “the importance of local and regular monitoring of individual prisons. The individual Visiting Committees carry out this role, which also includes dealing with complaints. HMIP does not deal with prisoners’ complaints.” To me, the most intriguing response came from the Scottish Prison Service, which was the only organisation to oppose the continuation of visiting committees. Its response is that prisons have changed and that more people from outside enter them in a variety of capacities. Well, what has changed so dramatically since 2005? The answer is nothing. So, overwhelmingly—indeed, one might say crushingly—

I accept the point that Mr Finnie makes about the ancillary activity that takes place, but nothing has changed about the fundamental character of a captive prisoner being looked after by a prison service and the complete conflict of interest if the prisoner has an issue with the prison service. The reek of self-interest from the Scottish Prison Service’s submission is overpowering. I do not think that the SPS likes independent prison visitors or their monitoring prisoners, establishing relationships that the SPS cannot emulate or investigating complaints, all of which are probably about as welcome to the SPS as a thistle in the backside. If I were the SPS, I probably would not like it either. But this is not about the SPS; it is about prisoners who, whatever they have done, are entitled to independent—

I am very tight for time, Mr MacAskill. Please forgive me if I continue with my argument. The Scottish Government may be inclined towards a narrower view of the SPS and the position of prisoners within it, but my concern is that prisoners must have access to independent help, support and advice, because that may well be needed at times when they are making a complaint against the prison service or against the Scottish Government. On the whole issue of human rights, I think that everyone in the chamber will have received a letter from the Scottish Human Rights Commission in which it says explicitly that it shares my concerns and fully supports my motion. So this is not solely my interpretation of the matter. I urge the Scottish Government to consider this very carefully. Why abolish the much admired provision of independent support to prisoners carried out by committed and able volunteers? Why replace it with a contracted service that will be liable for VAT and cost the public purse an estimated £1.2 million; will be unable to replicate the depth and extent of the service provided by prison visitors; will result in greater pressure on prison officers; will almost certainly contravene international law and invite legal challenge; and, most important, will leave that most vulnerable section of our society—a captive prison population—without resort to truly independent support and help? I have pleasure in asking the cabinet secretary to listen carefully to the views advanced in the debate. We will not be supporting the amendment. I move, That the Parliament notes with concern the Scottish Government’s proposals to abolish prison visiting committees and replace them with a prisoner advocacy service; considers that the independent scrutiny of prison conditions through regular, unannounced inspections and the independent examination of prisoner complaints is an important check and balance for the prison system; believes that, as they provide regular external scrutiny, are appointed from the local community and are independent from the Scottish Prison Service, prison visiting committees provide a distinct but complementary role to Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Prisons; notes that the Scottish Government’s consultation on the independent monitoring of prisons, which was carried out in 2011, did not include proposals for an advocacy service to replace the committees and that 59 out of 60 respondents to the consultation wanted to retain the independent oversight role that it considers the committees fulfil; further notes that, in 2005, a review of the committees recommended that they be re-established as independent monitoring boards and that there should be changes to improve their impact and consistency; understands that, on 22 December 2011, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice said that the cost of running the committees was less than that anticipated for the proposed advocacy service, and believes that prison visiting committees offer excellent value for money, that they should be retained and that the proposed prisoner advocacy service should complement, but not replace, their role.

I realise that amnesia can be alluring and attractive for politicians, but I remind the member that something has happened since the 19th century, namely the intensive review of 2005, the findings of which were endorsed by the SNP.

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

4. To ask the Scottish Executive what national health service structures exist to support whistleblowers and what plans there are to develop them. (S4O-00632)

Does the cabinet secretary accept that, within the NHS, lines of accountability become very blurred if an employee undertakes a particular role in, for example, a community health and care partnership, which has its own management and governance structures? If issues arise in such a case, to whom can the employee speak without fear of victimisation or reprisal?

I am pleased to speak in this afternoon’s debate on the year of creative Scotland. I am a great supporter of culture, and if my solitude in the chamber today suggests that I am advancing the cause in isolation, I should say that my party is very much behind what is happening. Of course, the initiative has already begun. The bells of hogmanay and the spectacular fireworks in our capital city marked the beginning of this creative year, and it is the beginning of an exciting period that embraces London 2012 and Glasgow 2014 and generates momentum towards the homecoming of 2014. Through a year-long programme of activity, Scotland will celebrate our artistic and cultural heritage. Although I recognise that 2012 has been given the title of the year of creative Scotland, we all appreciate that, year in and year out, Scotland showcases its breadth of talent to the world. Scots and tourists alike are treated to wonderful productions, world-class events, festivals and shows, and we should pay tribute to everyone who makes that happen. Scotland is rich in heritage and one of the world’s most dynamic and creative nations. This year, in particular, we celebrate that fact. The initiative is ambitious in scope as it involves the spectrum of the creative industries, and Creative Scotland is not shirking on its investment, having put £6.5 million into the creative Scotland 2012 programme—that is no small amount of money. I also agree with Patricia Ferguson that Creative Scotland working in tandem with VisitScotland, EventScotland and VOCAL is sensible. I welcome all that in principle. However, this is a debate, so I would also welcome the response of the Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism, Mr Ewing, if he is winding up, to concerns about the emphasis being on promoting what already exists. That emphasis has a place, but what about the anxieties of organisations that depend on Creative Scotland not for a one-off jamboree but for basic funding just to keep going? They need some certainty and reassurance about the shape of future funding. I hope that the minister will agree that while we look to Creative Scotland to co-ordinate and facilitate delivery of very exciting projects for the year, we do not want the staple diet of recurring and excellent creative activity falling off the radar screen. Nevertheless, I welcome the diversity of what is proposed and I am delighted to see the geographical spread of activity. I am the first to hold up my hands to taking the cultural banquet that is regularly on offer from Edinburgh and Glasgow completely for granted. Those of us who live in the central belt are fortunate. The iconic locations and events with which Scotland is now indelibly associated—Edinburgh castle, Stirling castle, our museums in Edinburgh and Glasgow, the Edinburgh international festival and fringe and Glasgow’s Aye Write! festival—all have their proud place, which is entirely appropriate. I think that a particular highlight this year will be the Royal Edinburgh Military Tattoo, which will have a wealth of creative talent from four continents and will pay tribute to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth’s diamond jubilee as well as the year of creative Scotland. That will be a special celebration and a crowd-puller, and a terrific advertisement for Scotland. Among all the high-profile bells and whistles, I am delighted to see activity in some of our more remote communities being recognised and rewarded. I was pleased that the minister referred to that. I pay tribute to three towns that have won creative places awards in recognition of their status as Scotland’s most creative places. Wigtown in Dumfries and Galloway received £50,000 for winning in the category of places with fewer than 2,500 residents. The town already hosts a successful book festival and the award will allow the book festival to be developed into a year-round programme. I know the area well and regard it with great affection, having holidayed there, so that is great news. It is precisely what a local community like that needs. In my own west of Scotland region, West Kilbride was awarded £100,000—I hope that Wigtown will not come with a war cry to West Kilbride—in the category of places with fewer than 10,000 residents and is seeking to develop itself as craft town Scotland. West Kilbride has a special place in my heart. I have known it since childhood and it was probably my introduction to the seaside. Indeed, I have been known to take a dook in the chilly Firth of Clyde there, but before Mr Ewing collapses it was admittedly not recently and it is certainly not for the faint-hearted. West Kilbride has so much potential in such a beautiful setting and the award can only enhance its growing reputation. Ally that with a train service, good road connections, its proximity to Portencross castle and its historic connection with the ancient Scottish kings, a sandy beach, a golf course designed by old Tom Morris and local recreational facilities, and West Kilbride to me is a wee diamond and a must-visit destination. If you cannot get there, St Andrews will have to do. St Andrews featured in the category of places with fewer than 100,000 residents and won £150,000, which was a significant achievement that will greatly enhance what it is trying to do. Again, on the local front, Creetown in Galloway and Huntly in the north-east have both impressed with their long-standing creative programmes involving the whole community, so the reach is indeed both local and broad. That localism matters, so I support Patricia Ferguson’s amendment. It is very important that we give a physical assurance that all this is reaching out and beyond the two Mecca points of Glasgow and Edinburgh in the central belt. As the minister said, the year will proudly feature a host of cultural delights that are too numerous to mention, some familiar names and some less so—I wish them all well. However, as well as celebrating all that, we should keep our heads screwed on. It is important that we do not view all this in isolation. I think that Patricia Ferguson alluded to that aspect slightly. We need to ensure that there is a legacy from the activity and the disbursement of public money and that we build on and develop our cultural infrastructure. As we enjoy the events of the year in Scotland and in the UK and look forward to the Glasgow Commonwealth games and the 2014 homecoming, I have two ambitions. First, for the homecoming, can we aim to exceed the proportion of overseas visitors that we achieved in 2009? Secondly, if we are repeating the gathering, can we have the most stringent financial safeguards to protect creditors? I am confident that 2012 will be an exciting year and I wish all those involved every success. I support the motion and the amendment.

I echo Kevin Stewart in saying that this has been an extremely interesting debate in which, predictably, there has been little dissent. Its most obvious feature is what has emerged about the diversity of Scotland’s creativity. The minister set the scene with her reference to diverse events such as the cultural olympiad, with the 2012 festival including the marvellous concert in Stirling featuring the Simón Bolívar Youth Orchestra. Her reference to peripatetic ballet alarmed me a little, but as long as I am not involved, I am right behind it. She indicated a breadth of activity about which we can feel excited and proud. Clare Adamson paid a deserved tribute to the role played by Alasdair Gray. I was struck by Mark McDonald’s reference to youth art in Aberdeen and by the references to fishing in Deeside and admiring Balmoral, which seemed to be Dennis Robertson’s very worthwhile pastimes. The whole issue of localism was reflected in Patricia Ferguson’s amendment, about which I spoke in my own contribution. I detect support for the need to ensure that we do not disregard localism and get carried away in a huge froth of excitement about the big, glitzy events but are also right down there in our communities. Several contributors made important points about that. Margaret McCulloch talked about Lanarkshire and the Kittochside museum, which I have visited. I recommend it to anyone; it is a fabulous experience. Several members gave impressive descriptions of what is available in their parts of Scotland. Some powerful points were made about the economy. The minister alluded to that, and Margaret McCulloch made some important observations, too. I had not realised the extent, according to Scottish Enterprise, of the contribution that is made by the sector—£5.4 billion, which is a whacking big amount of money. That makes it clear how culture can drive tourism and how the concept of cultural tourism is so important to us. I was struck by her observations on the role of skills and work experience in cultural tourism; she hits the nail on the head in that regard. There is an important benefit to be derived from that. Kevin Stewart was very candid. I enjoyed the part of his speech where he said, if I understood him correctly, that we do not always quite tie up the marketing of culture and tourism. That is a point well made. Perhaps we need to look at what we market, to whom we are trying to market it and what we are saying to those people.

That is a helpful observation, and I am sure that the minister will take it to heart. On the fundamental question of skills and the creative industries, Margaret McCulloch said that we need to ensure that training is in place, and she mentioned the hospitality trade. I think that we are all aware that first impressions are all-important. When visitors come to Scotland, we want to ensure that they have a very positive experience at whatever level their engagement is taking place. Perhaps the message is that we all need to be more proactive. I must confess that I am pretty passive; if I am in an eaterie somewhere and do not think that the service is all that great, I tend to just grin and bear it and disappear. Perhaps we need to be slightly more vigilant, and, if we think that something is not quite up to scratch, we should think to ourselves, “This isn’t just about the service I’m getting—it’s an advertisement for our country.” We may need to make people more aware of that. Jean Urquhart made a fascinating speech about the historic legacy. She may be surprised to hear me say that, but she should not be too alarmed by my paean of praise. I enjoyed her speech very much. She referred to the whole spectrum of historic cultural contribution, whether Sir David Lindsay’s “Thrie Estatis” or the Unity Players—yes, I knew what she was talking about—and the exciting concept of a new enlightenment. That illustrated the minister’s observation, quoting Einstein, that “Creativity is contagious. Pass it on.” The quotation from the schoolchild about Mackintosh and Greek Thomson was entertaining and encouraging. My love of the historic legacy probably tends more towards books. It occurs to me that we have writers such as Guy McCrone, Neil Munro and A J Cronin who were all novelists in their day but who now perform the role of social commentators on conditions in Scotland in their time. We should be careful, in our quest for new talent and new contributions to the creative field, that we do not forget that there is some valuable stuff in the background as well. It has been a pleasure to take part in the debate, which has been positive. I make a serious point to the minister: let us have an ambition for the year of homecoming in 2014 to improve the number of overseas visitors. The gathering was a bit of bad press. We do not want to repeat that bad press so, if the gathering is to happen again, we must be extremely vigilant and careful about the financial constraints that surround it.

The 2009 homecoming event attracted a disappointingly small proportion—only 8.6 per cent—of visitors from overseas, and it was overshadowed by the financial shambles surrounding the gathering, which left a trail of unpaid debtors. How will the Scottish Executive increase the number of visitors from overseas for the 2014 event? How will that event avoid a repeat of the gathering fiasco?

I was just swithering about whether there ought to be a collective noun for Annabels, and then Annabelle Ewing and I would be included as one. I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate and thank Joan McAlpine for lodging the motion. It is important that the Parliament debates such issues. It is also important to emphasise the positive presence that Scotland’s music talent represents and to emphasise that the new, unsigned part of that talent is a vital element. There is much in the motion with which I sympathise and agree, but I am sure that it has not escaped Joan McAlpine’s hawk eye that I have not signed it. That was not because of any major disagreement with it, but because of a slight nagging unease that, perhaps, an opportunity was being overlooked. I will advance my argument. First, I pay tribute to the very talented musicians that we have in Scotland and to the courage and commitment of new artists. I confirm support for the excellent work that, as Joan McAlpine said, Ally McCrae and Vic Galloway have done in nurturing that new talent and, as the motion says, giving that “talent exposure to the listening public”. Undoubtedly, those are positive factors and they should be recognised. I appreciate that it is hard for new musicians to break into the music business. I am aware that with the growth of social media sites, YouTube and music talent television programmes, there are already more forums available for exposure of that talent and for networking than has previously been the case. I want to make it clear that in no way do I diminish the efforts on the part of both listeners and campaigners to raise their concerns. They have done so passionately and the social media to which I have referred has been an important conduit for that campaign. However, prior to the debate I reflected on what talented new musicians who are trying to break through want to achieve, and I think that the answer is publicity and exposure that are as widespread as possible and not restricted to Scotland. That desire must be considered alongside licence fee issues.

If I had more time, I would like to take issue with the member’s proposition. My point is that it is right that we have to try to achieve a degree of exposure and publicity. The argument that I am advancing is that perhaps we cannot always achieve what we would desire to achieve in an ideal world. What we desire to achieve must be considered alongside licence fee issues and what is sustainable, cost wise. I will explore those two themes a little further. As I understand the current situation, “Introducing in Scotland” is a Radio 1 network programme. For three out of the four weeks it broadcasts in Scotland and on the fourth week it broadcasts UK-wide. I believe that what is proposed is a Radio 1 programme that will broadcast UK-wide every week and on which one of the co-presenters will still be Ally McCrae. At the same time, apart from the other social media outlets to which I referred, music talent in Scotland will continue to be covered by Radio Scotland and Radio nan Gàidheal, which already broadcast a wide range of music. I move to what I accept might be the slightly tedious but nonetheless inescapable issue of cost. Some rather stark facts have to be considered. The BBC informs me that the listening audience for the existing programme is about 9,000 people. Interestingly, in Wales, whose population is only three fifths of Scotland’s population, the listening audience for its counterpart is 12,000. My information from the BBC is that the current programme costs about 22p per listener, whereas the average cost for other specialist music programmes is only 0.8p per listener. I am informed that the cost of the new programme will be about a fifth of the cost of the current one. I bring those facts into the debate, because whatever we want or might aspire to achieve in an ideal world has to be balanced by the other relevant factors. On the one hand, I can totally understand the interest in and support for “Introducing in Scotland”, but I am anxious that a better opportunity and a bigger potential audience may be provided by the new programme. Let me conclude as I began. There is no major disagreement with the motion. It has been important to debate the issue. I think that the BBC will understand the obligation to ensure that the reservations expressed in the motion, and what has been said in the debate, are taken into account and to ensure that the new proposed programme manifestly addresses the concerns.

I am pleased that my motion on the Volunteer Centre East Dunbartonshire has been selected for members’ business this evening. I thank the MSPs who have supported it, and I particularly appreciate the cross-party support. That reflects the wide appreciation by MSPs across the chamber of the vital role that the Volunteer Centre East Dunbartonshire and many other local organisations throughout Scotland play in our communities. In November last year, I was privileged to visit the centre in Kirkintilloch, to meet staff and to learn about the excellent work that the centre does. I know that members across the chamber are diligent in making visits, but I have to say that when I emerged from that one I said to my researcher, “What an uplifting experience!” It was like drinking a glass of champagne. The centre provides a central point for volunteering throughout East Dunbartonshire. It aims to support and encourage local people to offer their services to help others in their community—it is the focal point where people are encouraged, enabled and have the opportunity to volunteer. When I stepped through the door, the enthusiasm and passion were tangible. That is down to the positive can-do approach reflected by all the staff, not least Paul O’Kane and Elaine, with whom I spent most time. Some of the staff are with us in the public gallery, and I welcome them to the debate. Those of us who were privileged to listen to Paul earlier today during time for reflection saw that passion and enthusiasm at first hand. I thought that he nailed it when he posed the question: what would happen if we woke up one morning to find that there were no volunteers? I think that there would be a Scotland full of voids and black holes, with thousands of lonely, vulnerable and unsupported people. No Government minister or local authority leader of any political hue could fill that void. Volunteering is unique. It is the antithesis of selfishness. It is basically the implementation in people’s own time and without remuneration of the enduring principles of people helping their neighbour and doing what they can to help others, not because they have to but because they want to. Those principles are all too often pushed aside. We are all guilty of that—usually not intentionally but simply because other pressures in life eat into our time and compete for our attention. That is why the East Dunbartonshire centre is so important. It reminds us of the need to volunteer, to help and to remember others around us. It also co-ordinates those who want to volunteer, and of course it plays a vital role in facilitating how to volunteer. However, that is only part of the story, because volunteering involves a symbiotic relationship—it is an exchange. It brings benefits not only to the recipient but to the volunteer. Indeed, among the reasons the volunteer Scotland website lists for why people should volunteer is because it feels good and because there will be “No More Billy/Mary Nae Mates”. However, there are other benefits for the volunteer. Volunteering can be a very social activity and can help people to make new contacts and meet new friends. It can provide new skills and experience. According to the Volunteer Centre East Dunbartonshire, just over 50 per cent of the people who go to volunteer centres are on jobseekers allowance or incapacity benefit. Volunteering is a recognised pathway to personal development, learning and employment. Importantly, it can be immensely satisfying and hugely enjoyable. On my visit to the Volunteer Centre East Dunbartonshire I was particularly interested to hear about the specific projects that it runs. Two in particular stood out for me: the befriending service, which for me represents the essence of what a volunteer’s presence can do; and the volunteer champions project, which endeavours to promote and encourage volunteering among our youngsters. The befriending service was first introduced by the centre more than 11 years ago. Befriending is a supported relationship between two people. It is usually face to face but it can be by telephone, letter or e-mail. The service pairs a volunteer with an isolated adult, and there have been approximately 300 successful matches. The befriending relationship is initiated, supported and monitored by volunteer centre befriending service staff. The project aims to make a difference to the quality of life of people who experience social isolation due to ageing, disability or other changes in their circumstances. It provides a vital source of friendship, assistance and company. How marvellous and, like so many good things, how simple. The volunteer champions youth volunteering project was developed by the volunteer centre in partnership with Turnbull high school in Bishopbriggs. Volunteer champions receive training from the centre so that they can promote a volunteering culture in their school and local community. In phase 1, the centre recruited 16 volunteer champions, who successfully completed their training in Turnbull high school and went on to promote volunteering and volunteering awards within the school environment. A volunteering hub is now being established in the school to assist the promotion of volunteering. The champions are fully involved in the project’s development and are encouraged to take ownership of the programme. I think that that is fantastic. The champions learn many new skills. They learn how to produce confident and motivating presentations, set up a volunteer stand at public events, work better in a team, overcome nerves and extend their knowledge of volunteering. When I visited I was delighted to meet Luisa, who runs the volunteer champions project. I also met Rachel, a volunteer champion and former Turnbull high school pupil. Both girls have clearly benefited from being involved with volunteering from a young age and both are a credit to the centre and to themselves. All those young people are a superbly positive advertisement for their local area. What, then, is the positive message from the Volunteer Centre East Dunbartonshire? First, although we are often told in the media that community spirit is dead and that everyone is busy or out for themselves, I can tell members that community spirit is in fact very much alive and kicking in East Dunbartonshire and Scotland. It was also clear to me that volunteering is cool. Our youngsters want that opportunity. I congratulate the Volunteer Centre East Dunbartonshire and its dedicated staff on the tremendous success of what they do and thank them for being such an inspiration to everyone else. I am glad that Parliament has been able to show support for their efforts this evening.

It is a pleasure to take part in this positive debate. It is clear that we all agree that the Commonwealth games represent an exciting opportunity. A great deal of very hard work and professional commitment contributed to Glasgow’s successful bid; indeed, I remember being in the Old Fruitmarket for the victory announcement. The excitement was palpable—I think that I might even have kissed Nicola Sturgeon. The whole venture is surrounded by high hopes and good will. Glasgow wants it to be a success; we want it to be a success; and Scotland wants it to be a success. Of course, as members have indicated, we want Scotland to benefit from the Olympic games as well. However, if we are to translate the good intentions and aspirations into reality, there must be robust, objective and, if necessary, critical assessment of progress. The 2009 report “On your marks ... Get set ... Go: A games legacy for Scotland” laid out a positive set of objectives for the Commonwealth games. I will concentrate on two of the areas that were covered: young people and the economy. I might look an improbable candidate to take part in a debate about sport in general and the Commonwealth games in particular, but I have had my moments—at least, I vaguely recall that I have had my moments. When I was active in sport, two things were important: a structure by which I could engage in sport and role models to encourage me. I am delighted by the desire to ensure that, by 2022, 80 per cent of children meet the recommended level of physical activity that is set out in the national activity strategy. That is great, but how will it actually happen? When I was at Greenock academy, which was a state secondary school, we had something called games every week and interschool matches every Saturday. There was hockey for the girls and—yes, Mr Wheelhouse—rugby for the boys. In the summer term, we had tennis, athletics and cricket. That led me from the age of 12 into a life in which sport was a regular component. Competing was fun and winning was a bonus, although a somewhat infrequent one. That activity continued at university and beyond and it certainly had benefits for me way beyond the actual sport. Neil Bibby referred to that aspect. The role models were not just Wimbledon tennis champions and ace athletes; they were the dedicated and passionate physical education teachers who turned out in all weathers to instruct, train and inspire. Only in adulthood did I really appreciate how much I owed them. They were supported by other teaching colleagues whose commitment to their pupils extended to assisting with umpiring, refereeing and bus duties for away games. Can we really say that such or even similar opportunities exist for youngsters at secondary school today? They might do in the private sector, and those pupils and schools are very lucky, but what about the state sector, particularly when recreational areas and open spaces are disappearing at an alarming rate? Those reservations about what exactly is available to school pupils are shared by the Scottish sports alliance. The Scottish health, household and recreation surveys have indicated that there has been no significant impact on the average level of physical activity among Scots. A British Medical Journal report in 2010 showed a mixed picture on the legacy of large sporting events. My friend Nanette Milne urged caution in how we view the legacy. If we want to deliver a worthy legacy for our young people, the Scottish Government must commission an audit now of how, where, when and by whom that legacy will be delivered. It is not just about a fitter future for our young people, although that is important, but about identifying Scottish sporting talent for the future, which is too precious an issue to leave to speculation and good intention. I hope that the Scottish Government will respond positively to that suggestion. The Government should also be prepared to report on progress to the Parliament. Patricia Ferguson’s sensible amendment makes that point, and we will support it. Economic benefits have featured as an identifiable legacy. As many members have said, not least John Mason, benefits are already visible for Glasgow, which is hugely important. We can anticipate direct spend in the Glasgow and Scottish economies from spectators and visitors but, again, anticipation and expectation are not enough and there are health warnings hovering around. The British Medical Journal report confirmed that an increase in tourist numbers cannot be taken as a given. During the games in Lillehammer, Seoul, Barcelona and Atlanta, tourist numbers increased, but that did not happen during the games in Manchester and Calgary, and Sydney showed mixed results. If we want to translate economic potential into reality, we need robust activity to measure what is happening on the ground. I ask the Scottish Government to liaise regularly with Glasgow City Council, the Glasgow Chamber of Commerce, the Scottish Chambers of Commerce and the Confederation of British Industry Scotland to get accurate feedback from businesses on whether progress is actually being made or is just fondly imagined. Again, I expect the Scottish Government to report back to the Parliament on what those organisations find. The debate has been informed, interesting and constructive, as Bob Doris said. I hope that the Scottish Government will respond in a similar vein. I support the motion and the amendment.

This has been a worthwhile debate. The debate is an important annual reminder of events, behaviour and attitudes that are completely unacceptable. We have all welcomed the emphasis on focusing on prevention as a means to an end. As Jackie Baillie said, it is a positive feature of the Parliament that since its inception we have frequently debated these issues in a constructive manner. I remember speaking in a debate in 2003 in support of the then national strategy to address domestic abuse in Scotland and another national strategy to prevent domestic abuse. At the same time, we celebrated the Protection from Abuse (Scotland) Act 2001. Since then, devolved Governments have brought forward a variety of measures, initiatives and legislation to address the challenge, endeavouring to improve the situation for victims and potential victims. As the minister said, the Scottish Government has taken a proactive approach, which has included raising public awareness through media campaigns and increasing support for courts in Scotland by drawing on the experience of the domestic abuse court in Glasgow. I echo Johann Lamont’s positive comment about the domestic abuse court in Glasgow and I have a suggestion for the minister. Why do not we consider having a floating expert sheriff in domestic abuse, who would go to the court that has the problem, rather than use a more rigid structure and try to create a court in the location? As others have done, I applaud the tireless and outstanding work carried out by Scottish Women’s Aid and the other organisations that, together, have been such powerful influencers and effective advocates for those who live in the dark shadow of abuse. All these activities and achievements suggest that positive progress is being made and that something that has stained and diminished Scotland is being tackled head-on and might be receding. However, the debate has highlighted that the unacceptable attitudes and bullying behaviour towards women of so many men—conduct that we find repugnant and unacceptable—are still out there, as Anne McTaggart and Dennis Robertson ably described. That is why we must never cease to investigate and challenge such behaviour and to intervene to support abused, fragile and frightened women. They need the reassurance that they are not alone, that they are not forgotten and, perhaps most important, that they are not in the wrong. When I looked back to 2003, I was struck by the figures. Recorded incidents of domestic abuse against women in 2002-03 totalled just over 32,000. Although the 2009-10 figure represents a welcome decrease from the preceding year, let there be no complacency. The stark fact is that since 2000-01 there has been a 33 per cent increase in the number of female victims of domestic abuse. On the positive side, I am clear that prevention and early intervention are the way to go. However, we have to be vigilant in monitoring current strategies and initiatives. Some approaches work and some do not. The official data discloses a repeat pattern of abuse. That is obvious from some of the recent data. We have to be clear about whether we are putting the necessary emphasis on the first report of an incident, because if we are not, a repeat pattern of abuse is likely to emerge. We also know from the Scottish crime and justice survey 2009-10 that more than six out of 10 of those who had experienced partner abuse in the previous 12 months had told at least one person or organisation about that most recent incident. Given that we know of the tendency towards repeat patterns of behaviour, are we sure that we are highlighting to victims and to their friends, their relatives or whoever they have confided in that intervention could achieve prevention? It is better to be safe than sorry. I conclude with two observations. First, as David McLetchie ably and extensively described, despite our best efforts to focus on intervention and prevention, some perpetrators will end up in the criminal justice system. I say to the minister that it is essential that judges have the option of custodial disposals available to them. I hope that the Scottish Government will rigorously track what is happening to ensure that no judge is being denied that option. Secondly, the statistics confirm that too many men still behave towards women in a disgraceful, inexcusable and utterly unacceptable manner. As Jackie Baillie said, it is a societal issue—Marco Biagi eloquently referred to that aspect. The debate sends out a message to those men that Scotland is on their case. They must stop this behaviour. They will not win. They will eventually be found out, shamed and dealt with. I support the motion and the amendment.

I thank Mr Findlay for the motion. As others have indicated, the level of support not just in the chamber but from the public galleries should tell the Scottish Government in no uncertain terms just how significant the issue is to communities the length and breadth of Scotland. I support Mr Findlay’s motion. There is a logic in the issue and a rather depressing conclusion to be drawn on the back of that logic, which became apparent four and a half years ago. When the Scottish National Party made clear its ideological opposition to the generation of nuclear energy in Scotland—I do not agree with it, but it is perfectly entitled to do that—there flew from that policy certain inevitable conclusions. One conclusion is that, if we exclude that component of energy provision in Scotland, we will have to have a renewed emphasis and focus on other forms of energy generation. It is clear that one form that has emerged is the contribution that is to be made by the generation of energy from wind turbines. The main point that I desire to make to the minister this evening is a broad one, and there have been echoes of it in the many excellent speeches this evening. The logical conclusion of what has happened over the past four and a half years under the policy that has been driven by the Scottish Government is that we now have a strategic energy policy that undoubtedly depends on a contribution from wind turbines. It is a policy that is pursued with vigour by ministers, the very consequence of which is to subject our planning system to what is now manifestly intolerable strain. I am aware from my own West Scotland region, not least with communities such as Uplawmoor, that there are communities and individuals throughout Scotland who feel marginalised, ignored and irrelevant and who have absolutely no confidence in the planning system. That is not only intolerable; it is utterly wrong. I will adhere to brevity, Presiding Officer. My message to the minister is simple: the Government should review its energy policy and current planning law and procedure because the public in Scotland are ill served by both, and the current position is unsustainable and ludicrous. It is within the control and the power of the Scottish Government to take corrective action now, and there are communities throughout Scotland—as is manifest from the number of members of the public who are here tonight—that are calling on the Scottish Government to sort out the issue and to do so soon.

2. To ask the Deputy First Minister when she will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-00215)

This week’s Citigroup report did not talk about oil and gas; it talked about the Scottish National Party’s policy on energy and, in particular, renewable power. It specifically warned that, in an independent Scotland, we would require an annual subsidy of around £4 billion, which would mean an estimated hike of nearly £900 for every Scottish household and £2 billion for Scottish businesses. The Deputy First Minister described the report as wrong and flawed. Can she tell me which bit of the estimates is wrong and flawed? If she cannot, how can she justify placing such an intolerable burden on Scotland?

The Deputy First Minister may rest assured that I shall not conduct a love-in. However, I thank her for her kind remarks. I have immensely enjoyed being leader of my party in Scotland and, to encourage her, I say, do not give up hope, dear. I am accustomed to a brazen and blustering First Minister—indeed, there was no surprise that his comment on the Citigroup report was, “So what?”—but I had hoped for a more thoughtful response from the Deputy First Minister. The reality is that, in an independent Scotland in which we generate nearly all our own energy from renewables and are liable for all our own subsidy, someone has to foot the bill. It is interesting to see from the running commentary that is going on how uncomfortable the SNP is with the report. Either households and businesses will fork out much more money than they currently do to pay their bills, or taxes will increase to let the Government pay the subsidy. Why does the Deputy First Minister not simply admit that the best way to maintain secure energy supplies at affordable levels in Scotland is by Scotland staying within the United Kingdom?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-00190)

I realise that this is my final opportunity to hold an exchange with the First Minister at question time. Members: Aw. I reassure him that I will not sing: “Good-bye-ee, good-bye-ee, wipe the tears, baby dear, from your eye-ee”. I have a feeling that that would not encapsulate his sentiments about my going. I have enjoyed our exchanges. I was proud to deliver a new drugs strategy that is focused on recovery, but it means nothing if it is not being rolled out on the ground. I was proud to be at the forefront of giving Scotland 1,000 extra police officers, but that achievement is diminished if understaffed courts cannot prosecute criminal cases. I was proud that Scottish Conservative votes delivered help with business rates for thousands of small businesses across Scotland, but now businesses are to be hit with higher rates. How has the First Minister undermined three such good policies in such a short space of time?

One of the more enjoyable features of this job has been reining in the First Minister’s more obvious exuberances. I must tell him that his priorities of independence and jaunting off to the middle east are not the priorities of people, patients, students and victims. It falls to me to rein him in again. Will the First Minister instruct the Lord Advocate to hold a crisis meeting with prosecutors to ensure that criminal cases are not time barred? Will he instruct his health minister to report to the Parliament as soon as possible on the burgeoning and inescapable problem of caring for the elderly in hospital? Will he explain how a 25 per cent increase over five years in the cost of methadone is compatible with a drugs strategy that focuses on recovery?

I am indebted to the Presiding Officer for her generosity, and I thank the Prime Minister—I mean, the First Minister—[Laughter.] It is good to give him a taste of what will never be. [Laughter.] I remember the First Minister dolefully observing of a previous Prime Minister that he never writes and he never calls. Let me reassure the First Minister that, although I may be leaving this job and may not be invited round to the new Salmond towers for drinks, he has not heard the last of me. I shall write and I shall call.

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-00174)

When will the level 4 figures—the really detailed figures for the Scottish budget—be published?

That is a rather economic response. I think what the First Minister meant was that one out of seven departmental heads was published yesterday. At that rate, we might get the rest of the information by the middle of December. Everyone is asking, “Why the delay? Why the secrecy?” The reality is that the budget is unravelling. Mr Swinney can whisper all the sweet nothings he likes into the First Minister’s ear but he cannot deny the inescapable. The much-vaunted £750 million for capital remains shrouded in mystery. We do not know where it is coming from; we do not know what it is being applied to; and we do not know what is being cut to provide it. Is this not another example of the arrogance of this Government sitting back and saying, “We’ve got the majority. You can’t touch us”? Parliament and its committees are being denied proper and essential scrutiny of the budget. Surely even the First Minister can accept that that is totally unacceptable.

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-00153)

The First Minister knows that I share his serious concern about sectarian behaviour in Scotland. Indeed, I have already raised the issue with him twice this year at First Minister’s question time. I do not doubt his commitment to tackling it. However, the First Minister will be aware of growing concern about his proposed legislation. We know that the consultation period has highlighted evidence that existing law, if it was enforced more robustly, may be adequate and that new law may not be required. In recent days, we have had impressive evidence of existing law being used to good effect. What does the First Minister consider is not covered by the existing law?

The First Minister and I know that all of us in the chamber are united in condemning sectarian behaviour wherever it occurs. That is precisely why we must not do a disservice to the public by making bad law just for the sake of making law. Will the First Minister confirm that he will keep an open mind on legislating and that he will be swayed by the evidence that is presented to the Parliament rather than by an understandable, but perhaps misplaced, desire to create new law just because he can?

2. To ask the First Minister—or perhaps that should be His High Excellency, as I understand from The Times he now likes to be styled—when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-00140)

The First Minister likes to wax lyrical at every opportunity about powers that he does not have, such as that over corporation tax, which he wants to be devolved. How many businesses in Scotland would benefit from his recently published proposal for a corporation tax cut?

It is not the CBI or David McLetchie who is sitting over there to answer questions but the First Minister. That is not the question I asked; I shall give him an answer to the question I asked, because he does not want to admit it. According to the Scottish Parliament’s researchers, fewer than 3 per cent of all businesses in Scotland would benefit from his proposal. By the Government’s own admission, it would take 20 years to create the 27,000 new jobs that it estimates would be created by reducing corporation tax. I am all in favour of cutting tax for business but the First Minister has a tax power that he can use right now. The tax is called business rates and it is paid by the vast majority of businesses in Scotland and not just 3 per cent. In a press release from the Deputy First Minister no less, we are told that the small business bonus scheme, delivered by the Conservatives—[Laughter.] Let me dispel the raucous laughter. Without the votes from these benches there would be no small business bonus. The scheme created 40,000 new jobs in just four years at a fraction of the cost of the First Minister’s corporation tax proposal. Why on earth was yesterday’s budget silent on extending more help to more businesses, large and small, to cut their business rates and create more jobs right now with the powers that we already have?

2. Can the First Minister contain himself? It is absolutely extraordinary to watch such self-satisfaction. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-00113)

Last week, I asked the First Minister twice what would—if he got his way—be his personal preference for our currency: the British pound or the euro. Twice he ducked it, and would not tell us—no doubt too embarrassed to say what his personal preference is. All we got was an endless stream of words on process. Let me try again. Does he believe, given what is happening at the moment, that an independent Scotland should join the euro zone?

When he talks about himself, you cannot shut him up. [Laughter.] When he is asked a serious, substantive question, a quite uncharacteristic coyness overwhelms him. Everybody who is watching and listening knows that the First Minister is not answering the question because he is squirming with embarrassment. He is too scared to admit his personal preference. It is pathetic, and what a contrast to his colleague, the member of the European Parliament Alyn Smith, who was asked the very same question—whether he believed that an independent Scotland should join the euro—on Radio Scotland this morning. He replied: “I do. And the euro will emerge stronger from this. The SNP’s position on the euro has been robust and intellectually sound throughout.” If the First Minister’s MEP colleague can come clean, why can Alex Salmond not come clean? Why does he not just admit that Alex Salmond wants the euro?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-00097)

Yesterday, the First Minister told us in his statement that we must move away from the European model of deficit-driven states. Of course, the European states with the biggest deficit problems are in the euro zone and their currency is the euro. There are masses of unanswered questions about the First Minister’s independence plans, but I will pick one that relates to the currency, which I hope he can answer without reference to Gypsy Amalia. If the First Minister gets his way, what is his personal preference—the British pound or the euro?

It seems to be anything but clear. In his statement yesterday, the First Minister commended to the Parliament and Scotland certain policies and political objectives, not least independence. Let us get this straight. This is a First Minister who wants independence but will not tell us the date of the referendum or the question that is to be asked and who does not know what currency he wants the country to have if he wins. This leopard has some spots. As First Minister, Mr Salmond has rushed to the airwaves—Radio Scotland one day, Radio Catalonia the next—to denigrate the British pound and praise the euro. I will ask him again, because Scotland needs to know. Does he, personally, want the British pound or does he want the euro? He cannot go on ducking questions on independence for ever. This is one question that he can answer. What is his answer?

One of the welcome consequences of my condition, which I think is described as being unplugged, is that I am responsible for raising with the First Minister only matters of the present. Matters of the future, I leave to others. It is transparent to me that, rather than answer an important and basic question, the First Minister would run for cover and use all manner of camouflage and distraction to disguise the basic point that this man, who wants this country to be independent, does not even know what currency that independent country would have.

The legislative programme is certainly not lacking in quantity, but that does not cut any ice with me: it is quality that matters. Indeed, much of the overdue change that we need to bring to Scottish public life does not depend on an endless list of brand new laws, and more and more statutes. It depends on political will, and—yes—a relaxation of existing rules, laws and restrictions. Sometimes, less is better than more. The changes that are needed are inescapable, as we all strive to protect our most vital services at the very time when we must also mop up the mess in our public finances and reduce the toxic levels of debt and deficit that we inherited. In that context, I was curious about the First Minister’s allusion to a string of economists, most of whom I had never heard of. Their purpose seemed to be to move away from deficit-driven states, and that is exactly what Alexander, Moore and Mundell are committed to doing.

Thank you. [Laughter.] Reform of our public services is unavoidable. That is why it is perplexing to see that the Beveridge report, which is one of the most important contributions to the debate, is now more than a year old and gathering dust on the Scottish Government’s shelves. That independent report into our public finances set out some solid ideas, but what was Alex Salmond’s response? It was to set up another review, the Christie commission. Such was the success of that little endeavour that we now have a new Cabinet sub-committee considering the Christie report and kicking things around a bit more. In the First Minister’s statement, there were just four paragraphs on public service reform and not one specific proposal. He is all talk and no action. It is a bit like the SNP’s plans for an independence referendum—there is no date, no question and, it would seem, no idea of what independence means any more. The summer offered Alex Salmond an opportunity to reflect, innovate and reform, but instead it was one long whinge—one long rant from him about what everyone else is getting wrong. People are getting fed up with that diet of negativity and gripe. The SNP is relentlessly hostile to anyone who dares to speak out against it, question its version of reality or challenge its proposals. The Confederation of British Industry Scotland is right to ask when the referendum will be and to point out that the fudge on offer from Alex Salmond is harmful to Scotland. What does it get in reply? Vitriol and bullying. Instead of answers to reasonable questions about precisely when the referendum will be and what the question will be, all that we get is a defiant, blustering and evasive response about some vague day in a few years’ time from a party that has already spent vast sums of taxpayers’ money drafting a bill. The SNP looks even more ridiculous when it comes to pinning the party down on what independence would mean for our currency, our armed forces, our defence jobs, the Scottish national deficit, social services and all the other essential aspects of a 21st century country. The SNP is always quick to complain about the powers that it does not have, but it is struck dumb when it comes to providing answers about what it would do and how it would pay for it. Only today, a series of legitimate questions to Mr Swinney from the UK Treasury about the devolved corporation tax was dismissed as “predictable” and “depressing”. If the questions were so predictable, why did the SNP not anticipate them and formulate the answers? The SNP’s true colours are on show. It cannot deal with informed comment and criticism. Its total response is hectoring and bullying bluster, which says everything that we need to know about the party. [Interruption.] Mr Lochhead is getting exercised, which is a rarity. What is more, I know what the next three or four years will bring: Alex Salmond will grind on and on, day after weary day, about the powers that he does not have. I can hear him now saying, “If only I had the powers to do this or that!” I say to him that today’s poll in The Times could not be clearer: Scotland says that he should get on with his independence referendum and get it out the road. If the First Minister will not or cannot answer detailed questions on what independence means, will he start concentrating on using the powers that he has? There are measures in the legislative programme that we can support, others that we cannot and some that will need amendment. My colleagues will deal with them in greater detail, but I will highlight a couple. First, the Government was right to acknowledge the problem of sectarianism and contemplate legislation but wrong to try to rush that legislation through. It was sensible to pause, reflect and consult. Therefore, let us ensure that the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill actually addresses the evil of sectarianism and contributes to its eradication. Secondly, on the reform of our police forces, the Scottish Conservatives have accepted that there are compelling arguments for having fewer forces in Scotland. However, public accountability is paramount. We favour directly elected commissioners throughout Scotland. The Scottish Government’s reform of policing cannot concentrate power in the hands of one minister and one police chief without the public protection of democratic accountability, and I hope that the First Minister will listen to us on that. I will also put down some markers about the big challenges that face our country and people—challenges that transcend constitutional issues or party politics. Three years ago, I gave a speech that, in light of recent developments, has renewed resonance. I spoke about how a new insidious and corrosive threat was emerging from the shadows. The threat to which I referred was not like drugs abuse or excessive alcohol consumption. It arose not out of something that people do but out of something that they do not do. I am talking about parenting skills or, sadly and in far too many cases, the complete lack of them. Too many parents do not or cannot extend to their children the parenting skills that are so essential if young people are to have any hope of growing up with guidance, support and boundaries. Why do they not extend those skills? Because, sadly, they were the children of parents who did not possess such skills. Disturbingly, we might now be moving into the third generation of that parental void. Just look around our society and ask our teachers—the depressing evidence is all too obvious. Indeed, the 2010-11 report from the Scottish Children’s Reporter Administration noted that the number of children who were referred on the ground of lack of parental care was more than 13,000. That is a reduction from previous years, but we all realise that that number is deeply disturbing. It is not some abstract bit of statistical data. We are talking about young lives being ruined and 13,000 children living in a desperate situation, and those are just the ones we know about. Those children are our nation’s future and the parents of the future. I welcome the First Minister’s intention to address the issue, but only time will tell whether legislation is what we need. We certainly need a long-term strategy to deal with this new problem. We cannot just cobble together solutions to deal with individual problems as they arise. We cannot hope that the overall problem will solve itself, because it will not. I will not stand by silent on the issue. I am prepared to ask tough questions. I accept that there is no simple solution, because the causes might be complex, arising from deep-rooted reasons, but we need to take a fresh look at the issue and find a new way. We cannot keep passing the buck to hard-pressed social workers or teachers, who are already under immense pressure. Our voluntary and charitable sector has a tremendous amount of expertise and skills, so how do we harness that? I will return to that point in the months ahead. That point also takes me to my next issue, which is drugs abuse. I am proud of my party’s role in forging the national drugs strategy, “The Road to Recovery: A New Approach to Tackling Scotland’s Drug Problem”. That was one of the Scottish Conservative conditions for agreeing to the 2008 Scottish budget. However, three years on, I am angry. Why? David Liddell, director of the Scottish Drugs Forum, claims: “if you look at the rate of drug-related deaths compared to the overall population, Scottish people are seven times more likely to die from a drug-related death than their European counterparts.” That is not the road to recovery. In June, we learned from the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime that Scotland tops the world league for cocaine consumption. That is not the road to recovery. Methadone, a state-prescribed opiate, still contributes to one third of drug-related deaths in Scotland. That is not the road to recovery. Clearly, more needs to be done to turn a good and well-intentioned strategy into results on the ground, so I put down this marker. I fought long and hard for a new strategy that would be based on recovery leading to abstinence. In the months and years to come, I will redouble my efforts to turn that aspiration into a reality. A glossy strategy is one thing, but success will come only when those who work in the drugs field get on board. It is time to forge a new political will to make that happen, because the benefits will be incalculable. The legislative programme might deal with some of the immediate issues that are facing Scotland, but other deep-seated challenges lie way beyond the scope of one year of lawmaking. The First Minister has the majority to railroad anything he wants through the Parliament, but I hope that he has the wisdom to realise that a majority does not make a flawed proposal good, and it does not make something that is wrong right.

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-00077)

I thank the First Minister for his very gracious comments. I am glad that he has enjoyed the experience of the exchanges with me at First Minister’s questions, because I am coming back in September. From his adulation, I felt a little apprehensive that he might not be. Nonetheless, I thank him for his comments. Why, according to a recent report from the United Nations, does Scotland top the list of world cocaine use? Why are there 712 fewer nurses and midwives in Scotland than there were last year? Why is childhood obesity escalating? Why do only 7 per cent of reported rapes end in conviction? Clearly, the First Minister has taken his eye off the ball, preferring to grandstand on the Supreme Court, pick fights with Westminster and provoke constitutional tension. Why has he allowed this appalling catalogue of failure to happen right here in Scotland under his watch?

Time and again, the First Minister has proclaimed the virtues of free university education, with his mantra being “the ability to learn, not the ability to pay”. However, he never told us that his mantra comes with the small print, “Does not apply to students from England, Wales or Northern Ireland and does not plug the funding gap”. Is that not the most brazen and barefaced sell-out of his so-called political principle? It is patently divisive; hypocritical, because it would not even be possible in an independent Scotland; hugely damaging to the welcome tradition of United Kingdom students studying in Scotland; and utterly ineffective in plugging a widening funding gap of more than £200 million. Will he abandon his little Scotlander mindset and bring forward serious proposals for the long-term funding and sustainability of our Scottish universities?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-00058)

We all agree that we must deal with sectarianism, which is vile, odious and utterly unacceptable. The imperative of the majority Scottish Government is to get the bill right, so I welcome the common sense that has broken out and the Scottish Government’s recognition of the need for a longer timetable. I am not given often to praising the First Minister, but he has shown maturity in accepting that his Government had not got the bill right. I say to him well done for accepting that and for putting the bill on to a much more realistic footing. It seems that, under the bill as drafted, there are circumstances in which making the sign of the cross or singing the national anthem could constitute a crime. Within the bill, criteria range widely: from hatred, to behaviour that is threatening or offensive, to behaviour that is likely to incite public disorder. Can the First Minister confirm that, with the new timetable, the Scottish Government will look at whether the criteria in the bill are consistent with previous legislation? Now that a more extensive consultation process is possible, will the Scottish Government consider whether the criteria as currently listed are adequate?

I will broaden this out a bit. Even if over the longer timetable—which is very welcome—we address some of the ambiguities and uncertainties in and maybe even limitations of the bill, the sad and ugly truth is that in certain parts of the west of Scotland we have embedded and entrenched sectarian attitudes. The bill is only part of solving the problem. What is the Scottish Government’s strategy to deal with that repugnant culture that, sadly, runs more broadly than just in football stadia or certain pubs?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-00042)

The First Minister’s interview with Holyrood magazine amounted to an extraordinary rant that was characterised by bile, intemperance, provocative personal insults and a sneering disregard for the independence of the judiciary and the rule of law. No one denies that there is a serious issue with how the Supreme Court engages with Scots law in determining human rights issues. It is right that the mechanisms be looked at. However, the First Minister’s blustering, bellicose outburst has totally obscured the real issue, made a laughing stock of Alex Salmond and, most serious of all, diminished the office of First Minister. Will he now apologise for bringing the office of First Minister into disrepute?

Just over a month ago, the First Minister said that he does not have a monopoly on wisdom—that is self-evident. Unfortunately, as characterised by his answer to my first question, he seems to have a monopoly on bombast, arrogance and conceit. Just to bring him back down to earth and to remind him, once again, that the judiciary is independent of Government, I point out that there is still a good old Scottish criminal offence called murmuring a judge. Rather than run the risk of the Lord Advocate having to prosecute the First Minister, would it not be easier for the First Minister to eat humble pie, admit that he botched this whole issue and apologise to all concerned?

Mr McBride is not an adviser to the Conservative Party. He is just one of the litany of names quoted by the First Minister. What the First Minister does not get is this: judges apply the law and lawyers advise on the law. If politicians such as Mr Salmond do not like that, they should not batter judges round the head—they should change the law. [Interruption.]

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S4F-00026)

It takes two to tango—let us hope that it is a mutual pleasure. Seven months ago in the chamber, the First Minister was asked about the death of a lady in Tomintoul. She died from a heart attack. She did not receive prompt medical attention, even though there was an ambulance 800yd away. It did not attend because the crew were on a tea break. At that time, the First Minister promised that “investigations will be thorough and will come to a conclusion, which will be spelled out to the chamber.”—[Official Report, 4 November 2010; c 30038.] What were the conclusions? Will he now spell them out to the chamber? What lessons have been learned?

That was seven months ago. Tragically, in April, the same thing happened again. This time, a little boy from Crieff, aged three, died. He did not receive prompt medical attention, even though there was an ambulance only 10 minutes away. Again, the crew were on a tea break. Apparently, the ambulance service diverts calls away from any crew who are on a tea break, so I accept that a crew may be unaware of a local emergency, but serious injury, critical illness and imminent death do not wait for tea breaks. That situation is completely unacceptable and it must change. An emergency service must cope with emergencies. In the past seven months, we have seen two tragedies. No MSP wants to contemplate having to raise the issue again, so can the First Minister assure us all that this time something will be done?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S4F-00001)

The Cabinet Secretary for Justice, Kenny MacAskill, disparagingly alleged that the majority of Supreme Court judges “do not know Scots law”, except what they may have picked up on a trip to the Edinburgh festival. Does the First Minister endorse Kenny MacAskill’s remarks?

If the First Minister had been a little more thorough in his research, he would have found that, when this Parliament considered the creation of the Supreme Court, I expressed reservations. My reservations were based on constitutional structure and function and on the basic fact that if something is not broken, why fix it? As everyone knows, the First Minister’s objection to the Supreme Court is that it sits in London. His trenchant dislike of and hostility to the concept of a British court is evident by his little Scotlander approach and his and Mr MacAskill’s ill-advised and provocative rhetoric. The First Minister has denigrated the Supreme Court as causing delays, sitting in another country and not having a majority of judges who are expert in Scots law, so will he explain why he considers a court that sits in Strasbourg with a huge backlog of cases and no permanent Scottish judge to be a better option?

I, too, thank the First Minister for his statement and for providing an advance copy of it. We all want to take Scotland forward. The questions, however, are: which Scotland and how? It is fantastic to be Scottish; it is great to be British; and I am proud to be both. The two are not in competition or mutually exclusive; in fact, they are mutually inclusive and complementary and represent the best of both worlds. Many people share that positive assessment. There is a difference between patriotism and nationalism. One can be a broad and widely shared sentiment of pride and cultural adherence; the other can run the risk of becoming narrow, restrictive and introspective. I want the best for my country, which, for me, means being Scottish and British and that we should work together for the good of us all. I know that not everyone agrees with that view. I respect their right to hold their view, but I do not share it. Our United Kingdom union is not broken but, like any other enduring institution, it needs to adapt and move with the times. That is why the Scotland Bill is the way ahead. I remind the First Minister that implementing the Scotland Bill was a commitment of 53 of the 59 Scottish MPs elected to Scotland’s other Parliament last year. [Interruption.] I never thought that I would see Mr Swinney of all people mocking democracy. Alex Salmond’s mandate is not the only mandate. Scotland voted by referendum for a devolved Scottish Parliament with tax-varying powers. That is the settled will. Let us nail the so-called independence-lite argument once and for all. People can no more be independent lite than pregnant lite. They are either one or the other; they either are or they are not. All the code and soft-shoe shuffling in the world cannot hide the simple truth that we are either Scottish and British or we are not. At its root, the debate about our identity is not just about economics and balance sheets or profit-and-loss accounts. We can argue until the cows come home about how much worse off Scotland would be if it was rent asunder from Britain, but at the core of the argument is how we feel and whether Scotland has some deep-seated grievance and sense of disquiet that compels us to seek divorce from England, Wales and Northern Ireland, or whether it is at ease within the United Kingdom and positive about an enduring relationship promoting our mutual good.

I do not propose to take interventions. The debate is about who we feel we are and what we want to be. It is about whether we want to be as we are or on our own; whether we want to be part of the British family or just a northern neighbour looking on; and whether we want to work together for the common good, sharing our assets and spreading our risks, or take the separation gamble. At its simplest, the union is about doing what families do best. It is about just being together and being comfortable and at ease with one another with the occasional squabble and difference of opinion, but knowing that we are stronger together. It is about the best of both worlds and being comfortable with who we are. I repeat: it is fantastic to be Scottish and great to be British, and I am proud to be both. I accept that the First Minister won his argument about holding an independence vote in this session, but there are two big questions that he must now face up to. The public have called his bluff, and they must know from him the question that will be in, and the timing of, his referendum. The question must be fair. It cannot be open to challenge or ambiguous. It cannot be a referendum lite. It cannot merely ask for the right to negotiate; it must give the people a fundamental choice about whether they want Scotland to remain part of Britain or to be a separate state. It is one or the other. Now that a vote is inevitable, the First Minister needs to explain his change of view on timing. If holding a referendum was the right thing to do last year when he had a minority of seats in the chamber, why does he now wish to delay a referendum by years when he has a majority of seats? The Scotland that I want to take forward is one that has learned from the past and is comfortable with its present and optimistic about its future. Let us consider how we can take Scotland forward and create a fair society. Now that it has been established that the First Minister does not, on his own admission, have a monopoly of wisdom—I think that we all suspected that—let me put that to the test. My party’s manifesto is packed full of good ideas that address Scotland’s real and pressing priorities using all our existing powers. There are policies to boost the economy and create jobs, reform our public services and take Scotland forward. Over the coming weeks and months, the Scottish Conservatives will continue to do what we have done over the past four years. We will find every means that we can to deliver common sense for Scotland. We will put our case debate by debate, committee by committee and argument by argument, and we will test every assertion that the SNP Government makes. We will provide the opposition that is needed and the alternative voice that is required, and we will carry on telling it like it is, however much the SNP does not want to hear that. When the uncomfortable truth needs telling, we will tell it, and when there is a better way to do things, we will be its advocate. I recognise that politics, especially when we are facing a Government with a majority, is the art of the possible and not chasing unrealisable dreams. During the debate, my colleagues will set out in more detail the policies that should be considered, but let me paint a picture of what the Scottish Government should be doing and could reasonably be expected to do. On the economy, creating jobs and boosting economic growth are rightly the number 1 priorities that underpin everything that we strive to do. There is no question but that the jobs of the future will come from the private sector. So, although we must protect our vital public services, if we are to create more prospects, opportunity, jobs and wealth for all of us, we must grow the private sector. I want an entrepreneurial, dynamic and thriving Scotland—a Scotland that backs small businesses and provides a framework for them to succeed and prosper. Let those be the watchwords of the new Parliament. On our public services, we now have a minister with a specific brief for public sector reform. However, that must be more than an elongated name on a business card; it must lead to real and meaningful change and it has to mean the end to the “aye been” mentality—the attitude that, “This is how it is, because that’s how we’ve always done it.” We have to break that status quo. We must embrace all the talents of Scotland, including its third sector and, yes, its private sector, and accept the simple premise that someone does not have to be a public servant to provide a public service. We must have a Scotland of all the talents, with a fairer and bigger society. I turn to three specific areas in which I believe progress is possible and more can be done, and on which I hope there is common ground. The first is health visitors, who are the vital point of contact with parents and young families in the community and in homes. They speak to mum and dad and give reassurance, help and advice. We need to ensure that all families, regardless of income, have access to a universal health visitor service. I hope that the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy will agree to an early meeting with my colleague Murdo Fraser. Secondly, more has to be done to rehabilitate prisoners in our jails. I know that the SNP will not see sense on short-term sentences, but I hope that it will use common sense on the urgent need to cut crime through proactive rehabilitation. We can do so much more on that front. My party has positive proposals and I hope that the Cabinet Secretary for Justice will take them on board and meet my colleague John Lamont. Finally, I make no apology for again mentioning drugs abuse. As I said yesterday, I pay tribute to the Government for listening and producing the new national drugs strategy, which is based on recovery. However, that strategy is not enough if nothing really changes on the ground. It is a long and hard fight, but it is one that we must never abandon. I personally pledge to continue that fight and I know that the First Minister will join me in that battle. We might disagree on many things, but let us unite on that. The Parliament has entered a new era in which we can either seek solutions or manufacture grievance, allowing discord to ferment. For me, it will always be the former. The constitutional debate will undoubtedly rage, but let nobody in the chamber forget why we are here—we are here to take our devolved responsibilities seriously and, by doing so, to take Scotland forward.

In relation to the appointment of Scottish Government ministers, I too welcome some old, new and recycled faces. I congratulate the new ministerial appointees and wish them well, as I do the new law officers. As someone observed last week, a Cabinet increased by three is maybe not the best advertisement for good housekeeping. Although, over the past four years, I might have disagreed with policies and politics advanced by the then smaller Cabinet, I never heard Alex Salmond blame failure or non-delivery on a lack of cabinet secretaries. He blamed just about everything and everyone else, but not having too few ministers. The achievements of the previous Cabinet were in no small measure down to the arch Mr Fixer, Bruce Crawford—a man whom I admire. I hope that that commendation does not blight his glittering career. Over the past four years, his successes in negotiating, smooth talking and, at times, simply herding together disparate Opposition parties look like a stroll in the park compared with his new challenge of managing those other disparate presences—the serried ranks of his SNP back benchers. The First Minister said that that reflects a move from tactical to the strategic. That might go down as one of the all-time euphemisms of this Parliament. Like Mr Gray, I cannot help but notice that on the day that the volcano stopped erupting, the gales abated and the rain reduced to a mere drizzle, there returns to Government a new Minister for Environment and Climate Change—Mr Stewart Stevenson. May conditions remain tranquil. Like Mr Gray, I welcome the new appointees and wish them well in their jobs. These are challenging times and they will have their work cut out for them. I was proud of Conservative achievements in the previous session. One of the most significant of those was one of the earliest—a new drugs strategy for Scotland that focused on recovery. I pay tribute to Fergus Ewing for the important role that he played in getting it under way. However, there is so much more to do. There is unfinished business, with major challenges still to overcome. I ask the First Minister to clarify who among his many ministerial colleagues will drive forward that particular strategy.

Madam Presiding Officer, the First Minister has achieved a remarkable election result. On behalf of the Scottish Conservatives, I congratulate him on his election as First Minister for a second term of government. The First Minister has been basking in his party’s triumph, with that mixture of chutzpah and undisguised glee that he has made his own unique style. However, I will haul him back to planet earth with a little dose of realism. The First Minister may have a majority of seats in this Parliament, but he does not have a majority of votes from Scotland. He may want separation, but most people in Scotland do not. The only mandate that he has from the election is to lead a devolved Government in the Scottish Parliament. I do not want to rain on his Scottish National Party parade, but voters expect his priorities to be jobs, education, our health service, law and order, local government and all the other essential services for which this Parliament is responsible. When he tucks himself up in bed in his “Alex Salmond for First Minister” nightshirt, interspersing his dreams of a Scottish republic should be the sobering thought that the buck now stops with him. He has a majority in the Parliament: he cannot blame others. He knows how much money there is. The comprehensive spending review has made clear the financial settlement. When services are cut, he has to explain why. When universities contract and departments close, he has to explain why. When local authorities shrink essential facilities, he has to explain why. When he breaks election promises, he has to take the blame. He would not be the astute and crafty political operator that he is if he did not try to suck others into his blame game. The First Minister and the SNP now stand alone, and they alone will take the blame. Our role as Scottish Conservatives is to support what is good for Scotland and vigorously oppose what is not. Just because Alex Salmond declares something to be good, that does not necessarily mean that it is. When he is wrong, I and the Scottish Conservatives will put him right. When he tries to pursue his separation agenda for Scotland, I and the Scottish Conservatives will fight him every step of the way.

The First Minister has a majority of seats in the Parliament, but not a monopoly of wisdom. He has a big SNP presence, but he has even bigger challenges. His imperative is to put the interests of Scotland before the interests of his party. I remind him that his mandate is to be our devolved First Minister—to act in the national interest, not in his nationalist self-interest. I and the Scottish Conservatives will hold him to that obligation. [Applause.]

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-2979)

When I met the Prime Minister on Friday, the Libyan situation was obviously uppermost in our minds. I know that the Prime Minister’s decisions reflect the overwhelming sentiment of political parties and politicians here in Scotland. I am sure that the thoughts of everyone in the chamber are with our brave men and women in our armed services. [Applause.] In the past four years I have asked the First Minister almost 300 questions. Occasionally, he has found the right page in his big book of notes, and occasionally he has listened to the sweet nothings of Ms Sturgeon in one ear and the murmurings of Mr Swinney in the other, but rarely has he found the right answer. Let me give him one last chance. I remember that, at one point, the Scottish National Party was going to give us only 500 more police officers. Then it saw sense and increased the figure to 1,000. What changed the First Minister’s mind?

Just to refresh the First Minister’s memory, without the Scottish Conservatives we would never have got 1,000 extra police; we would have been stuck with the First Minister’s broken promise. The bottom line is that facts are facts. In addition to voting for the measures on the police, the Scottish Conservatives did indeed vote for a council tax freeze; we also voted for help for small business, for a town centre regeneration fund, for a new national drugs strategy and for a £26 million boost to business, construction and housing. Those were all delivered by Scottish Conservative votes—we have made the difference. All those commonsense policies—and more—have been delivered by the Scottish Conservatives and were credible and costed. Does the First Minister agree that “credible” and “costed” should be the watchwords of all politicians in the weeks ahead, and that all politicians need to be straight with the voters and tell it like it is?

I, too, support the motion in the name of the First Minister. As has already been indicated, the past four years have seen a new development in the life of our Parliament—minority government—that reflected a very different political territory from the previous eight years of coalition. Some who witnessed this interesting period in our parliamentary development will leave the Parliament today, and I share the sentiments for them that have already been expressed. From the Conservative benches, we will lose Bill Aitken and Ted Brocklebank. If not exactly the odd couple, they certainly reflected diverse and distinctive attributes that enhanced our benches and Parliament. Bill has been renowned for clearly expressed and uncompromising views on justice and the interests of the victim, and Ted for his informed and entertaining contributions to debates on numerous subjects, not least those involving culture and the media—I did not want him to feel excluded because I had not mentioned culture. I thank them and the other MSPs, not least, Deputy Presiding Officer, yourself and your colleague Trish Godman, who have served this Parliament with such distinction. I thank all our colleagues who leave the Parliament today for their contributions in the past 12 years. I am aware that the period of minority government to which I referred has presented political opportunities and scenarios that were not present in the first eight years, and which in turn have created administrative challenges for this session of Parliament, not least for the role of Presiding Officer. Through you, Deputy Presiding Officer, I congratulate and thank our Presiding Officer for the courteous and capable way in which he has discharged his responsibilities. I am in no doubt that Mr Fergusson’s previous life as a farmer was of invaluable assistance in helping to herd together the disparate and colourful presences that constitute the different political parties and their members in this chamber. I know that there has been universal appreciation of his engaged and consultative approach, which has greatly facilitated navigation of the inevitable challenges that arise in the course of chairing a Parliament for four years. On behalf of my colleagues, I thank the Presiding Officer not only for his stewardship and commitment as our Presiding Officer and for the support that has been given by his wife, Merryn; I thank him, too, for being a principled and decent human being whose attributes have enhanced both the role of Presiding Officer and this Parliament. If protocol permits me to say it, I look forward to seeing him again. [Applause.]

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2963)

This week in Scotland, two men were convicted of a sickening sexual assault on a woman. Horrifically, two young boys aged 10 and six were forced to observe and participate. Those men have received a prison sentence of six years. How long will they actually serve in jail?

What is astonishing and deeply troubling is the First Minister’s ignorance on an issue that is so serious. Let me tell him the answer to my question, because answer there is. The men involved might get out after three years but will definitely get out after four. In the First Minister’s 2007 manifesto, which I have here, he promised to end automatic early release. In the 12 years of this Parliament, the Conservatives have repeatedly tried to end automatic early release, and on every occasion we have been voted down by the Scottish National Party, Labour and the Liberal Democrats, so I will not take any lectures from the First Minister on protecting victims. The public is sick and tired of political parties doing cartwheels and U-turns on pledges and commitments. Will the First Minister explain why he broke his 2007 manifesto commitment and why he has nothing meaningful to say on this serious issue?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-2946)

Six years ago, there were nearly 1,500 health visitors in Scotland. How many are there today?

If the First Minister does not know, would it not be easier to say, “I don’t know”? Let me confirm the facts. In 2005, there were nearly 1,500 health visitors. In 2010, there were marginally over 1,200. Back in 2009, the First Minister said to me: “I am interested in and concerned about the position and numbers of health visitors in Scotland, and that will be an abiding concern.” That concern is so abiding that we have seen the number of health visitors in the majority of health board areas drop under his watch. So much for an abiding concern. For the Scottish Conservatives, health visitors are the vital point of contact with parents and young families. In the community and in the home, they speak to mum and dad, giving reassurance, health and advice, and often spotting problems before they develop. Their value was recently reinforced by Professor Susan Deacon’s report. What will the First Minister do to match the Scottish Conservatives’ commitment to spend £20 million a year on getting more health visitors to support more parents and more children right across Scotland and to give that crucial early years support?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2933)

On Saturday, in the Parliament building, I and many women from all over Scotland will celebrate international women’s day, which is an occasion that is filled with pleasure and pride. For some women in Scotland, other occasions, which should be filled with pleasure and pride, can instead be the dark prelude to a night of fear and violence. I am talking about the surge in domestic abuse after high-profile football matches. Strathclyde Police has reported that the old firm clash the weekend before last resulted in nearly double the number of incidents of domestic abuse, compared with the average Sunday. What the effect of last night’s disgraceful scenes will be, I dread to think. It is regrettably the case that alcohol plays a part in domestic abuse, but that can never be the excuse for such behaviour. Does the First Minister agree that the connection between football and escalating domestic abuse is repugnant, disgraceful and utterly unacceptable?

I thank the First Minister for the tenor of his response. There is a huge moral obligation on football clubs—their management and their players—to set the highest examples of responsible behaviour. If managers and players start behaving like thugs, there is not a shadow of doubt that minority elements among their supporters will also start behaving like thugs. For many women and children, that will translate into the horror and misery of domestic abuse. I need hardly add that disgraceful scenes such as those at last night’s old firm clash merely inflame undercurrents of tension. Will the First Minister discuss the issues with me and the other party leaders? Does he agree that there is a need for an urgent summit involving the two football clubs involved, the football authorities and the police, so that football encounters can become occasions that are less about fear, violence and disgrace and much more about pleasure and pride for Scotland?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-2914)

Everyone agrees that delayed discharge from hospital is bad for the patient, the patient’s family and the hospital. The goal is to ensure that no patient who needs continuing care waits longer than six weeks to leave hospital and get that care. I give credit where it is due: in April last year, that goal was reached. However, from January last year to January this year, the number of patients who have waited more than six weeks has not just steadily increased but doubled. Why has the First Minister allowed that to happen?

Surely the goal should be that no one waits more than six weeks in any month, any quarter or any year. The problem for the First Minister is that, however the figures are measured—whether they are for less or more than six weeks—more patients are being kept in hospital for longer. Those people do not want or need to be in hospital and would make better progress out of hospital. Is it not the case that we need to change the structure and cut bureaucracy? We also need the national health service to drive forward a new agenda. Surely the First Minister agrees that that would be made possible by transferring budget from local government to the NHS, so that the NHS is in control. That would ensure that our patients receive the care that they need when they need it. Surely even he can see the sense in that.

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2898)

The former United Kingdom Secretary of State for Justice, Jack Straw, claims that Kenny MacAskill tried to do a deal linking progress on airguns and slopping out with moves that could have paved the way for Mr al-Megrahi, the Lockerbie bomber, to return to Libya. Did Kenny MacAskill act alone or was the First Minister complicit with him in trying to cut that odious deal?

Let us get this straight: the First Minister is telling us that it was a huge confusion and just a great big muddle. With all the conversations, correspondence, minutes, memos and meetings, he is saying that everyone else has got it wrong. That does not wash. Let us move on to April 2009, when the First Minister himself asked Jack Straw directly whether he had a view on Mr al-Megrahi being sent back to Libya. Alex Salmond has always maintained that the release of Mr al-Megrahi was an exclusively Scottish matter and no one else’s business, so why did the Scottish Government give the impression of wanting to cut a deal, and why was Alex Salmond so anxious to find out the UK Government’s view on Mr al-Megrahi being returned to Libya? What on earth was going on?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-2874)

Is 30 days’ knitting a tough community sentence?

I point out a headline in a paper this morning: “Sentenced to 30 days’ hard knitting”. I inform the First Minister that two knitting needles, a ball of wool and a cup of tea are not a tough community sentence. In Scotland, we call that a knitting bee. I have to give credit to the First Minister for at least acknowledging that, because of the Scottish Conservatives, we have delivered 1,000 extra police in Scotland, but the point is that the Scottish National Party is putting all of that at risk with its soft-touch-Scotland approach—more tagging, less jail, the failure to end automatic early release, and the scrapping of short prison sentences. Is not the reality that all the First Minister’s tough talk about tough community sentences is just candy floss and flim-flam, and that under the SNP Government there is no such thing as a tough community sentence?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

As the First Minister knows, I am responsible for my party’s justice policy in Scotland, and the First Minister is responsible for the justice system in Scotland. Is not it time that he started doing the job?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2858)

In Scotland, cancer sufferers are being denied access to a range of drugs that can prolong life for some patients, which are now available in England. A report in October by the Rarer Cancers Foundation published a list of at least 18 drugs that are available in England but not in Scotland. The Scottish Conservatives have proposed the setting up of a Scottish cancer drugs fund to help patients in Scotland to get those drugs. Does the First Minister agree that Scottish cancer patients deserve the same access to those drugs as patients in England have?

I have listened carefully to what the First Minister has said. Difficult challenges confront us, but I do not think that we should ever be timid about looking at what is happening elsewhere. This specific issue is one of importance and urgency. The United Kingdom Government’s commitment to set up a cancer drugs fund for patients in England and Wales has been warmly received by cancer sufferers, their families and campaign groups there. It is time that the Scottish Government took action here. The UK Government thinks that the issue is so important that it has provided interim funding. Will the First Minister agree to meet me and my health spokesman to discuss how we might proceed on the matter in Scotland, including the setting up of an interim fund, to give cancer patients in Scotland the same access to the drugs as patients have in England?

2. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-2839)

A quarter of a million people in Scotland are employed in the retail sector. That is one in nine of the Scottish workforce. Many shops are also vital outlets for Scottish food. The First Minister knows that because, when Sainsbury’s announced 1,300 new jobs in Scotland, he described it as—this is not a doctored quote— “a significant boost to the economy.” Now, however, many shops the length and breadth of Scotland face the Salmond super-tax, which threatens jobs and investment. How many jobs will be lost? Why is he giving out the message that in Scotland, if you grow your business, create more jobs and are a success, the Scottish National Party will punish you with a Salmond super-tax?

I want to help all businesses, which is why my party made possible the provision of help with business rates bills to small businesses. The £30 million that the First Minister says might be raised by his proposal could be found four times over by dealing with the high levels of absenteeism in the public sector. When it comes to his super-tax, the First Minister is sending out a message that it just does not pay to be a business success in Scotland. Whatever happened to the legendary SNP prawn cocktail offensive on business? Now the SNP is just being offensive to business. Never have so many prawns died in vain. If the First Minister really cares about Scottish business and Scottish jobs and really wants to secure the Scottish recovery, he should put the kibosh on his tax on jobs. Will he scrap his Salmond super-tax and will he do that now?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2819)

Today, we have more than 1,000 more police officers than we had four years ago. Just before the First Minister indulges in selective amnesia, however, I remind him that that was made possible only because of the Scottish Conservatives. If it had been left to Labour, there would not have been any more police officers at all. If it had been left to the SNP, there would have been 500 fewer. Maintaining the extra 1,000 officers is a political priority for me and for the Scottish Conservatives, not just for this year but for the next four years. That is my commitment and the Scottish Conservatives' commitment. Will the First Minister match it?

I am delighted by that response. I welcome the First Minister's apparent clarity and I congratulate him on yet again following a Conservative lead. However, I must take his assurance with a pinch of salt: after all, he tried to break the selfsame commitment four years ago. That was naughty and I had to tweak him back. At least the First Minister made a commitment, which was more than can be said for Labour, which made no commitment then and has none now. Is not it a simple fact that when it comes to keeping Scotland safe and protecting our public, Labour is silent, the SNP is soft and the only people who can be trusted are the Scottish Conservatives?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-2801)

Scotland is still in the icy grip of winter. Two weeks ago, I raised with the First Minister the "Scottish Road Network" report, which was published back in August. It promised that an even wider review of the winter resilience of Scottish transport would be published in the autumn but, a fortnight ago, it had not been published and the First Minister did not seem to know what I was talking about. I am sure that, with his legendary athleticism, he bounded out of the chamber to order his civil servants to produce it. My question is simple: what did it say?

I have had a lengthy response to something that I did not ask about, but let me publicly pay credit to the Prime Minister, whose communication with the First Minister at the weekend I was informed about. I am extremely glad about that improved cross-border co-operation between the two Parliaments and the two Governments. I join the First Minister in praising everyone who is going to extraordinary lengths to keep Scotland moving, but that is the reality of the situation that we are in—how do we keep Scotland moving? Three weeks ago, the First Minister said to me: "we have two months' supply of grit and salt in Scotland at the present moment, even under heavy usage conditions."— [ Official Report , 2 December 2010; c 31183.]  In other words, he assured us that we had supplies for all of Scotland for all of December and all of January under heavy usage but, in the past 24 hours I have received reports that a number of councils have confirmed that their remaining salt stocks can be counted in days rather than the weeks that we thought we had. One council is rationing and, even when salt is on order, there are still uncertainties about delivery dates. How much salt does Scotland currently have? How many days will it last? Is rationing more widespread? When will fresh supplies arrive?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2782)

Last week, the First Minister's economic advisers indicated that there was a crisis in the funding of our Scottish universities and that they supported a graduate contribution. Last night, Universities Scotland confirmed that it sees a fair graduate contribution as necessary. Ominously for the First Minister, it also said that the time for talking is over. I know that a green  paper is to be published this afternoon and I am not looking for detail, but does the First Minister at least accept the principle of a graduate—not a student—contribution? Yes or no.

It is ludicrous that the Scottish Government can run around briefing the media ahead of a green paper but the First Minister cannot even answer a simple question of principle in the Parliament. He directs me to Mr Russell. Heaven help us. Just listen to what Mike Russell said on the radio this morning. First, there was not a crisis, then he admitted that there is a funding gap, then he said that the money is already there, and then he said that it will all be sorted out after the election. Quite simply, Alex Salmond is putting his party's skin before his country's needs, because it is all about limping through to May. He may criticise me, but my party is prepared to face the facts and is not hiding from the truth. We are ready to do what needs to be done, and the time for talking is over. Instead of another year of fudge, evasion and delay, will the First Minister give certainty, leadership and a solution?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-2763)

On its website, under the banner “Ready Winter”, the Scottish Government tells the nation: “Even the worst effects of winter can be reduced by a few simple steps ... such as ... being more aware of the weather forecast, especially weather warnings”.  [ Laughter .] It is a pity that the transport minister did not follow his own advice.  On the website, we also find a report entitled “Scottish Road Network” on the events of last winter. Published back in August, the report mentions a “wider review of the resilience of Scottish transport which will be published in the autumn”. Now that we are in the grip of winter, where is that review? Was it indeed published? No one can find it.

I find it absolutely unbelievable that initiatives mooted by the Scottish Government because of last winter’s atrocious conditions cannot even be delivered by the Scottish Government to deal with this winter’s challenges. In light of what the First Minister has just said, I point out that the Scottish Government spent yesterday pretending that no severe weather warnings had been issued on Sunday night. Last night, though, we caught it red-handed. It also spent yesterday claiming that, as the First Minister has said, the actual fresh snowfall was twice or three times the amount that had been predicted. The Met Office warned of up to 10cm of fresh  snow across the central belt. Overnight, my office spoke to the Met Office, which confirmed that on Monday there was between 5cm and 10cm of fresh snowfall across the central belt. Frankly, how can anyone believe anything that this Government says about this crisis anymore? Scotland is losing patience and losing confidence in the transport minister, who has been complacent, negligent and belligerent. Are those essential components for being a Scottish Government minister or just optional extras?

Having listened to the First Minister, there must be very few people who are thinking with any confidence that they would have welcomed an independent Scotland in the past two years. Scotland still has a sustainable and vibrant economy because it is part of the United Kingdom. That is why this debate is important. It marks a watershed in the life of the Scottish Parliament. The Scotland Bill, which was unveiled on St Andrew’s day, reflects the deep thinking and thorough process that culminated in the Calman commission report. The bill will set the direction of the Parliament for the rest of the decade and beyond. It is not a tweak and tinker. It is not merely an MOT. It is a road map for our future. It is the direction of travel that is wanted by the great majority of people in Scotland, and wanted overwhelmingly by the Parliament. It is no coincidence that, as the three unionist parties have come together to make devolution work better, support for independence has hit an historic low. Let us be very clear: we have settled the constitutional question, and devolution has won. I am a proud Scot and a committed unionist. The proposed legislation and transfer of powers will not only benefit Scotland, but strengthen the  union. The bill and the report that preceded it were conceived by Scots, for Scots and for the strength of Scotland within the United Kingdom. It is no mean feat to have brought together the three main UK parties. Even the original Scotland Act 1998 did not do that. The SNP’s attitude towards the Calman commission is a matter of deep regret. Time after time, it was given the opportunity to participate, contribute and debate the proposals. At all stages, the invitation to get involved and to shape the future was extended in good faith but, at all stages, it was rebuffed. The SNP is outside the political main stream. It resented the fact that the Calman commission was the will of the Scottish Parliament. It cried foul when the bill was published, and although it could align itself today with the Parliament and Scotland, it has indicated clearly that it will not.

I shall come to that in a moment. Interestingly, given the First Minister’s intervention, the nationalist minority Government has run away from every opportunity to shape Scotland’s future. Alex Salmond took independence off the agenda. John Swinney secretly mothballed the Government’s tax-raising powers. Both are lost in the ideological and dogmatic fights of the past, when Scotland has actually moved on. To address the First Minister’s intervention, I hope that Alex Salmond continues to fight on that ground during the Scottish parliamentary election, as it will be a fitting political epitaph that says, “Here lies one who didn’t like the answer to his national conversation. It was no—N, O.” The Scotland Bill heralds a new era. From now on, the debate will not be about the powers that Scotland has; instead, it will be about how those powers are used. Let us consider what those powers involve. There will be real fiscal accountability. The Parliament will have to think about how it raises money, not just how it spends it. That is a crucial discipline, the absence of which has weakened political responsibility and  accountability. The Parliament will now have a real financial stake in the success of the Scottish economy. Those powers offer a huge opportunity for the Scottish Conservatives. We are the party that froze council tax bills—cutting them in real terms—and reduced small business rates. Now we have the opportunity to argue for tax competition within the UK, to encourage and reward the Scottish entrepreneurial spirit that will return this country to prosperity. We have an opportunity to grow our private sector and rebalance our economy. There has been a wide debate over many years with diverse ideas feeding into each party’s discussion and into the Calman submissions. There are those who worry about devolution and have no desire to move it out of the current limbo, but it is that very atrophy that is dangerous to the union. So, too, there are those who argue that full fiscal autonomy is the only way forward but, after years of scrutiny and evidence, the broad consensus across the parties, the Parliament and the country is that the bill is the way forward. David Cameron and the coalition Government pledged to act on Calman and they have delivered. I support the proposed legislation. However, because of its importance, scope and impact, it must be scrutinised in detail in committee. That is entirely right. We must find the best way of implementing the financial provisions. We must properly examine the proposed new powers for the Parliament and for individual ministers both here and at Westminster. Those are the practical issues that must be looked at.  For today, the questions are simple. Do we, as a Parliament, want to move ahead following the road map that was set out by the Calman commission and which is now in the Scotland Bill? In doing so, do we want to strengthen devolution and safeguard the union? Do we want to embrace greater tax responsibilities so that fiscal responsibility goes along with spending power? My answer—but, much more important, Scotland’s answer—is a resounding yes. Over the past three years, the cross-party, cross-border initiative that created the Calman commission led to this bill. The three unionist parties north and south of the border worked hard to get to this point. Why? So that we could look beyond party politics, set aside our differences and work for the future benefit of Scotland. Even now, it is not too late for the SNP to put its partisan tub thumping behind it and join us in supporting the principles of the Scotland Bill. I am proud to support the bill. It will strengthen the union. It will make devolution work better. It responds to the wishes of the Scottish people. If used properly, it will allow us to make Scotland a more dynamic and prosperous place. That is why I support the  motion in Mr Gray’s name and reject the amendment in Mr Salmond’s name.

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2748)

We have seen the worst winter weather in November for 40 years. I pay tribute to all our public service workers in transport, in our hospitals and in our general practitioner surgeries. I pay special tribute to our care workers, who have battled through the snow to reach the most vulnerable people in our communities. Does the First Minister agree that a powerful message can be sent from the Parliament that there is a duty on all of us who are  fit and able to keep an eye on our elderly and frail neighbours—to lift the phone and see whether we can help? The First Minister and I do not always agree but, on this occasion, will he join me in saying that this is a time for us all to muck in?

We read that four out of five people have made it to work this week; that is, indeed, incredible. One group that is particularly challenged by this weather is parents. Tens of thousands of them, who are willing to battle their way to work, have found themselves coping with the result of the decision of numerous councils to impose a blanket closure of every school. The safety of children and teachers is paramount and, of course, individual judgments must be made. However, surely the point is that we should trust our headteachers to make the right decisions for their schools and their pupils. Does the First Minister agree that a blanket closure policy is obstructive and inappropriate, and causes huge and avoidable disruption to thousands of families across the country? We need local judgment. Why cannot we trust our headteachers?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-2731)

Mr Swinney was first bruised and then humbled by the Parliament yesterday, quite correctly eventually conceding that he had got it wrong, made errors of judgment, and represented himself and his Government in a poor light. He apologised to Parliament. Today, the First Minister said that he knew, and he apologised to  Parliament, although his demeanour was less than humble and his apology was less than convincing. When did the First Minister know? Did he instruct Mr Swinney to engage in the cover-up? Did his Cabinet know about all this?

The tiles are coming off the roof. John Swinney was not acting alone. We have just heard that he has had an accomplice since May 2007—the First Minister. The First Minister may resort to whatever rhetoric and hyperbole he likes, but he has now conceded that he orchestrated a cover-up, a collective irresponsibility, and a concerted effort to hide the truth from the Parliament and the people of Scotland. That is a shocking state of affairs. Having admitted his culpability, will the First Minister eat fare that is foreign to him—humble pie? Will he apologise not just to the Parliament but to Scotland for this disgraceful episode?

I am still not clear whether this fiasco is an SNP mess-up, an SNP Machiavellian conspiracy or both, but one thing is clear: there has been a cover-up. This is not some minor administrative slip by a junior official, nor is it some academic exercise about fantasy powers. There has been a systematic, concerted and conscious cover-up lasting more than three and a half years. When the people of Scotland voted for our Parliament to have the power to vary income tax, that power was not given to the SNP or to any other party; it was given to the Scottish Parliament. It is the people's power, not Mr Swinney's or Mr Salmond's, yet Alex Neil admitted on radio this morning that Mr Swinney chose to stop updating the HMRC system in 2007, which Mr Swinney has confirmed. Why was the Parliament not told of that decision? It is totally irrelevant what Mr Swinney thought about whether  to use the power. It is fundamental that he neutered the power, made it inoperable by any other party and did not tell the Parliament.

Forgive me, but we are in the middle of 2010 and are approaching an election in 2011. Is not that precisely why the finance minister has been negligent in not informing the Parliament of what was going on? To argue, as the SNP has done over recent days, that none of this matters, that the power was never going to be used and that that was made clear at every budget is to completely miss the point. That attitude is grossly misleading and blatantly hypocritical. Here is why. It misses the point because no minority party in this Parliament of minorities has the right to shackle the other parties. To neuter the ability of the next Parliament to exercise its rights under the Scotland Act is a betrayal of democracy. As we now know, when the SNP rendered the tax-varying powers unusable, it knew what the consequences would be for the next Parliament, but it did not let anyone else know. It is grossly misleading and blatantly hypocritical to claim that none of that mattered. Unless I have missed something, time after time over the past three and a half years, the SNP has trumpeted a local income tax. Unless it was conning the voters and never really intended to introduce a local income tax, why did Mr Swinney say in July 2008: "We propose that LIT is collected through the existing PAYE system and self assessments. The Scottish Government will pay Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs to administer and collect the tax"? He went on to publicly praise HMRC's cost efficiency, while the SNP was making those procedures unusable. In 2008, the SNP's consultation on local income tax said: "the SVR could, in principle, be introduced relatively quickly." It went on to praise the HMRC as being the most efficient means of delivering a local income tax, given that it already held the relevant data and had all the experience and systems that were necessary to collect such a tax. In 2008, the SNP told the world that the HMRC was cost effective, efficient and quick, that it held the relevant data and had the necessary systems, and that it was just a question of pressing the button, because it was all ready to go. How could that be when the  SNP had stopped updating the records? It does not add up. Let me tell you what else does not add up. Whenever the UK Government does or says anything that could be construed as doing Scotland down, who is the first to shout blue murder? Let us take the example of prisoner transfer and Alex Salmond's outrage at the possibility of being cut out of a deal. He was incandescent. As it happens, he was correct to be, but can you imagine the hullabaloo from Messrs Salmond and Swinney if the Westminster Government by act or omission denied this Parliament the right to exercise a power? Alex Salmond and the SNP would take to the streets in protest. What happens when this Parliament is denied the effective use of a Scotland Act power by the SNP? There is deafening silence and cover-up. Just when did the SNP plan to come clean? Was it really going to produce a manifesto for next May that promised a local income tax, while still keeping quiet? Every word that has been uttered today by Mr Swinney, by his colleagues around him and by the First Minister and their minders will be scrutinised over the coming hours and days. Answers need to emerge about just what happened, who knew what and when, and who ordered the cover-up. Someone somewhere orchestrated a cover-up to deny the people of Scotland the truth. That is the charge that the SNP faces today.

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2709)

Scottish Conservative plans would give more money to Scottish universities and greater support to the students who are most in need. We now know that Alex Salmond will give less money to our universities and less support to the students who are most in need. Will he tell me whether that is a five-month plan, a one-year plan or his long-term solution?

The First Minister does not want to be reminded of the facts, but they are that the Scottish National Party Government is cutting funding to our universities and support for those students who are most in need. Before the First Minister gets carried away with his rhetoric about the reaction of universities, I point out that the convener of Universities Scotland, Professor Bernard King, is damning. He said today: "universities have agreed to take on a significant number of students at a fraction of the real cost of teaching them. This is borne out of extreme circumstances for one year only and is not a sustainable position for universities to be in." I repeat to the First Minister that Conservative plans are ready. They are for the long term, and they will—[ Interruption .]

They will put more money into the sector and give greater support to those students who are most in need. What about the SNP? How many more reviews, task groups, working groups, green papers and acres of long grass does the First Minister need before he delivers a real, lasting solution?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-2683)

The First Minister is a passionate advocate of independence and autonomy for the governance of Scotland. Why is he such an entrenched opponent of independence and autonomy for the governance of schools?

I realise that I am no competition for Finnish models This week, a highly respected educationalist, Keir Bloomer, said: "progress is made in the modern world by releasing the creative energies of people, in this case the teacher, and the system that we have at the present moment constrains them far too much by direction from the top." He joins the ever-growing number of voices supporting the devolution of powers to our schools. Even the First Minister's colleague Mike Russell has refused to rule that out. Despite the First Minister's warm words, it is clear that he is the road block to reform: feet stuck in the mud, head buried in the sand, Mike Russell on a leash—[ Laughter .]

Perhaps that should be Jack Russell. Does the First Minister have any proposals for genuine reform to put Scotland's headteachers back in control of Scotland's schools?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2657)

Alex Salmond and his Scottish National Party colleagues have always been passionate and unquestioning supporters of the European convention on human rights and its incorporation into Scots law. In the light of subsequent events—most recently around the right of prisoners to vote—does he now regret that?

The Prime Minister made it clear in the House of Commons yesterday that the prospect of votes for prisoners is sickening. He said:  "It makes me feel physically ill".—[ Official Report, House of Commons , 3 November 2010; Vol 517; c 921.] I think that that sentiment is widely shared. He also made it clear that this is just another example of the mess that the coalition Government is having to clear up. The First Minister faces a political paradox—a very inconvenient truth—because, in fact, he does not want many of those prisoners in prison in the first place; he wants convicts in the community. One can just see him outside our Scottish jails, brandishing a placard that says, "Freedom! Vote SNP for a soft-touch Scotland." On prisoners' votes, the First Minister should mop up his crocodile tears. I will make a constructive suggestion. Regrettably, some prisoners will have to be given the right to vote and the UK Government is considering how to limit the damage, but surely in Scotland we could take some interim measures. Could guidance be given now to our Scottish judges that when they impose a prison sentence they should make clear whether the prisoner retains or loses the right to vote?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-2638)

When last month I raised with the First Minister the funding crisis that is facing our universities, he had no answer. Indeed, that  was the day that he came, he saw and he did not have a clue. Today, our Scottish universities are acknowledging the crisis by accepting that there will have to be a graduate contribution and calling for urgent action. Those are all points that the Scottish Conservatives have made repeatedly. If the First Minister still does not have a clue, does he at least accept the principle that graduates are going to have to contribute to the cost of their degrees?

Listening to the First Minister, he is like some latter-day Nero, strumming out "Gaudeamus Igatur" on his fiddle while tongues of flame reach out to our universities. This is a First Minister who talks but never leads, a First Minister who ducks and dives round the problem but never solves it, and a First Minister who will always do the populist thing rather than the right thing. When our own universities now concede that graduates will have to contribute to the cost of their education, and when the National Union of Students accepts that, why cannot the First Minister accept that simple principle so that we can all get on with working out the detail?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2618)

Nearly half a million methadone scripts are being given out every year in Scotland. That figure has soared over the past five years. Let us be clear what that means: every minute of every hour in every day, a methadone script is issued in Scotland. Of course methadone can have a role to play for some addicts on their road to recovery, but the BBC reports today that Scottish pharmacists now want that number cut. We know that many addicts never wanted to go on methadone in the first place and many who are on it want off. We simply cannot switch people from an illegal drug and park them on a prescribed one. Does the First Minister agree?

I welcome the First Minister's commitment to putting recovery at the heart of the strategy. That strategy, to which we both agreed, was a watershed in the approach to drug abuse in Scotland. However, a new strategy and political will are not enough if the change is not being delivered on the ground. The simple truth is that every month 1,000 people join the Scottish drugs misuse database. Put that together with the methadone prescription levels and it is clear that the sea change in policy two and a half years ago has not become a sea change in practice on the ground. Will the First Minister set up an independent review to report to this Parliament on why, for too many addicts, the road to recovery is still not a reality?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-2599)

This morning, we received an independent report on health services at Stracathro hospital, which the Scottish Government commissioned. That report contains the disturbing comment that the option of the continued use of the independent sector could not be looked at because "this is not reflective of current Scottish Government policy". The Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing has said to the British Medical Association: "NHS Scotland is, and in my view always should be, a service that is publicly owned and delivered." For the record, can the First Minister confirm that, under his Scottish National Party Government, the independent sector is banned from delivering national health service health care in Scotland?

The First Minister has either inadvertently or wilfully missed the point that I am making. His position, as just articulated, is incoherent, incomprehensible and ludicrous. He bans the independent sector from one part of the NHS and completely ignores its vital role in other parts of it. It is a dog's breakfast of dogma. The First Minister must either allow the independent sector to bid for contracts such as the Stracathro contract, or he must nationalise our dentists, pharmacists and opticians. Even Alex Salmond cannot have it both ways, so which is it to be?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2577)

"Via, veritas, vita"—the way, the truth, the life—is the motto of the University of Glasgow, whose principal, Anton Muscatelli, has warned that, in 2013, his university will "run out of cash". That is certainly showing the way, telling the truth and facing up to life. Anton Muscatelli accepts, as do many of his Scottish colleagues and Liam Burns of the National Union of Students Scotland, that the present funding system for universities is no longer an option. Change has to be made and made urgently. The clearly growing consensus is that graduates will have to make a contribution. Does the First Minister agree?

Having listened to that, I believe the First Minister's motto should be veni, vidi, procrastinavi: I came, I saw, and I haven't a clue. At this stage, given the crisis that confronts our universities, talk of a green paper is far too little, far too late. For the record, the Scottish Conservatives rule out up-front fees, and we rule out a pure graduate tax, but we rule in a graduate contribution from income that is based on fairness and ability to pay. We have put our cards on the table, but from the First Minister and the Scottish National Party we have had three years of dither, delay and indecision. Will Alex Salmond show some leadership? Will he accept that graduates will have to make a contribution—yes or no?

I, too, congratulate Ross Finnie on securing this important debate. I say at the outset that the Scottish Conservatives, alongside our colleagues in the United Kingdom Government, have long been supporters of clean-coal technology. We support the Scottish Government's stated aim of Scotland becoming the European leader in carbon capture and storage. To that end, we welcome the CCS road map that the Government has produced jointly with Scottish Enterprise. Turning to the motion, I note the deeply worrying figures that Mr Finnie cites on the levels of carbon dioxide that would remain unabated under the Hunterston proposal. However, rather like Mr Gibson, I would not wish to go as far as Mr Finnie does in seeking to restrict carbon capture solely to existing installations. That seems to be inflexible, although I accept that Mr Finnie raises real concerns about how we assess implementation of the technology. The fact remains that, as with all new energy infrastructure, whether it be wind turbines, hydro schemes or—as we are debating—a brand new power station, it is essential that it be the right scheme in the right place. Mr Gibson raised legitimate questions about that. I am certainly aware, as he is, that local concern remains current and the community is worried. Having examined the details of the Hunterston proposal and the passionately expressed concerns of local residents, not to mention the issues that are highlighted in the motion, the Scottish Conservatives are not fully convinced that the site in question is an appropriate location on which to construct such an installation. As someone who lives near the Clyde and who, like Mr Finnie, went to school in Greenock, I know the Clyde coast well. The proposed development is in an area of exceptional beauty that is rich in biodiversity and popular with tourists. We must therefore subject any such proposal to the highest levels of scrutiny. I am concerned by the representations of bodies such as RSPB Scotland and the Scottish Wildlife Trust, which have real concerns that the proposal could destroy a substantial part of the Portencross SSSI, which they say has the best remaining intertidal mud and sandflats on the outer Clyde and which are important feeding grounds for a huge range of waterfowl and waders. The comments that were made earlier about the attitude of Scottish Natural Heritage legitimately give rise to concern. We must be in the business  of sustainable development and of considering proposal and consequence. It is difficult to justify development on the proposed scale on such a sensitive site if we are serious about fulfilling our obligations to preserve and enhance the rich diversity of our coastal locations and to respect the concept of a sustainable environment. I note that the proposal entails an air emission stack of some 500ft in height. There is no doubt that that would be a disruptive and detrimental visual intrusion and that it would impact negatively on the landscape. Profound concerns have been expressed to me by local people about the road infrastructure in the area, which they feel is unsuited to dealing with the inevitable increase in heavy transportation that the project would entail. Rail transport also seems to be at maximum capacity. Concerns have also been raised with me about health, and the data to which Mr Finnie referred do nothing to assuage those. I conclude with a word about the future energy development that my party would like in the region. The Scottish Conservatives, along with every other party in Parliament, supported the world-leading emissions reduction targets that were agreed by the Parliament last year. It is our conviction that achieving those targets will be exceptionally challenging if, as has been said, nuclear capacity is not part of the mix. To that end, the Conservatives would like the continuation of nuclear generation at Hunterston, initially by extending the life of Hunterston B beyond its current estimated decommissioning date for as long as it is safe to do so, and ultimately by replacing it with a new nuclear facility.

Presiding Officer, I think that all members in the chamber would join me in sending our sympathy to the Prime Minister on the sad death of his father. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2532)

I thank the First Minister for his comments. Yesterday, a humiliated First Minister ditched the defining policy of him and his Scottish National Party Government. The independence bill went through the shredder. The First Minister will have to cope with the spasm gripping his fundamentalist corps, his flagging troops and the anguish on his back benches, but what taxpayers want to know is how on earth the First Minister can justify spending £2 million of their money on party-political propaganda, which has turned the national conversation into a nationalist con.

Presiding Officer, the First Minister and I are responsible for events within this Parliament. The First Minister has confirmed that his independence bill is now nothing more than a piece of SNP campaigning propaganda. It was  bad enough that he gambled millions of pounds of taxpayers' money on his failed policy, but it would be a scandal and an outrage if any more public money were squandered on his party-political campaign. Will he guarantee today that not one penny more of Government money and not one minute more of civil service time will be spent on this blatant SNP self-promotion, which would be a crass abuse of taxpayers' money?

Will the member give way?

Mr Scott referred to the First Minister pinning his saltire to the mast. Would Mr Scott agree that the saltire is the flag of Scotland? It is not the flag of the First Minister or his party.

The statement that we heard from the First Minister this afternoon is not just the final legislative agenda from the Government, but the final nail in the coffin for Alex Salmond's political credibility. It reeks of inertia, exhaustion, escapism and atrophy. Rhetoric is not enough and rosy promises will not do this time, because this time the First Minister can be measured by what he said against what he did. In 2007 he won votes by promising to write off student debt—in 2010 that is a promise broken. He courted the electorate on the back of a local income tax proposal, which was never brought before the Parliament. His fantasy politics, which promised free money to first-time house buyers, bit the dust, as did manifesto pledges on class sizes, health checks for 40-year-olds, physical education provision in schools and replacing the student loans system. The Scottish investment fund is an embarrassing non-event and the gathering 2009, with its much-vaunted promised benefits to business, has left a trail of angry creditors. To cover his failure, the First Minister will spend the next nine months whining about the powers that he does not have, instead of using the ones that he has. What do we have today? We have a statement of some 30 pages, but where are the new ideas and the vision? Where is the boldness that Edwin Morgan so desired? Where is the political courage to take Scotland forward and to use the levers that we have to make the changes that we need? For far too long, Scotland has been stuck with the statist attitude, according to which Governments run everything, the minister always knows best and only Governments can provide solutions. That old politics has boxed Scotland into a sterile corner while the rest of Britain—and indeed the world—has moved on. The immense financial challenges that we face mean that tough choices have to be made. They mean that we must sort out the essential from the optional. They mean that we must challenge how Scotland is run and who does what. The "it's aye been" mentality might have worked once, but not any longer. We must find the political will to challenge the status quo and we must put people first. By putting people first, we will restore fairness, common sense and community to the fabric of Scotland.  We are in difficult times. I will not dwell on how we got into this dreadful mess—on how Labour's debts and bank-busting deficits will cost our children and grandchildren dear. I care about how we will get out of the situation. That is why the few bright spots in the otherwise unrelieved gloom of broken promises and dogma from the SNP Government have come when the Conservatives have shown political leadership and delivered for Scotland. Who ensured that our society was kept safe by delivering an extra 1,000 police officers on the streets? It was the Scottish Conservatives. Who, I would ask Mr Gray, ensured that thousands of small businesses could ride out the recession by insisting on business rates relief? The Scottish Conservatives. Who stepped in to stop the decline in our high streets by delivering a town centre regeneration fund? The Scottish Conservatives. Who protected council tax payers by sanctioning a freeze in their bills—not for one year, but for each of the past three years? The Scottish Conservatives. Who started a real debate on how services will be delivered in the future by establishing an independent budget review group? The Scottish Conservatives. The First Minister may bask with his self-indulgent and complacent smile, but none of those achievements would have happened without the Scottish Conservatives. Those achievements show at least that Alex Salmond listens to me now and again. Perhaps he listened last year, too, when I told him that "he should stop the smoke and mirrors and ... ditch"— [ Official Report , 3 September 2009; c 19217.]  the independence bill. He has, but what humiliation. The promise that he made in 2007, which he has repeated through the past three years and which was to define him and his term in office—the raison d'être of his party—has gone. It has been reduced to a self-proclaimed campaigning tool for the SNP. How much has the unauthorised nationalist conversation cost us? How much ministerial time and effort, parliamentary resource and civil service manpower have been invested in that broken promise? With the independence bill now in the bin, I want the First Minister to promise that not one penny more of public money will be spent on his fantasy politics—on the separation of our country that we do not want and which he knows he cannot deliver. Will he give that promise now? Scotland does not want a First Minister who whines about not having independence. We want a First Minister who has the courage, the foresight and the drive to take the difficult decisions to address the challenges that Scotland faces now. Edwin Morgan's "nest of fearties" is alive and well  on the Government benches. We want a First Minister who will stand up for the Scotland that we have, not fantasise about a Scotland that we do not even want. What we want from a First Minister is realism, vision, innovation and leadership. The 10 bills are not without merit, but they do not represent a sea change for Scotland. The SNP's political prospectus is worthy rather than innovatory; it is track maintenance rather than forging a new direction of travel. A less charitable person might conclude that the Government wanted an easy life this term and that ministers were so busy trying to keep their jobs that they were forgetting to do their jobs. My colleagues and I on the Conservative benches will do—as we always have done—what is right for Scotland. We have consistently contributed positively to the Parliament. We have backed bills that we thought would make ordinary Scots' lives better, amended ones that were flawed and opposed those that failed Scotland. Scotland needs leadership, a new narrative and a new vision of how to take our country forward. Scotland does not need the SNP's narrow nationalism and dogma or Labour's unreconstructed statism. The legislative programme contains little that is of controversy, which is exactly the problem: it is legislation heavy, innovation light. A safety-first First Minister is trying to secure Bute house for his SNP successor rather than secure a better future for Scotland. That is selling Scotland short. Scotland deserves better.

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-2515)

The collapse of The Gathering 2009 Ltd left more than 100 small businesses out of pocket to the tune of more than £300,000. In anger and despair, a number of those small businesses have written to the First Minister, and this quotation is typical of the response that he has given: "I was and remain delighted that the indications are that Homecoming Scotland 2009 has been a resounding success." That must have cheered the small businesses up no end. What a patronising insult to them. The collapsed company, overseen by two Scottish Government quangos and a Scottish National Party council administration, reported cash-flow problems two months before the Scottish Government granted its secret loan. Let me ask the First Minister these questions: what financial checks were made, what personal guarantees were sought from the directors and what attempt, if any, was made to have ticket moneys held by the third party assigned to the Scottish Government?

Well, the First Minister may retreat into rhetoric and bombast, but let me get back to reality. Let me quote from a letter written by Jamie Landale, the then managing director of Wild Thyme, a small Perthshire catering company that was left high and dry. He said: "I concede that in the business world, deals go wrong and agreements fail, but what angers me here is the eagerness by which a multitude of senior figures have been very happy to take the glory, talk up its success and then fail the very people who made it successful in the first place." That is the reality. That catering company provided canapés and a cocktail party for VIPs and the First Minister. While he enjoyed himself nearly a year ago, that company is still owed £11,000. Surely even the First Minister feels red faced with embarrassment. That company and other small businesses have today issued a statement about the secret loan, which states: "We are all of the view that we should have known about this loan and that would have given each of us the ability to make clear commercial decisions as to whether we should take part at all and if we did on what commercial terms." So what does the First Minister say to those small businesses today? How is he going to restore their confidence in the Scottish Government, because most of them would not touch it with a bargepole? Or is his final word, "So long and thanks for the canapés"?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2497)

The First Minister has always demonstrated a casual and arrogant attitude to taxpayers' money. Time and again I have challenged him to be more responsible with the public's cash, and time and again he has rejected my advice, which is why the Conservatives have forced the Government to be more open with the taxpayer. Unfortunately, that was not the case as far as the gathering was concerned, and taxpayers certainly deserve some honesty today. We know from the devastating Audit Scotland report that the Scottish Government made a secret loan of £180,000 to a company that is now in liquidation. When did the First Minister find out about that secret, interest-free loan? Did he authorise it? Was it his idea? If it was kept secret from him, does he now back the actions of his then Minister for Culture, External Affairs and the Constitution, Michael Russell? Was the loan even legal? Will he now apologise to the taxpayer for the whole sorry mess?

The homecoming and the gathering were good ideas with good aims, but a laudable concept does not justify the Scottish Government playing fast and loose with taxpayers' money. Let us look at who has lost out because of the mess: the police, the ambulance service, more than 100 small businesses and the taxpayer. Quite frankly, the whole thing stinks, because the First Minister will not come clean about the secret loan. He says that he knew about it, but he will not say when he knew about it. He says that it was legal, but he will not give details of the legal advice that the Government received. He did not tell the steering group, he carried out no financial checks, but he still pumped in taxpayers' cash. Why such a casual and arrogant attitude to the taxpayer? Will he come clean today? Will he tell the Parliament whether his Government has made any other secret loans to any other organisations?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-2477)

A year ago, at First Minister's question time, I raised the issue of Salduz v Turkey, the human rights case concerning the right of a person who is detained by the police to get legal advice. Last week, the Lord Advocate issued interim guidelines on that very point. A year ago, I asked what steps the First Minister had taken to assess the potential impact of the Salduz ruling on Scotland. I did not get an answer then, and nothing happened until last week. So can I ask the First Minister, in the 12 months since I first raised the issue, how many suspects have been interviewed without a solicitor, how many of them  were convicted and how many of those convictions could be appealed?

The events as narrated by the First Minister involve his admission that the Lord Advocate is making contingency plans, to use his phrase. Time will tell whether the stable door should have been bolted 12 months ago, rather than last week. Given that the Lord Advocate now has contingency plans to safeguard future prosecutions and that the First Minister has alluded to Government contingency plans, exactly what are those plans? If the pending judgment is adverse, and retrospective in effect, the doors to Scotland's jails could be flung open and there could be far-reaching implications for our criminal justice system, the safety of communities and victims' peace of mind. What are those contingency plans to which the First Minister referred? He needs to plan now and not start rushing around the day after the court judgment is issued.

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2458)

I have asked the First Minister on numerous occasions to spell out his plans for sorting out the mess that Labour has made of the UK finances. No answer has he given. Labour has left this country with the biggest national debt that we have ever seen. Although it is Labour's mess, it is also the First Minister's responsibility to sort things out in Scotland. The buck stops with him. Do not take my word for it, Presiding Officer. The First Minister's colleague, Andrew Welsh, convener of the Finance Committee, says that the Scottish Government needs to show far greater leadership, "to set out more fully" what the Government will do and to "demonstrate real leadership by setting out spending choices in an open and transparent manner." Does the First Minister agree with Andrew Welsh?

Not for the first time I see a complete lack of connection between my question and the First Minister's answer. I am not asking about George Osborne's budget; I am asking about the Scottish budget, as known to the First Minister. I have been asking the First Minister about it for well over a year now, and the Finance Committee has now backed that call. The First Minister might rely on bluff and bluster to duck his responsibility, but this is at a new level. Members of the Parliament are now demanding his plans. Members of his own party, however embarrassing it may be to him, are now demanding his plans. Why is the First Minister dodging the issue? John Swinney has admitted that on his desk are secret plans to make savings—

Something that exists but that is not disclosed to others is a secret. Secret plans to make savings have been drawn up by John Swinney's civil servants. Now is the time to be transparent. We should be told what the Scottish Government is going to do. The First Minister should show some leadership and stop the secrecy. When is the First Minister going to come clean about his budget?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-2444)

I hope that, when the First Minister meets the Prime Minister, he will pledge to work with the UK Government on issues such as tackling problem drinks through taxation and dealing with general practitioner contracts, because his minority Scottish National Party Government has, quite simply, stalled. Nicola Sturgeon has said that the Scottish Government is committed to ensuring that everyone in Scotland can access high-quality health care "when they need it, regardless of where they live."  No one could disagree with that, so what on earth has gone wrong in Kinloch Rannoch, a community that is being denied acceptable out-of-hours GP cover? Why has the Scottish Government ended up in court over the issue? Why is the First Minister's Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing refusing to talk to the community of Kinloch Rannoch and refusing to intervene? Why has the Scottish Government broken its promise to provide high-quality health care when and where people need it?

The question that I asked was about out-of-hours GP cover, and I used the illustration of a particular community that is suffering such a significant problem that the Scottish Government has ended up in court over the issue. I also remind the First Minister that we know from a question to him on a previous occasion in the chamber that, since the renegotiation of GP contracts, emergency call-outs of the ambulance service have soared.  The First Minister might be fond of basking in the roseate impression that he likes to create of some of our public services in Scotland, but I remind him that the issue that the community is concerned about actually covers a great deal of Scotland, unless one happens to live in the central belt or metropolitan or urban areas. I ask the First Minister again whether his health secretary will now intervene. In comment to the media, she has apparently explicitly declined to intervene. How many other rural communities in Scotland lack acceptable out-of-hours GP cover? Does he even know? As the Westminster Government is committed to renegotiation of GP contracts, will the First Minister, in his imminent meeting with the Prime Minister, commit his Government to that process?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2424)

I am sure that all members rejoice in that happy event. The First Minister is having to grapple with the predicted but now inevitable consequence of Labour's economic mess. Although I accept that that dilemma is not of the First Minister's making, nonetheless it poses for him and his Government the critical questions of what he will cut and when he will cut it. We now know that the cost of Labour's mess this year is a penny in every pound that the Scottish Government spends. Doing nothing is not an option. The First Minister's colleague John Swinney told the Finance Committee last week: "I have asked for contingency work to be prepared to deal with the possibility of in-year adjustments".—[ Official Report , Finance Committee , 18 May 2010; c 2305.] In other words, that is this year. Is the First Minister, out of self-interest for his party, planning to keep that information secret, or will he, in the national interest of our country, publish those proposals?

It is indeed the case that the Conservative chancellor has offered the First Minister a degree of flexibility over when he faces up to the problem, but that does not make the problem go away. The First Minister is like a man who refuses to fix a dripping tap and then wonders why the house has flooded. Dealing now with Labour's mess will not choke off the recovery; it is delay that could make things much worse. Alex Salmond needs either to make savings of one penny in the pound this year or to explain why he will not do so. Gordon Brown refused to make savings ahead of the UK election for political reasons. The First Minister cannot be drawn into that dangerous game, so rather than bind his successor with a unilateral minority Government decision, will he not only publish the options for savings this year, but bring those options to the Parliament for debate and allow the Parliament a vote?

I commence by intimating that I may have to withdraw from the debate before the conclusion of proceedings. I apologise for that, Presiding Officer. No discourtesy is intended to you or to members in the chamber, but I require to prepare for First Minister's questions. I hope that the chamber will understand that there is an irreconcilable conflict of interest. This is the first Conservative business debate since the general election. I have waited 11 years to say this, but it is also the first Conservative business debate in the Parliament to take place with a Conservative Prime Minister at Westminster, leading a Liberal-Conservative Government. We have in David Cameron a Prime Minister who came to the Scottish Parliament before he even went to Westminster. We also have a new Government that is committed not just to respecting devolution but to strengthening it. In short, we have a new politics. We have turned the page in Scottish politics. When the nationalist First Minister of Scotland is able to have a constructive dialogue with a Conservative and Unionist Prime Minister and a Liberal Democrat Secretary of State for Scotland, we see three parties looking to the future. Although Labour, ousted from Government, must adjust to the humbling experience of being in opposition, I hope that it will recognise the opportunities that are being created for Scotland in the United Kingdom and contribute positively to that process. Of course, that task is made more challenging by Labour's appalling legacy of debt, but no one can doubt the coalition Government's resolve to take the tough decisions that are needed to sort out Labour's mess.  However, enough about Labour, and enough about the past. Scotland can look forward to the future with confidence. Our new Government will do what the Labour Government failed to do—work together with the Scottish Government for the good of the people of Scotland. We will scrap Labour's jobs tax, because we want to keep Scots in work, not tax them out of work. We will scrap Labour's identity cards, because we believe that the state should protect our liberty, not erode our freedoms. We will strengthen the Parliament, because we believe in devolution and are determined to make it work better. We will build an agenda of mutual respect between Scotland's two Parliaments and Governments, because Scotland needs co-operation, not confrontation. Of course, it takes two to tango. Everyone knows that the First Minister wants Scotland to separate from the rest of the United Kingdom. Alex Salmond knows full well that he and I will never agree on our ultimate constitutional destination. I will fight him every step of the way if he tries to separate Scotland from the rest of the UK. I take heart from the fact that, once again, the overwhelming majority of Scots chose parties that support the union over parties that support separation. Despite our differences on the constitution, nationalists and unionists can work together in Scotland's interest. Indeed, our differences on the constitution need not preclude us from working together on the constitution, where we can find common ground. I was disappointed that the Scottish National Party did not participate in the work of the Calman commission, but that is in the past. I take at face value the Scottish Government's desire to work with the UK Government to take forward the Calman proposals for financial responsibility and hope that that constructive engagement will happen. Conservatives always argued that the Calman proposals were the platform for change. I appreciate that the new Government's proposal to raise substantially the income tax threshold will have an effect on the Calman proposals; that issue, and others, should be discussed. I am pleased that we have from the Scottish Government a degree of engagement that did not exist under the previous Labour Government. Yesterday's announcement that the Calman steering group is to be reconvened, under the chairmanship of the new Secretary of State for Scotland, Danny Alexander, is more welcome evidence of the coalition Government's resolve to take Calman forward. The steering group was originally set up to look at the implementation of the Calman commission's recommendations and included representatives of the Conservative, Labour and Liberal Democrat parties at both Westminster and Holyrood. As a member of the group, I know that Labour and Liberal Democrat  representatives found it an effective and positive forum. However, I shall not support the Labour amendment in the name of Pauline McNeill, which suggests that we should just rush ahead, without proper scrutiny of the proposals, and omits all reference to the fossil fuel levy. That is indicative of a slight lack of grasp of the issues and of the new agenda of mutual respect. The new dimension is that, following the constructive talks in Edinburgh between the Prime Minister and the First Minister, the Scotland Office will now have a dialogue with the Scottish Government on the Calman recommendations. As my colleague David Mundell, minister at the Scotland Office, said yesterday: "The implementation of Calman recommendations is very important to Scotland. We have shown a commitment to talking to the Scottish Government on how best to take this forward and it makes sense at this time for the Steering Group to continue to meet ensuring dialogue across and between all the main parties." He added: "At this exciting time for Scotland it is important that everyone works together in the national interest and I look forward to discussions with politicians from all parties in Scotland in the coming weeks." Once again, we have hard evidence of the new politics and the new coalition Government attitude to Scotland and the Scottish Government. I have been heartened by the marked change in tone from the First Minister. From the bombast of the election campaign, we have seen Mr Salmond not only mellow but almost wax lyrical. He has talked with such warmth of the new Government that it must have been a matter of regret to him that he was not there in person on Tuesday to cheer the Queen's speech. When phrases such as "impressive", "extremely positive" and "substantive" trip off the first ministerial tongue, it is usually a sign that the First Minister is back to his favourite topic—himself. However, on this occasion, that is not the case—those words were his assessment of his meeting with the new Prime Minister. I welcome that change in tone. [ Interruption .] It is not often that Lord Foulkes is lost for words, but there is always a first time.

All relationships need a beginning. The intentions of the two parties are clear and positive. I welcome the different political climate in Scotland. As I have said before, the First Minister may also be the leader of the Scottish National Party, but his first duty is as head of the devolved  Government. His prime responsibility is to work in the national interest, not the Scottish National Party interest. The election of our new Westminster Government gives Scotland the chance of a new start in the relationship between our two Governments. We all understand why the Labour Government saw the role of the Scotland Office as being the Opposition to the Scottish Government—I have as little faith in the ability of Scottish Labour in opposition as Jim Murphy clearly had. However, we are clear about the fact that the Scotland Office's job is to argue Scotland's corner at Westminster, to work with the Scottish Government—whichever party forms that Government—and to do so in the national interest. Instead of conflict, we now have co-operation. Instead of silence, we now have dialogue. Instead of stand-off, we now have engagement.

I am sure that serious regard will be had to the issue that Mr Doris raises. He will accept that the new coalition Government has been in office for only a short time, but I am certain that he will pursue issues directly with the appropriate UK minister or via the conduit of the Secretary of State for Scotland. Both Mr Scott and I would like to know whether there is any difficulty in facilitating such communication. With a new approach of mutual respect, when disagreements arise, rather than rush to the nearest television studio to lambast the other side, we will have the opportunity to try to find common ground and, if that cannot be found, at least to understand why that is the case. There will be respect for the right of the Scottish Government and the UK Government to pursue their different agendas within the areas for which they are responsible. A good example of the new politics is the fossil fuel levy, which has been raised as an issue by the Scottish Government on many occasions. Almost £200 million from the proceeds of the levy in Scotland is held by the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets, yet currently if Scottish ministers ordered that the money be paid into the Scottish consolidated fund, the Treasury would reduce the block grant by the same amount. In those circumstances, it is difficult to see how it would ever be in the interests of any Scottish  Government of any political persuasion to seek the release of that money. It is right and proper that the Treasury looks at the issue again, so I am delighted that George Osborne has ordered that to happen. Complex issues are involved, but the new UK Government has already taken a substantial step to listen to the legitimate concerns of the Scottish Government and to see what can be done to address them. That is the respect agenda in practice, and it has taken a Liberal-Conservative Government to deliver it. Shamefully, Labour did not even try to build any relationship between our two Governments and our two Parliaments. Since leaving office, Labour has made it abundantly clear that it has a similar lack of respect for the intelligence of the public. Iain Gray has been happy to rant on in this chamber about "cuts, cuts, cuts" as if the spending squeeze had nothing to do with the out-going Labour Government, which was racking up debt at the rate of £3 billion a week. Thus, although there is much that is new in the new politics, there are clearly some things that do not change. For example, those who take over from a Labour Government always have to clean up the mess. Liam Byrne was not joking when he said there was no money left. The Treasury cupboard is indeed bare. Labour's recession was the longest and deepest since the second world war. Britain's deficit is the largest in the European Union. The Labour Government was spending one third more than it raised. It was addicted to out-of-control spending and to mortgaging our nation's future in an attempt to save its own political skin. Labour's waste and Labour's financial mess mean that tough times lie ahead, but our Liberal-Conservative Government will always ensure that we look after the most vulnerable in society and that the spending decisions that are taken, although tough, are fair. Let us be honest: there will be difficult days ahead. Yes, there will be disagreements between the Scottish Government and the UK Government. Indeed, there may be disagreements between the two coalition partners. However, this new age of mutual respect and of constructive engagement lays the foundations for a new era of devolution and genuinely offers a fresh start and an exciting and different future for Scotland. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the commitment of HM Government to establish a positive and constructive working relationship with the Scottish Government and Parliament to tackle the problems facing the country and, in particular, welcomes the commitment in the Queen's Speech to introduce legislation to implement recommendations from the final report of the Commission on Scottish Devolution and the willingness to consider matters in relation to the Fossil Fuel Levy.

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-2406)

That is most encouraging. As Prime Minister, Gordon Brown did not come to the Scottish Parliament in three years; David Cameron came within three days. That is a symbol of the new working relationship between our Governments and our Parliaments. One of David Cameron's first commitments is to order the Treasury to look at the fossil fuel levy, which could release millions of pounds for green jobs in Scotland—money that was blocked by Gordon Brown. In the spirit of co-operation, will the First Minister work with the United Kingdom Government on today's coalition agreement, to renegotiate general practitioner contracts to provide better out-of-hours services, to scrap Labour's jobs tax, to protect front-line services, to support post offices, to deliver high-speed rail, to participate in Calman, to help veterans with mental health problems, and to  give the children of servicemen and women who have been killed in action scholarships to universities? Those are just a few of the excellent proposals in the coalition agreement. We all know that the Scottish National Party minority Government has run out of ideas and that it is the United Kingdom Government that is now setting the agenda. Will the First Minister work with the Prime Minister to do his best for Scotland? That, Mr Salmond, is real progressive politics.

Indeed—let us look at the policies. The First Minister's plan to impose a blanket minimum price on all alcohol is floundering. Today's coalition agreement has come up with a way forward. Will the First Minister support a ban on the sale of alcohol below cost price? Will he work with the UK Government to target problem drinks and problem drinkers through alcohol taxation and pricing? Will he use existing  legislation to clamp down on underage drinking? Will he work with the UK Government to find a way forward on a solution to Scotland's and Britain's binge-drinking problem? Will he ditch his blanket minimum pricing policy, which is probably illegal and which would certainly penalise responsible drinkers?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister, David Cameron. (S3F-2387)

I hope that the First Minister will try to have a better working relationship with the new Prime Minister than he had with the  previous one. Scotland has been badly served by the First Minister's politics of gripe and grievance over the past three years. His attitude has damaged the relationship between our Governments and our Parliaments. I know that the Prime Minister has already spoken to the First Minister—thankfully, unlike the previous two Prime Ministers, the current one knows how to use a phone—and will meet him very soon. When they meet, will the First Minister welcome the fact that our new Government will scrap Labour's job tax, scrap Labour's identity cards, keep the winter fuel allowance, keep free television licences for over-75s, keep child benefit, increase pensions, reform our banks, protect our armed forces abroad and do so much more? Will he work with the new politics and abandon his girn and his whinge?

Oh well, there is nothing that a little Tory antihistamine does not make a lot better. [ Laughter .] Enormous challenges face our country. Scotland's unemployment rate is now higher than that of the United Kingdom—that is Labour's jobs legacy on top of Labour's debt legacy—and we need to deal with the consequences of Labour's failure. Our new British Government has a job to do, but so does the First Minister: he needs to knuckle down and play his part. What plans does his Government have to deal with Labour's legacy? Will he make economies? If so, what are they? Alternatively, does he plan to raise taxes—is that his secret plan?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2374)

The chief executive of the Outward Bound Trust, Nick Barrett, supports a national citizen service as proposed by the Conservatives: "It's a great idea," he says. Stacey Adams, who is the chief executive of Raleigh International Trust, also supports it, saying that she "would be happy to endorse the roll out of the NCS policy to Scotland." Why, then, is the First Minister opposed to giving 16-year-olds in Scotland a chance to take part in this exciting new idea that has received such significant backing? If there is a Conservative Government in Westminster after Thursday—which I very much hope there will be—why will 16-year-olds in England and Wales get opportunities that 16-year-olds in Scotland will be denied by this SNP Government?

Perhaps surprisingly, I am encouraged by the first part of the First Minister's response because he has not ruled out a very good idea, although less than a month ago he snubbed it completely. That shows that the power of Conservative argument can prevail. I turn to the admittedly important issue of funding. The fact is that the First Minister and his Government have a perverse sense of priorities. Why does he think that it is better to spend £57 million a year on the provision of universal free prescriptions for people such as himself, who earn £150,000 a year? He is awash with money, including the resettlement allowance of £65,000 that he proposes to take, which is granted to people who give up politics, even though he apparently has no intention of doing any such thing. More is the pity. Even a fraction of the £57 million that is being used to provide universal free prescriptions would make a world of difference to the Scottish youngsters who would benefit from the scheme. Is the First Minister the only person who cannot see that?

I am delighted to hear that my party is so popular with so many opponents. I am not in the least surprised at that development. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-2356)

Last Sunday, in a television studio, the First Minister was asked: "had Thomas Hamilton, the Dunblane killer, survived and been sentenced to life imprisonment in a Scottish jail, would you have released him if he had been diagnosed with terminal cancer?" The First Minister replied, "No". I agree totally with his answer. Will he explain the difference between the mass murderer Thomas Hamilton and the mass murderer Mr al-Megrahi?

I will cut to the chase and leave the First Minister to explain. The point is that the integrity and status of our Scottish criminal justice system are at stake and that the First Minister has publicly stated two irreconcilable and totally contradictory positions in relation to two mass murderers. I ask him again how he justifies that contradiction. How can he support the release of one mass murderer and totally oppose the release of another?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2340)

John Swinney announced last week that the Barnett consequential for social housing will produce an extra £31 million for the Scottish Government to spend. Yesterday, Homes for Scotland said that Scotland "is facing its worst housing crisis since the Second World War", and that housing development "is touching an all-time low". Will that £31 million have a significant effect on the Scottish house building industry? How many houses will the money build?

Not for the first time, the question that I asked was not answered. I will do that for the First Minister. I estimate that £31 million could build nearly 400 houses, which is welcome. Why is the Scottish Government completely undermining that benefit by robbing the housing budget of an estimated £100 million—almost 1,300 houses—because of Alex Salmond's dogmatic insistence on abolishing the right to buy? First, we had the Liberal Democrats hitting new-build houses with a £14,000 tax bill. Now we have Alex Salmond, with his SNP cut, clobbering the Scottish house building industry and shattering the hopes of many families across Scotland. How can he justify that cut of £100 million to the Scottish housing budget?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister—the current one, that is. (S3F-2321)

Earlier this week, Nicola Sturgeon, the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing, said that progress on the national health service in Scotland is threatened by what she described as "the cuts agendas of the London parties". The Conservative party has confirmed that a Conservative Government at Westminster will increase NHS funding in real terms every year. Will the First Minister give the same pledge to Scotland? Will he confirm that in his next budget he will also increase NHS spending in Scotland in real terms?

I asked a specific question about the health service, and I failed to get a specific response. We now know the truth about  the SNP: it is more nats, more cuts. It is utterly disgraceful that the First Minister is unable to give a pledge to protect the Scottish NHS. He might want to play politics in the chamber, but he cannot play fast and loose with our NHS patients. I ask him once again: in light of the Conservative pledge on the health budget, will the First Minister increase Scottish NHS funding?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2302)

The Scottish Government is spending just over £10 million on advertising in the current financial year. Will the First Minister tell the Parliament how much of that money he is spending this month, in the run-up to the general election?

I can understand why the First Minister has no desire to answer the question that I asked. Let me give him the facts, which were obtained through a freedom of information request. The annual spend is indeed £10 million. In the first 11 months, he spent only £6 million. In March, he is spending the balance, with expenditure of more than £4 million in this month alone. Forty per cent of his annual advertising budget is being blown in one month, at a rate of £1 million a week, as we approach a general election. Something does not smell right. The spending reeks of taxpayer-funded SNP propaganda rather than the provision of essential public information. Will the First Minister clarify what public information was so pressing that 40 per cent of his annual advertising budget had to be held over and squeezed into the final month of the financial year, with an advertising bonanza just before a general election?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-2281)

Presiding Officer, "Members of Parliament have to do their best for their constituents. They should do it without fear or favour".— [ Official Report , 11 February 2010; c 23793.]  Those fine words were uttered by the First Minister in this Parliament just last month. Last week, the business of this Parliament was disrupted by strike action that resulted in the cancellation of committee business, and another strike is planned for next Wednesday, when the Parliament will sit to debate Scottish Government business. Does the First Minister agree that if MSPs are to do their  duty and act "without fear or favour" in this Parliament they should cross any picket line outside the Parliament and get on with what we have been elected and are paid to do?

No one disputes that trade union members have the right to engage in lawful strike action. However, MSPs who are elected and paid for by the public have a primary and absolute duty to represent the interests of all their constituents in this Parliament, and from that we must not be diverted. It will be business as usual for my party if the strike proceeds. Will the First Minister confirm that he will instruct his ministers and MSPs—all of them—to cross the picket line and come to work?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2262)

We all know that there is nothing the First Minister likes better than flashing a toothy smile for the benefit of any passing camera, but all is not well in the world of Scottish dentistry. At a cost of £2.5 million every year, the Scottish National Party Government wants to allow the names of patients to remain registered with a dentist for ever, even if that patient has not turned up for years or not turned up at all. That may allow the Government to trumpet that more and more patients are registered with dentists, but it does not mean that any more are being treated by dentists. That is why the stupidity of the approach is obvious to most people, not least to the British Dental Association in Scotland, which says: "It has ... been pointed out that the change is a politically expedient way of artificially improving the statistic". Does the First Minister agree that, in layman's terms, that means cooking the books? How can he defend that?

Let me bring the First Minister back down to earth. I had hoped that Ms Sturgeon's whispering sweet nothings into his ear might have enlightened us all, but clearly she failed. The facts are that in Moray barely a quarter of adults are registered with an NHS dentist, in Aberdeenshire only 41 per cent of adults are registered, and in the Scottish Borders fewer than half are. Teeth are rotting while we speak—that is hardly a tribute to the Government's stunning success with Scottish dentistry. On the registering-for-ever approach, the First Minister's Government has chosen to ignore the dire warnings of NHS dentists in Scotland, who warn that the change will undermine the importance of regular check-ups and will, which is most alarming of all, increase the chances that serious conditions such as mouth cancer will go undetected. All that will cost £2.4 million a year, just to make the SNP Government look better. That £2.4 million could be much better spent on giving more patients real treatment, than wasted on phoney propaganda for the SNP. The Conservatives have lodged a motion to annul this nonsense. Will the First Minister support it?

Nobody disputes the extreme nature of the financial challenge that is being visited on this country—it is the legacy of Labour debt. Is that not exactly why the First Minister should be spending £2.4 million on treating people's teeth and not on filling up meaningless patient lists with patients who never go for treatment?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-2240)

Freedom of the press and the independence of broadcasters are key pillars of a democratic society. The First Minister is under suspicion of undermining those pillars and using taxpayers' money to compromise the impartiality of Scottish Television. That is why, yesterday, the Office of Communications launched an official investigation into the affair. The issue is causing concern and the First Minister must be totally transparent. Indeed, we got "full disclosure" from the Government yesterday. It revealed that it has spent £625,000 of taxpayers' money on sponsoring programmes on STV. We know that other money is spent on advertising, but has any more taxpayers' money been spent by the Government or its agencies on sponsoring programmes? Can the First Minister confirm that yesterday's statement was full disclosure?

I asked the First Minister whether we have been given full disclosure on Government expenditure on sponsoring programmes. His response, if I may say so, is both intriguing and troubling. I have here a document from Scottish Natural Heritage that confirms that more taxpayers' money was used to sponsor other programmes on STV. That begs the question what else the First Minister is hiding and how much more taxpayers' money has been spent. Why is he not being transparent? Is there anything else that he needs to reveal after his so-called "full disclosure" yesterday? For example, I have here an example of the Government's response to freedom of information requests from the Sunday Express. It is pretty obvious that not much information is being disclosed. Indeed, I think that, for the First Minister, FOI must stand for "full of ink". Will he undertake this afternoon to issue unredacted documentation to take us at least one step closer to full disclosure?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2221)

Does the First Minister accept that the humility and candour of his deputy yesterday were in stark contrast to the self-satisfied, bombastic, tub-thumping bravura of someone else whom we know? I am not convinced that the SNP leopard has changed its spots, so let us test it. Will Mr Salmond say sorry to students for breaking his promise on dumping their debt? Will he say sorry to first-time buyers for breaking his promise on £2,000 grants? Will he say sorry to the people of Scotland for breaking his promises on class sizes, local income tax and physical education in schools? Will he say sorry for breaking his promise to pay council tax on Bute house, despite criticising his predecessor for not doing so? Yesterday, the Deputy First Minister was big enough to admit her mistakes. Will the First Minister now admit his?

Ah well, test failed—bombastic as ever. Now that we have established that sorry really is the hardest word for Alex Salmond to say, let us move on to the immediate challenges that confront our country. Scotland is facing a major cut in spending as a direct result of Labour's debt legacy, so why, when teacher numbers have dropped by nearly 2,000, has the SNP Government employed another 1,000 civil servants? Why, when local government warns that free personal care may need to be cut, is the SNP Government employing another 1,000 civil servants? Why, when Audit Scotland criticises the SNP Government's 2.5 per cent efficiency savings as not enough, does Alex Salmond bolster his own staff by 1,000? I will say sorry. Sorry, First Minister—that record is not good enough. Will the First Minister get his priorities right, take the tough decisions and do what the rest of the country is doing and tighten his belt?

When the issue first arose two weeks ago, far from helping his deputy, the First Minister hindered her case. We had the usual Alex Salmond decibel delivery of rhetoric and arrogance. Where there should have been humility and reflection, all that we had was bluster. Where there should have been an apology, all that we heard was defiance. When we needed to hear something of substance, all that we heard was misrepresentation and spin. The fiasco should never have happened. Nicola Sturgeon's approach is welcome and sharply contrasting. I thank her for her candour, humility and courageous recognition that she did not get everything right. We have today heard answers to many of the questions that were asked, but some questions remain. Ms Sturgeon continues to use the word "duty" in relation to the code of conduct. In the light of her statement, will she confirm that MSPs are not under "an absolute obligation" to make representations, as Alex Salmond claimed? That phrase does not appear in the code of conduct. Will she accept that we have discretion as to whether and to what extent we become involved? To put the general matter beyond doubt, will Ms Sturgeon confirm whether Mr Rauf and his  associates have any connections with her party or the independence movement? Does Ms Sturgeon accept that a lid has been lifted on the Scottish National Party's attitude to crime and criminals? The public will have every right to believe that, although she accepts that she went too far in pleading for Mr Rauf to be spared jail, the SNP still believes that a non-custodial sentence is right, even for a serial and serious fraudster.

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-2204)

The events of the past 24 hours are extremely worrying and they go to the heart of the conduct of this Government. The Deputy First Minister is under serious scrutiny. I am not calling for her resignation at this stage—I believe that such a call is premature—but many questions need to be answered, and must be answered if Ms Sturgeon is to retain the confidence of this Parliament. If necessary, she should come before this Parliament and make a statement. In the meantime, clarification is overdue. Is this a constituency issue or a Government issue? The Government's chief spin doctor—at taxpayers' expense—was sent out to defend Ms Sturgeon. Surely that makes it a Government issue. Did Ms Sturgeon seek or receive advice from Government officials on this matter? Is she now receiving advice from Government officials? Did Government officials do checks on Mr Rauf on behalf of Ms Sturgeon? Will the First Minister now insist that Ms Sturgeon make a statement to this Parliament?

Given that the First Minister has now confirmed that this is an issue for the Government, there are questions for the Government. MSPs are not, as Ms Sturgeon has claimed, "duty-bound" or, as the First Minister has averred today, under "absolute obligation" to make representations to a court for a constituent. An elected politician is not an officer of the court making a plea in mitigation. We all have discretion as to whether and how to get involved. Indeed, who asked Ms Sturgeon to get involved? The First Minister did not answer Mr Gray's question. Will he confirm that paragraph 7.7 of the ministerial code has not been breached? Do Mr Rauf or his associates have any connections with the Scottish National Party or the independence movement? Does the First Minister genuinely believe that serial fraud, two convictions and 779 fake signatures can all be dismissed as, to quote Ms Sturgeon, "mistakes"? That is why a statement must be made to this Parliament.

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2183)

The people of Scotland are getting a raw deal on out-of-hours medical care.  Since the Labour Government at Westminster and the Lib-Lab coalition in Scotland introduced the new general practitioner contract in 2004, three telling facts have emerged: GP pay is up by 40 per cent; 95 per cent of GP practices opted out of out-of-hours care; and, meanwhile, out-of-hours ambulance call-outs have rocketed by 42 per cent. It is clear that the Scottish Ambulance Service, which is already under pressure, is filling the gap. Does the First Minister agree that the contract was mismanaged, has undermined patient confidence and could jeopardise patient care?

I would not dissent from the overall perception that the First Minister has conveyed, but I am talking about a particular aspect of the health service, which I know concerns a great many people the length and breadth of Scotland. Everyone in Scotland should have reliable access to urgent and primary care 24 hours a day, seven days a week. I accept that some general practices have extended their daytime hours, but that is not out-of-hours service, and we cannot rely on the Ambulance Service to plug the gap. The GP contract is a United Kingdom contract, but the Scottish Government and the Scottish Parliament have a formal role in the process. A Conservative Government at Westminster would renegotiate the contract. Does the First Minister support a renegotiation of the UK GP contract in order to get a better deal for patients in Scotland?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-2165)

The Scottish National Party manifesto could not have been clearer. It promised that every pupil would get "2 hours of quality PE each week". I shall repeat that: every pupil, in every school, every week, would receive two hours of quality physical education. Nearly three years on, the First Minister's Government has failed to deliver that pledge. Two out of three primary schools and five out of six secondary schools are still waiting—abject failure, because the commitment was clear, cast iron and categorical. It was made by the First Minister, so why has he not delivered it?

Unfortunately for the First Minister, patting himself on the back does not count as PE. [ Laughter. ]

I wish that the First Minister's reply to my question had been even half as clear as his manifesto commitment. Gavin Hastings has said that we must give every kid an opportunity. He feels that two hours of PE is not too much to ask. With the British Olympics and the Glasgow Commonwealth games just around the corner, this is a golden opportunity to inspire our children. As Andy Murray thrills the nation at the Australian open, it is such a shame that there are no tennis courts at 40 per cent of our councils' secondary schools. I leave it to the First Minister to explain his Government's failings, but will he join Gavin Hastings in supporting a Scottish Conservative initiative to set up a new sporting trust—a charity specifically intended to give more children more sporting chances?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2148)

Does the First Minister accept that the Scottish National Party Government has got its priorities on health all wrong? It puts political ideology before patient care and is more interested in populist policies, such as free prescriptions for people such as Alex Salmond who are on £160,000 a year, rather than in providing value for money. What we really need is less waste, more choice and more innovation. In England, there are general practitioner walk-in treatment centres open during patient-friendly hours and at patient-friendly locations. Will the First Minister pilot such a facility in Scotland or will he deny patients in Scotland the benefits that patients in England enjoy?

I am sure that some of that information is interesting to the chamber, but not one bit of it answered my question. We all aspire to make public services better, and I defend our NHS. Our clinicians, our nurses and all the others who work within it do a tremendous  job. Nonetheless, I ask Mr Salmond whether it would not be wonderful if, here in Scotland, someone could see their GP within a quarter of an hour, without any appointment, on their way to work, and still be at their desk by 8 o'clock. People can do that in London, in Bristol and in Manchester, where it is a case of, "The patient will see you now, doctor." Yet again, the First Minister has his head in the sand—blind to what the public need and want, and obsessed with his own top-down, Alex-Salmond-knows-best approach. Patients in Scotland deserve better, so I ask the question again. Why is the First Minister denying patients in Scotland the benefits of GP walk-in treatment centres that are enjoyed by patients in England? Why is he not standing up for patients in Scotland?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-2127)

Everybody is now aware of the corrosive financial impact of Labour's recession in every walk of life. Today, details of the £72 million annual costs for running this Parliament have been disclosed. Looking at those costs, I think that it is obvious that we, as members of the Scottish Parliament, will have to sort out the essential from the non-essential. Does the First Minister agree that, above all else in these difficult times, the Parliament must set an example of good housekeeping? Does he agree with the Conservatives that we need to cut the cost of running the Parliament?

Let me clarify for the First Minister that the Scottish Government allocates the budget for the running of this Parliament and that he leads a party that has a member who sits on the corporate body—

I apologise for any confusion, Presiding Officer.  I infer from the First Minister's response that he now accepts the need for financial prudence in the broad round. I am heartened to hear that. He talked about the chancellor being apparently no longer in denial, but I think that the person whom everyone regards as being in denial is the First Minister, who has consistently refused to explain how he proposes to make budget provision for the inevitability of cuts. He has to stop his ludicrous posturing that a vote for the Scottish National Party will somehow make Scotland immune to Labour's debt crisis. He is living in denial—[ Interruption. ]

The First Minister is the King Canute of Scottish politics, presumably hoping that his wee tartan tootsies will not get wet. Time and again, the Conservatives have put on the table measures to save the Scottish budget a quarter of a billion pounds a year, but time and again the First Minister has rejected them. What everyone now wants to know—now that he admits that denial is not an option—is whether he gets it. What will his Government do? Does he accept that it will need to spend less?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-2095)

Obviously in the same boat as the Governor of California. I bring a story of NHS good will to the attention of the First Minister. A Mr Guthrie recently received a new hip at the Scottish regional treatment centre at Stracathro. It was paid for by the NHS, the procedure was delivered by an independent provider, and Mr and Mrs Guthrie are full of praise for the attention and care received. I understand that, best of all, Mr Guthrie sought advice on 21 October and got his new hip in just less than three weeks. Now some winter chill sets in. In due course Mr Guthrie will need his other hip to be replaced, but, because the unit is being fully transferred back into the NHS, he has been informed that the waiting time for that operation will be at least 18 weeks. How can the First Minister justify that as being acceptable?

As the First Minister has just eloquently demonstrated, the hostility of the SNP and his health minister, Nicola Sturgeon, to involving the independent sector in the NHS is widely known and affirmed today. Patients such as Mr Guthrie do not care who delivers a procedure; they just want pain relief as quickly as possible. The independent contribution at Stracathro has achieved a significant reduction in local NHS waiting times, there are no hospital-acquired infections, and there has been a saving to the NHS of £2 million. That is what patients want. What is the First Minister doing to promote such independent involvement in the NHS? If he is not doing anything, why is the First Minister allowing SNP dogma and prejudice to block the delivery of swift, cost-effective and quality health care?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2073)

Yesterday, the nightmare of Labour's economic incompetence and the true extent of Labour's debt crisis were laid bare in shocking terms. Every child born in Scotland is now saddled with a Labour debt of £23,000. It just gets worse. Everyone working in Scotland who earns more than £20,000 a year will see their pay packets cut; equally, employers will be hammered by Labour's tax on jobs. Unless it is bingo, boilers or barbecues, Labour cannot be trusted on the economy.  How big will Labour's cut be in our Scottish budget and how deep will it be in our Scottish public services? Is it not time that Labour Treasury ministers appeared before the Scottish Parliament to explain the devolved consequences of the pre-budget report?

Unusually, I thank the SNP First Minister for his response, although it is with no pleasure that I hear about the SPICe projection of the budget cut. Given the number of people in Scotland who work in our health service, schools and other essential public services, Labour's tax on jobs will rip an estimated £200 million out of Scotland's public sector and a third of that could hit the national health service alone. Since last April, I have challenged repeatedly the First Minister to confront reality and tell us precisely what he will do. My party has identified hundreds of millions of pounds of savings that could be made and the First Minister has disagreed with every one of our proposals. I say to the First Minister, listen up: Labour has brought us to the brink of bankruptcy; doing nothing is not an option; living in denial is not an option; and saying that all will be well in an independent Scotland is not an option—just look at Ireland. Face reality—come clean with the Scottish people and tell us where the cuts will be made and where the savings will come from.

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-2056)

For some time now, the First Minister has been desperately denying that there is anything wrong with education in Scotland. In fact, just a few weeks ago, he told me that he put on record his "approval and endorsement" of the then Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning—poor woman. Obviously, his sacking of Fiona Hyslop is a belated admission that something is very far wrong. Was it the 10,000 pupils who leave school each year unable to read or write properly that made him sack Fiona Hyslop? Was it the 2,000 fewer teachers than two years ago that made him sack Fiona Hyslop? Was it possibly Scotland's below-average global ranking for mathematics and science that made him sack Fiona Hyslop? Or was it none of the above, because he thinks that there is nothing wrong, which begs the question: why did he sack Fiona Hyslop?

Of course, I believe in genuine devolution of local control to local government; I do not believe in central Government telling local government what to do. Sacking Fiona Hyslop  does not get Alex Salmond off the hook. He wrote the SNP manifesto and concocted the undeliverable pledges, and he must accept that he got it wrong and that we need a new direction for education in Scotland. What is the First Minister's position? Is it the Fiona Hyslop model of centralised control of education by the state, or is it the Mike Russell vision that "power in education" should "be transferred to the school and where power lies" and "so should resource and the ability to decide", which is also the Conservative position? In only 48 hours, is the First Minister already at odds with his new education minister?

I am sorry, Presiding Officer, but it really is a case of pot, kettle and black. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2039)

It is now clear that another of the First Minister's flagship policies—the minimum pricing of alcohol—is going to hit the buffers, because the Labour Party has finally seen the light, or found a backbone; whatever it is necessary for it to do to follow the Conservative lead. [ Interruption. ]

As it is now clear that the First Minister will not succeed with his policy of the minimum pricing of alcohol, I ask him to reconsider another area of policy—his determination to provide universal free prescriptions. We know that the Liberal Democrats, once again following my party's lead in opposing the measure, have joined our ranks in opposition to that policy. No doubt Labour will follow shortly.  Does the First Minister agree that at this time of crisis in our public finances, when delivering essential public services is proving hugely challenging, giving people like him and me free prescriptions is morally repugnant and politically irresponsible?

Many of the people in the category to which the First Minister referred already get their prescriptions free. Last week, I raised with the First Minister the deeply disturbing issue of child malnutrition. As I said last week, one of the most important interventions for children who are at risk would be to improve the provision of health visitors. Is not supporting vulnerable children far more important than subsidising free prescriptions for me and the First Minister? I know that the First Minister and I do not agree on universal free prescriptions but, if he loses the vote for that policy in the Parliament, will he commit to using the money that is saved to improve the provision of health visitors throughout Scotland?

I would ask the First Minister who he thinks should be the next manager of the Scottish football team, but I will leave that to Tavish Scott. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-2019)

I was alarmed and appalled when I discovered this week that, of 1,500 children who were admitted to the Royal hospital for sick children in Glasgow, more than 150 were suffering from malnutrition. That is a disgrace and an affront in modern-day Scotland. However, Government statistics that were recently obtained by the Conservatives claim that only 48 children across the whole of Scotland were admitted to Scottish hospitals suffering from malnutrition. Given the huge variation between those figures, and given that the figures cover only hospital admissions, can the First Minister tell me the true extent of child malnutrition in Scotland? If he cannot, why cannot he do so and what will he do to find out?

It is worrying that the First Minister does not know the true extent of the problem. I urge him to find out, and to do so quickly, because unless we know the extent of the problem, we will certainly not know how bad it is or how to deal with it. Let me make one suggestion to the First Minister. In the meantime, we can start by having more health visitors, who are the key to preventing child malnutrition. I have discovered that a general practitioner practice in Springburn with 7,000 patients on its books has only one health visitor. Another GP practice in Possil has no health visitor at all. That is totally unacceptable. The scandal of child malnutrition and the scandal of there being too few health visitors go hand in hand. Will the First Minister demonstrate his resolve in tackling child malnutrition by backing Conservative policy for more health visitors for all our children throughout Scotland?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-2001)

I will remind the First Minister of what some leading Scottish educationists said recently. In September, Professor Lindsay Paterson of the University of Edinburgh said: "In mathematics, science and reading, Scotland is mediocre by international standards ... the situation is dismal." Yesterday, Professor Eric Wilkinson of the University of Glasgow said:  "In Scotland, we are ... stuck in a mud pool ... Scottish education is on a downward spiral". Just this week, East Lothian Council's leader, David Berry, of the Scottish National Party—for the moment—proposed a radical departure from the traditional system of providing education. Does the First Minister accept the urgent need for a debate on how we provide education, or is his mind closed to those very public concerns?

The First Minister may want to sit in his bunker and ignore those who know what they are talking about, but one would have thought that a significant and interesting proposal from someone senior in his own party, such as David Berry, would at least have merited a response from the education minister, the hapless Fiona Hyslop. What did we get? On Monday, there was nothing; on Tuesday, there was nothing; on Wednesday, there was nothing; and today, there has been nothing. There we have the Scottish Government's contribution to the educational debate. One minister is too busy taking his dentist out to dinner to bother and the other is rendered mute. The conspiracy of indifference from the Government is unacceptable. Alex Salmond must grip the issue. If Fiona Hyslop cannot lead the vital and overdue debate on Scottish education, will he find someone who can?

rose—

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-1977)

The Audit Scotland report on public finances that was published today is extremely worrying in identifying up to £3.8 billion in budget cuts. That must be a wake-up call for the Scottish Government. The report is Labour's legacy, but it is the Scottish National Party Government's problem. It blows out of the water the First Minister's pretence that he can prevent budget cuts in Scotland. Gordon Brown had to be dragged kicking and screaming to admit that cuts were necessary. In the light of Audit Scotland's report, does the First Minister now accept that cuts are unavoidable?

The figures are not my rhetorical invention; they are in an independent report and cover the next four to five years of the Parliament's activities and the Government's responsibilities. If the First Minister is not prepared to accept an entirely independent report on our public finances, how can anyone look to his Government to provide leadership through these desperately difficult times? Let us get back home to Scotland and the problems that confront us now. Will the First Minister now consider taking Scottish Water out of public control? Will he reconsider his plans to give free prescriptions and free school meals to people who can already afford to pay for them? If he will not do any of those things, what will he do or, on the issue of budget cuts, is Alex Salmond lost for words for the first time in his life?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-1954)

The irony of Labour masquerading as the party of business is obvious to everyone except Iain Gray. This is a man who was such an impressive minister for enterprise that he lost his seat.

This week, the Scottish National Party's pretence of being a business-friendly party collapsed. Iain McMillan of CBI Scotland said:  "At the moment there are more harmful things for business than positive ones from the Scottish Government. The SNP is talking the talk, but not walking the walk." David Watt, head of the Institute of Directors in Scotland, criticised the treatment of Diageo, and Liz Cameron of the Scottish Chambers of Commerce expressed concern that growing the Scottish economy is not the Government's first priority. The SNP Government has lost the confidence of the business community in Scotland, and the business-friendly image of the SNP at the election was clearly just another charade to get votes. Why has the First Minister allowed that dreadful situation to develop, or are all those business organisations wrong?

The First Minister and I may have jointly demonstrated to the workers of Kilmarnock that we were concerned and that we wished to represent those concerns to Diageo, but the difference between us is that I do not believe in telling business what to do. The First Minister thought that he could get away with that and failed. This is the business-friendly First Minister who on the one hand campaigned to save Diageo whisky jobs while, on the other, pursued a minimum pricing policy that will destroy whisky jobs. This is the First Minister who wanted to introduce an anti-business local income tax and who said that he could save the Dunfermline Building Society for £25 million, when the actual cost was £1.6 billion. This is the First Minister who leads a party that is hostile to the private sector, as was made abundantly clear at his recent party conference. And, yes, this is the First Minister who tramps over to France and causes offence to the bosses of one of Scotland's major employers. In these tough economic times, Scotland needs a business-friendly Government, not a fractured relationship with business. What is the First Minister's big new idea to help business in Scotland?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-1936)

We were all devastated by the tragic news that two teenage girls from the Good Shepherd Centre in Bishopton took their own lives earlier this week. For me, the tragedy was particularly poignant because Bishopton is my home and I am a former member of the board of management for the centre. The centre takes in young girls who have a range of hugely complex needs and come from the most challenging backgrounds imaginable. For those girls, the centre is a source of structure, reassurance, education and stability. The staff and the girls at the centre are now having to cope with their grief and shock on top of the immense challenges which for them are an everyday fact of life. The First Minister has said that there will be  inquiries. Will he assure me that they will be carried out in a sensitive and compassionate manner, so that the traumatised community of the Good Shepherd Centre is not further upset and the excellent work that it does is not further disrupted?

I thank the First Minister for that full response. Having spoken to people in Bishopton, I know that there is anxiety that there will be a witch hunt that is more concerned with finding someone to blame than with finding a way forward from the tragedy. A chaplain to the centre said to me in a text: "We only have 11 residential girls and to lose two means we are a community and family in mourning." Will the First Minister confirm that he will use his best offices in whatever inquiries are proposed or  are taking place—and, indeed, if a fatal accident inquiry is mooted—to influence the overall environment of the inquiries so that they are conducted in a sensitive and compassionate way?

I associate Conservative members with Johann Lamont's comments about the late Bill Speirs. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-1919)

The health of our children is hugely important. The Scottish National Party manifesto promised that every pupil would get "2 hours of quality PE each week" and would have "free ... access to council swimming pools." The manifesto also promised that the SNP would establish "an innovative sport volunteer programme" and that there would be more "centres of sporting excellence". By my calculation, none of those promises has been kept. Why not? Will they ever be kept? If so, when?

The face in the seat may have changed but the message has not. That answer to my question has the hollow ring of more broken election promises from the SNP. We cannot play politics with our children's future. The class size pledge is in tatters, discipline is not being dealt with and now the SNP is reneging on our children's health and wellbeing. I ask the Deputy First Minister—again—when will every pupil get two hours of quality PE every week; when will every pupil have free access to council swimming pools; when will there be an army of sports volunteers; when will there be more centres of sporting excellence? Will those promises, like the class size pledge, be delivered only to our great, great, great grandchildren in 90 years' time?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-1895)

Let us take a look at the First Minister's own report card on education: raising standards—fail; teacher numbers—fail; outdoor education—fail; physical education—fail; and now the flagship class size pledge trumpeted by the SNP—fail. Posted missing in making any comment to the Parliament about this mess is the minister, the hapless Fiona Hyslop. Who should parents blame for the mess? Should they blame the cocky head boy, Alex Salmond, or his silent and wretched prefect, Ms Hyslop?

For all his bluster, the First Minister has been found out and found wanting. He has failed. The Daily Record talks about "a cynical election soundbite", the Daily Mail says that there has been a "humiliating climb-down" and The Sun says that the First Minister is the "School Dunce". Very few people have any confidence left in the Scottish National Party's approach to education. I ask again, who is to blame for the shambles? The First Minister is the head boy. Is he big enough to admit that he got it wrong? Will he put on record his full, unequivocal and unconditional support for his Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning?

It would be much more to the point if the First Minister answered my questions instead of issuing a diatribe to the Labour ranks. I want to know who has caused the mess. Whatever is happening, I believe in choice in education, but the policy is restricting choice, not expanding it, and parents do not like that.

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-1871)

Yesterday's shocking unemployment figures show the human cost of Labour's recession, and we know that Labour cuts are on the way. In April, Labour's national insurance hike will increase tax for ordinary workers right across Britain, so the last thing that Scotland needs is a Scottish National Party tax rise on top of Labour's tax rise. Will the First Minister confirm that continuing to freeze council tax is at the top of his budget priorities?

Time and again, Alex Salmond has spurned Conservative proposals to free up public money for the most pressing public need. He can no longer dodge and weave. Does he regret keeping Scottish Water under state control, which costs the taxpayer nearly £200 million every year, and abolishing the graduate endowment, which is nearly £20 million every year? How can he justify stripping £40 million every year from our vital health budget so that he and I can get free prescriptions? That is a saving of a quarter of a billion pounds every year that he has rejected. Will he think again?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-1851)

The First Minister should be aware that every 90 seconds, a pupil is excluded from Scotland's schools and that, according to the Government's own figures, 85 per cent of excluded pupils are sent home with nothing to do. That is a disgrace and an inexcusable waste of resource. On 17 March 2005, when the SNP was in opposition and was demanding everything left, right and centre, Fiona Hyslop, the current Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, said: "If we regard indiscipline as a serious issue, it is important that regular statistics be produced so that there can be accountability. The production of statistics every three years is not good enough."— [ Official Report , 17 March 2005; c 15444.]  Hear, hear! The Conservatives agree and so do 84 per cent of Scots, who in a recent poll said that they wanted the figures to be published every year. Will the First Minister support his education secretary and publish those figures annually, or—to quote Ms Hyslop again— "What does the First Minister have to hide?"— [ Official Report , 20 January 2005; c 13733.]

What the First Minister has failed to make clear is that the Government does not publish statistics on incidents in classrooms, and that is what is worrying teachers, parents and well-conducted pupils throughout our schools. We need to take persistently disruptive pupils out of mainstream education and place them in second chance centres. That is what the Scottish Conservatives would do. The Scottish National  Party Government says that such facilities already exist. Will the First Minister therefore publish figures to show whether those facilities are working, or is that something else that he wants to hide? The First Minister has recently been found wanting on the international and domestic stages. It is sad that his hapless education team has clearly been found wanting as well. There is no mention of discipline in the SNP's programme for government. Why not?

The Scottish Parliament has established that, in deciding to release the Lockerbie bomber, the Salmond Government made a bad decision badly. It has also been established that the United Kingdom Labour Government was involved in double-dealing diplomacy. I now want to move on to whether the Scottish Government also failed to act in an up-front and proper way and whether it was involved in dubious deals and nudge-and-wink diplomacy. In all the Scottish Government's dealings with Arab states, seeking money for the First Minister's Scottish Futures Trust, did the issue of Mr al-Megrahi's release ever come into play? Was it raised in any form?

I am afraid that there are suspicions—and facts. Fact: the First Minister is seeking money for his Scottish Futures Trust from Arab states. Fact: on 11 June 2009, he met the Qatari Government and discussed trade and Mr al-Megrahi's release at the same time. Fact: on 17 July 2009, the Qatari Government wrote to the Scottish Government, supporting compassionate release. Fact: one week later, Mr al-Megrahi applied for compassionate release. That does not look good. The First Minister has told Mr Gray that it would be a grave mistake to hold secret meetings. Is the First Minister still going to Qatar later this year to ask for money? Will he publish all the correspondence, notes and minutes of meetings— and the details of all proposed meetings—between his Government and Arab states?

Today we have had not so much a programme for government bound together by a common theme as a rambling list of 13 bills, which range from the feeble to the fantasy. Not for the first time has that happened under this First Minister. Last year, Alex Salmond said that Scotland would judge harshly any MSP who voted to retain the council tax. We did not even get the chance. The First Minister blinked and threw in the towel. In the face of strong opposition from organisations all over Scotland, he abandoned his discredited local income tax before the bill was even published. It went from being the SNP's flagship to an abandoned pedalo in the blink of an eye.  I warn Alex Salmond that, far from it being the Opposition parties who will be judged harshly on the council tax, he and his SNP Government are the ones who will be judged harshly for breaking yet another promise. This Salmond Government simply cannot be trusted. It has a list of broken promises as large as Mr Salmond's ego—yes, we are talking magnitude here. In 2007, he conned the voters into voting for him, but he should be very wary of trying to pull that stunt again. Whereas last year the First Minister's legislative obsession was local income tax, this year his new legislative obsession is separation. That will go the same way as last year's obsession—absolutely nowhere. Last year, the vast majority of Scots were against his discredited local income tax. That was why he was forced to abandon a vote on the issue. This year, the vast majority of Scots are against separation. By his own logic, Alex Salmond should abandon that bill too. He knows full well that, just like his discredited local income tax, separation will be rejected by the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish people. Whatever else Scotland needs, we do not need Alex Salmond's referendum.

I want to make progress. Scotland needs a Government that is prepared to face up to the big challenges and a First Minister who is prepared to take the tough decisions. We need a Government that is focused on economic recovery, not constitutional vandalism. We need a Government that is focused on reforming our public sector, not wrecking our political partnership. We need a Government that is focused on restoring Scotland's battered international reputation. On the constitution, Alex Salmond is on the extremes of Scottish politics. Let me take something right on the chin: the Conservatives were on the extremes of the constitutional debate in the 1990s, when we opposed a Scottish Parliament. We are now well and truly back in the main stream once again. We are the party that understands devolution. We know that there needs to be a basis of mutual respect between Governments and Parliaments—something that the SNP and Labour do not understand. Alex Salmond is a lone voice representing a minority view, but his obsession with independence is harmful to the best interests of the people of Scotland. My final point on this unnecessary and opportunistic piece of legislation is that Mr Salmond knows that he has no chance of getting the referendum bill through. As a result, he wants to fiddle it to tempt the Liberal Democrats to join  his team. He thinks that, by offering more powers as an option, he will split the unionist vote and come steaming through the middle to take his independence prize. My message to Mr Salmond is that he should stop the smoke and mirrors and just ditch the bill. I turn to the real challenges. For some time now, I have been warning about the consequences of what Labour has done to this country through record levels of borrowing that will saddle future generations with massive debts. I have challenged the First Minister on how he will respond to Labour's £500 million budget squeeze. Where will he take the tough decisions? What will he cut? I have yet to get an answer to that from the First Minister. In fact, we have had a silence that Gordon Brown would be proud of. Gordon Brown's Government may well be in its death-throes, but Labour's debt—and the harsh impact that paying it back will have on devolved spending—will be with us for years. Tackling Labour's debt while protecting the public services that we all value will be the Scottish Government's main responsibility this year and next. It will also be the main responsibility of whoever is in government from 2011. Only this morning economists from the University of Glasgow said that, because of Labour's recession, Scotland's budget will be cut by £2.5 billion over the next four years. If this Salmond Government, rather than deal with that situation, chooses simply to ignore it or to make political capital out of it, Scotland will be in big trouble. Being First Minister is about more than just turning up to open everything in sight and pressing for independence. The First Minister has a job to do. From the evidence of his legislative programme, he is ducking that responsibility. Although Labour has created this mess, we must all play our part in getting out of it. That requires leadership from the Government, not parochial party posturing. Where in the First Minister's statement are the signs of a Government that is willing to take the tough decisions that we need to reform public services to make them sustainable and affordable while we repay Labour's mountain of debt? Where are the plans for real public sector reform? We heard no serious announcements on reform today. That will make it all the more difficult to improve our public services in the future. Where was the announcement about the reform of Scottish Water? The organisation does not need to sit in the public sector, where it consumes almost £200 million of public funds every year. The Scottish Conservatives would take Scottish Water out of state control. Will the First Minister support us?  Alex Salmond had a choice to make in framing his legislative programme and, typically, he ducked it. He chose posturing rather than public service reform. That is not good enough, because Scotland is facing unprecedented challenges.

I will first continue this point. Alex Salmond said that "a glass ceiling threatens Scotland's progress." What utter rubbish. Having a self-indulgent leader who is unable to take tough decisions is what threatens Scotland's progress.

I am just coming to an example of a glaring problem to which we must attend, the scope of which is absolutely devastating. Every week nearly 500 people go bankrupt, and every minute of every hour of every working day someone in Scotland loses their job. I give one public service—education—as an example. Education in Scotland was once the envy of the world, and it can be so again, but where in the First Minister's statement are the measures that will allow that to happen? Where are the proposals to tackle the 1 million teaching days that are lost to truancy each year in Scotland or the increasing number of attacks on teachers in school? Where are the measures that focus on discipline and rigorous testing of the basics, and which allow parents a greater say in their children's education?

Why is the future of 680,000 children less important to this Government than a dodgy referendum? Education is calling out for public sector reform. My party is prepared to look at that and to explain our thinking. We need leadership, not showmanship. It is not credible for the First Minister in one breath to call for blanket minimum pricing on alcohol and in the next to argue against job losses in the Scottish whisky industry. My party is proud of the achievements that we have made possible in this Parliament. Without us, there would not have been the increase in the number of police officers of which Mr Salmond boasts. My party is proud of the contribution that it has made to helping small businesses, which, without our intervention, would have been paying more rates in the midst of Labour's recession.  I have one conclusion. Recent events have confirmed that Alex Salmond did not step up to the mark on the international stage. Today, he has failed to step up to the mark on the domestic stage.

The debate has been instructive. We should never forget the genesis of the issue, which Elaine Murray so eloquently described. Members have been offered an opportunity to assert the position of the Parliament, as distinct from the position of the Scottish Government. I am intrigued by the fact that the First Minister is to close the debate for the Scottish Government because so far he has made it quite clear that the issue is the exclusive responsibility of his justice minister, and that the decision to release Mr Megrahi was Mr MacAskill's decision and Mr MacAskill's decision alone. I find it less than impressive that when it becomes clear that the Labour Party is embarrassed and in trouble, none other than the First Minister is ready to leap to centre stage and return to the fray. Of course, the SNP is feeling a little less bruised this morning because the Labour Party is now getting it in the neck on this issue. The emergence of the evidence that Gordon Brown told the Libyans that he did not want Mr Megrahi to die in jail is damaging for the Prime Minister, and his  situation is made worse by his stubborn silence since the release decision was made. However, let us not get distracted. This debate is about Opposition parties calling this Government to account for the decision that it made. In my view, the Salmond Government made a bad decision, and made that decision badly. For example, it is clear to me that Mr MacAskill gets so upset about the idea of keeping Mr Megrahi in Scotland in secure care because he did not consider that idea as a serious option. Today, he has again failed to answer the question why Scotland's police officers and NHS staff were able to hold the Glasgow airport bombers securely in a Scottish hospital for more than a month but—according to Mr MacAskill—would not be able to do the same for the Lockerbie bomber in his last few days.

I am sorry, but I am short of time and have a lot to cover. I can conclude only that Mr MacAskill had set his mind on releasing Mr Megrahi back to Libya—an impression that is reinforced by the presumption that was clearly established at the meeting with the Libyan Government on 22 July 2009 that, if compassionate release were granted, release would be to Libya. On the question of process, we must raise the remarkable incident of the meeting between Mr MacAskill and Mr Megrahi. At first, the SNP claimed that the minister had to meet the Lockerbie bomber because Jack Straw's rules required him to do that. Then, the SNP said that they met because Mr Megrahi asked for a meeting. However, we now learn that Kenny MacAskill instigated the meeting, although under no obligation to do so. In my view, that personal engagement was acutely misjudged and profoundly naive. Again, the suspicion lingers of nods and winks and deals. Despite his claims, Mr MacAskill has not published all the medical advice. It is quite clear that, as Dr Ian McKee indicated this morning, the SNP was given expert advice. If Mr MacAskill is in possession of that expert advice, it must be published. Further, on the BBC's radio programme "Good Morning Scotland" today, Nicola Sturgeon said that all the medical evidence that Mr MacAskill saw has been published. Where is it? The medical officer's report to Mr MacAskill says: "we attach relevant medical reports in a sealed envelope". Where are those reports? Where is that expert  advice? Why has it not been published? Dr Richard Simpson was absolutely right to raise those issues. They are germane to this matter and, so far, there is a huge silence surrounding the import of that medical advice. Alternatively, is it the case that, as the medical officer also says, no expert is willing to give a prognosis of three months? Once again, the suspicion lingers that this was not a decision that was based on facts, but that facts were found to fit the decision that had already been taken and had already been signalled to the Libyans. I think that Gordon Brown and Alex Salmond have been engaged in nudge-and-wink diplomacy and that the SNP Government made the wrong decision. It is important that the Scottish Parliament has an opportunity today to express the Parliament's view. As I said last week when I responded to Mr MacAskill's statement, I do not consider that the decision that he made was a decision in the name of Scotland or this Parliament, and it was not a decision that was in my name. That is why my party will today support the Labour and Liberal Democrat amendments. In turn, I ask members to support the amendment in the name of my colleague Mr Aitken.

I, too, thank the minister for the advance copy of his statement. The image of the Lockerbie terrorist atrocity is etched indelibly in my memory. I shall never forget my sense of disbelief and horror. That is why I want to make it clear that the decision to release Mr al-Megrahi was not made in the name of Scotland, in the name of this Parliament or in my name: it was made by Mr Salmond's SNP Government and Mr Salmond's minister. If Mr al-Megrahi's condition is so severe that keeping him in prison is inhumane, why could he not have been released to a secure house, a hospice or a hospital in Scotland? Is the SNP Government seriously suggesting that our Scottish police, who coped so admirably with the security arrangements for G8 leaders, could not adequately protect Mr al-Megrahi? Forty-eight police officers for a few weeks seems a small price  to pay to protect Scotland's international reputation. Is the SNP Government seriously arguing that our excellent national health service is incapable of providing compassionate and sensitive palliative care? Even Mr al-Megrahi's own lawyer, Dr Ibrahim Legwell, considers that Mr al-Megrahi would receive better treatment in Scotland than in Libya. Compassion and justice would have been better served by that approach than by a convicted terrorist being fêted as a hero in Libya to a backdrop of waving saltires. Equally disturbing is the extraordinary and incomprehensible silence of the Prime Minister, Gordon Brown. The SNP Government's flawed decision has significant implications for foreign policy and trade. What joint efforts are now being undertaken by Alex Salmond and Gordon Brown to limit the damage done to our country's international reputation and to our economy?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-1806)

I have in my hands a copy of the Scottish National Party manifesto and no, I am not going to rip it up, because it is hard evidence of the promises that Alex Salmond has broken over the past two years on class sizes, on student debt, on first-time buyers, on council tax and on the Scottish Futures Trust. The list goes on. If that were not bad enough, the First Minister has picked fights with Westminster at every opportunity. He has even politicised swine flu. Will he spend the recess deciding whether he is running a Government in power or a Government in opposition? Will he apologise to all the voters whom he has misled?

That is just more hot air—more emissions from the First Minister. Heaven help our climate change targets. To return to the First Minister's broken promises, a flagship policy in his manifesto was: "Scotland can be smarter. It's time for ... smaller class sizes and it's time to dump student debt." So what happened? It is less a case of a smarter Scotland and more one of a smugger First Minister, if the performance that we have just had is anything to go by. We have as First Minister a man who blames everyone else for his own failures and who will fritter away £40 million a year on free prescriptions for the wealthy, but who will not hesitate to pick a political fight with Westminster over funding for flu vaccinations. Has he no sense of guilt, no twinge of conscience, over his broken promises? I again ask him whether he will use the recess to apologise to all the voters whom he has misled.

If the petrol in the engine of change is the SNP, bring on the post-carbon economy with all haste. Let the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill, which we passed yesterday, be implemented as soon as possible. I thank Sir Kenneth Calman, his fellow commissioners and the secretariat to the Commission on Scottish Devolution for all their hard work. In the 18 months between the Parliament voting to create the commission and the publication of the report earlier this month, the commission has engaged widely with Scots in all walks of life and all parts of the country. Many submissions were received, and witnesses gave evidence on a range of issues. I was pleased to give the commission my views when it took evidence from MSPs. David  Cameron, George Osbourne, Philip Hammond and David Mundell all took part in the process. I am sure that members throughout the chamber will concede that a great deal of work has gone into the report. The commission's work was a real national conversation, unlike the sham spectacle of the SNP's so-called national conversation, which was a series of public relations stunts designed to further inflate the ego of Mr Salmond, if such a thing were possible.

Not at the moment. I am just about to refer to Mr Russell. The national conversation was also designed as a forum to intensify the decibel levels of Mr Russell's orations—again, if such a thing were possible.

The national conversation speaks for its limited and self-serving self. It can best be described as an SNP internal chit-chat forum. The contrast between the work of the commission and the national conversation could not be clearer. The report stands witness to the scale of the task that the commission undertook. In this short debate, the Parliament cannot be expected to reach a consensus view on the merits, or otherwise, of every proposal in the report. Indeed, it would do a disservice to the work of the commission if any member did anything other than give serious and thoughtful consideration to the report—consideration that will, inevitably, take time. We all must take that time to get things right. Along with my colleagues at Westminster, I will listen very carefully to what my party has to say. It is right that a mechanism such as the steering group is set up to give the unionist parties a forum in which to continue to engage. However, the steering group can steer only when the parties to it have reached a settled position, without which it cannot, of course, deliver anything at all.

As I have made clear in my remarks to date, the process upon which we are embarking, post publication of the report, is hugely  significant and must not be rushed. We must get this right. I welcome the report, but I will not accept uncritically the Calman recommendations. I will give thorough reflection to the detail of the proposals. That said, I will not reject out of hand proposals over which the commission—whose remit was endorsed overwhelmingly by this Parliament—spent months deliberating. In our 2007 manifesto, the Conservatives acknowledged the need for a debate on devolution powers and funding. I repeat what I said earlier: I want our response to the Calman recommendations to be right, not rushed. Whatever we do to the devolved settlement must be built to last; it must be a secure legacy from this generation of MSPs to future generations of Scots. I am a committed unionist. I will do nothing to put at risk a partnership that has served our nation well for centuries. That is the agenda of another party. However, as we recognised in 2007, when we voted to establish the commission, devolution was at a crossroads. At that time, we asked a simple question: is the current arrangement incapable of improvement? I believe the answer to that question was no. For instance, I believe that devolution has been done a disservice by the lack of mutual respect between Governments and Parliaments. We need to see a vast improvement in that area. The answer that flows from the simple question "Can things be improved?" is fundamental for those of us who are unionists. Is the best way of securing Scotland's continued place in the United Kingdom to reject all change? I am clear that the answer to that is no. Rejecting any and all change would be to play into the hands of the separatists and to stoke the fires of resentment that the SNP Government has been busy igniting over the past two years. Given my strong and unwavering commitment to the union, let me make it clear that supporting the creation of the commission was not a decision that I entered into lightly. I believed it to be—I still believe it to be—the best way of progressing the unfinished business of building a stable devolved settlement that will secure Scotland's place in the union As the Daily Telegraph noted on the Calman report: "The timid will warn that this could weaken the Union, but why should it? Separatist tendencies are more likely to flourish if Scotland continues to have a client relationship with Whitehall". Commitment to the union is not measured by hostility to devolution any more than Scottishness is measured by support for separation. I am British and Scottish and proud to be both. An  overwhelming majority of people inside and outside the Parliament believe in devolution, not separation. We do so because we believe it to be in Scotland's best interests that we remain part of a greater whole, and because we believe that Scotland's distinct needs and desires can be accommodated within a union that has evolved over centuries, at the core of which is a recognition that we have much to gain in working together. Supporting the unionist motion tonight will be a sign of self-confidence, not a sign of weakness, on the part of the unionist parties. It will be a signal that we have the courage to consider change and that far from wanting to weaken the union, we share a common aspiration to strengthen it. I remind the Parliament of the central remit of the Calman commission, which is to "continue to secure the position of Scotland within the United Kingdom." That is the acid test that will underpin all the deliberations of my party.

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-1785)

Today, this Parliament unites to close the ludicrous loophole, which has arisen out of the European convention on human rights, that allows Scottish prisoners an open-ended period of time within which to make slopping-out claims. That loophole has been costly for Scotland and an affront to many victims and their families. However, the storm clouds are gathering again. Senior lawyers have warned of dire consequences for Scotland's criminal justice system following a ruling by Europe's highest court that any evidence or confession given to police in the absence of a lawyer is not admissible in court. What steps has the First Minister taken to assess the potential impact of that ruling on Scotland?

It is precisely because of the challenges in the past in addressing slopping out, to which the First Minister has just referred and in respect of which the previous Executive was undoubtedly caught exposed and unprepared, that I think it important for the First Minister to give some indication of the Government's contingency plans if the European ruling is ultimately incorporated into Scots law. What is he doing to protect the public purse and, more important, the safety of our communities and the peace of mind of victims and their families?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-1765)

There are currently almost 12,500 people in Scotland who have not paid one penny of their fines, and the people of Scotland are currently owed £8 million by fine defaulters. Equally alarmingly, the consistent rate at which the problem is escalating will mean that by the end of the Scottish National Party Government's term in office the taxpayer will be owed approximately £30 million. That does not even take into account the SNP's soft-touch-Scotland approach, which will of course mean more fines. Does the First Minister think that that level of unpaid fines is acceptable? What is he doing about it?

If the First Minister were to be fined for every occasion he did not answer a question, all our fiscal problems would be resolved in an instant. The figures show an explosion in unpaid fines over the past two years, and the Government's response has been to send out more than 57,000 warning letters and issue nearly 4,500 court citations and more than 14,000 enforcement orders. Instead of having this vast bureaucracy not collect money at vast expense to the taxpayer, why does the Government not get the money in by deducting fines directly from earnings and benefits? After all, fines cannot be some sort of voluntary, optional IOU to the taxpayer.

Does the member agree that under the Conservatives in Government we never had to service debt interest at a level greater than the entire Scottish budget, which is what we are seeing from the Labour Government at Westminster?

This debate comes during a tumultuous period in British politics: there is a crisis of confidence in our political system, which has been brought into sharp relief by the expenses scandal at Westminster; there have been daily resignations from the Government; there has been a reshuffle in which the Cabinet, not the Prime Minister, called the shots; and there has been electoral meltdown for the governing party. In the European elections, Labour was beaten by the nationalists—in Cornwall. Labour is a national party no more. Only as a source of ridicule and contempt does the Labour Party operate at anything approaching a national level. The demise of the Labour Party does not, of course, trouble me any more than it troubles the Prime Minister, but the consequences of the collapse in authority of the Government and the Prime Minister are not confined to Westminster or to reserved areas; they affect Scotland and the Scottish Parliament too. That is why this debate is needed. That is why members of the Scottish Parliament should be concerned. I have spoken previously of the need for a new relationship between Scotland's two Governments. In a time of economic turmoil, that is more important than ever. However, such a relationship cannot exist when the United Kingdom Government is hellbent on creating tension, as it was when the current Scottish Government was formed. I still find it astonishing that, during this time of economic crisis, the Prime Minister and the First Minister did not meet for nearly a year, as Labour's recession emerged. However, a new relationship cannot exist when the UK Government itself has ceased to function in any meaningful form. We have a careworn and exhausted Prime Minister, wrestling with the recession and raddled by the treachery of colleagues who are united only in their desire to distance themselves from him as quickly as possible and who are vying with each other to accomplish that end with the ultimate in tawdry, tacky and contemptible behaviour. From  the smoking ruins of the Government that they have left behind them arises the shadowy spectre of an unelected éminence grise, Lord Mandelson—the new Prime Minister by default, omnipotent, absolute and unchallengeable. What a distortion of democracy. [ Interruption. ]

We have a Prime Minister who, even at the peak of his power—[ Interruption. ] It is interesting, Presiding Officer, that for member's debates and party debates we seldom see more than about five Labour MSPs in the chamber. What a testament their presence today is to their insecurity. What a visible demonstration of their discomfiture. What they lack in quality they are going to try to make up for in numbers. This Prime Minister has paid scant attention to Scottish issues. He has been content to pick fights with the Scottish Government, and content to allow others to do so as well. Now that he is fighting for his political life, what chance is there of him adopting the constructive approach that is needed? To paraphrase James Purnell, with Gordon Brown there is no chance. If anyone on the Labour benches should doubt that the Prime Minister's time is up, let me remind them of the harbinger of doom, the final sign that all is lost: Lord Foulkes has pledged his full support. It can now be only a matter of time.

In the 10 years that I have been a member of this Parliament, the party that has been in power at Westminster has never had a majority here. It has always been possible for all the other parties in the Scottish Parliament to combine to defeat the party of Government at the United Kingdom level. However, that has never happened in a vote on a motion of this kind. Today's vote, if carried, will be a parliamentary first. We have not lodged our motion lightly. A unique combination of factors makes it right that we demand a UK general election. We are in the final year of the current Westminster Parliament. Even Gordon Brown cannot avoid calling an election in the next 12 months, unless he ceases to be Prime Minister. The question is not whether we have a general election in the next 12 months, but when. Let no one pretend that there is any principled objection to holding a general election now. The expenses scandals at Westminster have caused grave damage to trust in politics in general. All parties at Westminster—Labour, the Conservatives, the Liberal Democrats and the Scottish National Party—have had serious questions to answer. The issues may be particular  to the Westminster system of expenses, and the transparency with which we operate in this Parliament may stand in contrast to the shroud of secrecy that surrounds the House of Commons, but let us not pretend that the public considers the Scottish Parliament beyond reproach. Last week's elections show us that much if we did not already know it. We are, sadly, all tainted by what has happened at Westminster—deservedly or not—so we have a legitimate and fair question to ask: how do we restore faith in politics? Yes, there must be transparency and changes to the rules, but until there is a general election and the opportunity for the people to have their say, the stench will remain. There is currently a wave of cynicism—not just a lack of faith in individual politicians or even in the political system, but a more fundamental and damaging view that politics can never deliver change. That is corrosive and strikes at the heart of democracy. That cynicism or scepticism must be dispelled. Why do the public doubt the motives of politicians of every party more now than in the past? Why has there been such a breakdown of trust in the capacity of politics to deliver? Yes, in large part it is a reaction to the expenses scandal, but there is much more to it than that. We have grown used to a Government that routinely says one thing and does another. That is a lesson that the SNP Scottish Government must heed. We have become accustomed to a hatchet job being done on anyone who dares to speak out or question what the Prime Minister says or does. When Government ministers speak openly of smears against colleagues, what message does that send to the public? Moreover, what signal does it send when the Chancellor of the Exchequer is the subject of briefings by number 10 and is hung out to dry in public? He is clearly the Prime Minister's second choice, yet he remains in office not because the Prime Minister wants him there but because the Prime Minister lacks the authority to move him. That sends an atrocious signal to the financial markets, investors and the international community. It sends an even worse signal to the public. If the Prime Minister has no confidence in the chancellor, why should anyone else? Until there is a general election, a cloud will hang over politics. I shall, of course, campaign for the return of a Conservative Government at the next general election. I hope and expect that David Cameron will prevail. Others will argue for different outcomes. However, the fact remains that, at present, we have a weak and pitiful excuse for a Government that is not worthy of the name. Unlikely as it seems, it is possible that Labour could win a general election. Let us consider that  ghastly prospect—one party should certainly consider it. How can any Labour member seriously argue that their Government and Prime Minister would not have greater credibility and more authority if they had the mandate of a general election victory? Would any member really claim that the Government is better able now, in the current horrendous mess, to take tough but necessary decisions than it would be following an election victory? In short, would the party be better able to govern if it won that election? Of course it would. There is only one reason why Labour members are against a general election: they expect to lose it, as the Prime Minister admitted at question time some weeks back. Government is a privilege, not a right. It requires the national interest to be put ahead of party interest, but it is clear that such a concept is alien to the Labour Party and to Gordon Brown. As Scotland languishes in what is expected to be the worst recession since the second world war, members of the UK Government are more concerned about briefing against each other and clinging to office than about taking the right decisions for our future. The right decisions involve not only sorting out the appalling mess that Labour has made of the public finances, although that challenge will dwarf all others, and will have direct and lasting consequences for this Parliament and Scottish Governments for years to come. There should be a UK Government that not only tolerates the devolution settlement but is keen for it to evolve, and which treats the Scottish Government and Parliament with respect. David Cameron's Government will be such a Government. He has demonstrated impressive leadership on the expenses issue, and has shown how a new relationship that is built on mutual respect must be forged between our Parliaments and Governments. That is why David Cameron, if he is elected as Prime Minister, will meet the First Minister within a week of taking office; why Conservative ministers will be allowed to appear before committees in the Scottish Parliament—[ Interruption. ]  Perhaps one of the Labour members will, among all the sedentary bawling and shouting, volunteer to tell us how often Labour ministers at Westminster have appeared before committees in this Parliament. A Conservative Government—[ Interruption. ]

There may be order, Presiding Officer, but there are no volunteers to answer the question. A Conservative Government will seek to strengthen and stabilise devolution, rather than undermine it at every turn as the current  Government has done. We are seeing not only the collapse of a Government and the waning of power of a Prime Minister, but a wholesale collapse of faith in the political process. Promoting Lord Mandelson or bringing in Glenys Kinnock cannot correct that; even Sir Alan Sugar cannot fix this one. The situation can only be resolved by a general election, and the Scottish Conservatives would welcome the opportunity to prove, as we did last week, that we are again winning throughout Scotland. [ Interruption. ]

The voters deserve the chance to have their say on our broken economy and our broken politics. They deserve the chance to cast their verdict on our unelected Prime Minister—and on the unelected real Prime Minister, Lord Mandelson: the man who is actually pulling the strings and running our country. In a parliamentary democracy, the public are rightly outraged that so much power has been seized in a number 10 coup by someone who has twice been dumped from Government. Change happens when those who do not usually speak are heard by those who do not usually listen. The people have found their voice, and their cry must not fall upon deaf ears: Labour must listen. Scotland needs a general election, and the sooner, the better. Today, the Scottish Parliament can speak out not only for the majority in Scotland, but for the majority in the whole of the United Kingdom. In the words of the legendary Labour reprise, "Bring it on." Today, this Parliament can tell the Prime Minister to do just that. I move, That the Parliament believes that the interests of Scotland and the United Kingdom would be best served by holding a general election for a new House of Commons as soon as possible.

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-1746)

Trust in politics and politicians has never been lower. It is essential that the person who holds the office of First Minister is, like Caesar's wife, above suspicion. In the First Minister's foreword to the Scottish ministerial code, he confirms his strong commitment to "serving the people of Scotland in an open, honest and transparent way." Last week, I, too, specifically asked the First Minister about absconding prisoners from the open prison estate. In his reply, although he knew that a convicted murderer was on the run, he chose to conceal that fact from Parliament. Had he no sense of discomfiture about that? Had he no sense of personal unease? Did he really feel that he was discharging his role in a non-contentious, responsible and candid fashion? Will he confirm to Parliament whether he experienced any of those unpleasant or disquieting emotions?

Let me remind the First Minister of what he said last week, in reference to the previous escapee Martin. He said: "The prisoner concerned has been recaptured, as other prisoners from the open estate have been recaptured."——[ Official Report , 28 May 2009; c 17970.] That was a patent misrepresentation. As the First Minister spoke, he knew that a convicted murderer was on the run. The First Minister has chosen to fall back on the defence of police operational sensitivity—

Will the First Minister confirm that that sensitivity, which resulted in a delay in publishing the details of the second absconding prisoner Brown, was nothing more than a delay in sourcing a photograph of the prisoner for the press release?

My obligation as an elected politician is not to the Prison Officers Association Scotland or to chief constables. It is to ensure that the standards of honesty, transparency and integrity are upheld in Parliament by Parliament and the First Minister.

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-1730)

Yesterday, Mr MacAskill did indeed have to come before the Parliament, his tail between his legs, and make embarrassing admissions about the absconding prisoner Brian Martin. However, let me just get this straight: that dangerous criminal, with a history of violent behaviour, who had absconded before, was given  a 10-year sentence, then sent to an open prison after three years. Presumably, he will get out after five years, and he has now been given four months for being on the run again. Just how much of the 10 years will that man serve and just how much of the four months will he spend inside?

Enough of the First Minister's fantasy, particularly on early release—here are the facts. Time and again the Conservatives in the Parliament have brought forward a vote to abolish automatic early release, only to be blocked every time by—yes—the Labour Party, the Liberal Democrats and the Scottish National Party. Let us not have any more hypocritical nonsense from the First Minister. We have had another dangerous criminal on the run and we have a Cabinet Secretary for Justice on the ropes, saying that prison is "a skoosh" and that that appalling incident was "a glitch". I have one word for Mr MacAskill: disaster. However, whatever Mr MacAskill's failings, the buck stops at Bute house. The First Minister must grasp the nettle, find his political bottle and show some mettle. Is he prepared to be a leader? Will he announce a Cabinet reshuffle and will he put an end to the SNP's soft-touch Scotland?

David Cameron has pledged that, if elected as Prime Minister, he will treat devolution with respect and responsibility. Indeed, if he is Prime Minister, he will offer to appear  before MSPs in this Parliament to answer questions on any subject. Can the First Minister demonstrate the same respect and responsibility? Is he big enough to put aside his gripe and grievance politics for the good of Scotland? He claims to be Scotland's voice at Westminster—although, with his attendance record, it is more of a whisper—so will he match David Cameron's pledge and offer himself for questioning before MPs at Westminster?

It is unfortunate for the First Minister that what voters tell me and what the opinion polls reflect is very different from the image that he might like to portray. There are two types of politician in the Parliament: those who, like the public, want devolution to work, who are in the majority; and those who, like the First Minister, want to wreck devolution, who are in the minority. Perhaps Alex Salmond cannot rise to the challenge of being a responsible First Minister. Perhaps he will always be a separatist party leader with a wrecking agenda. Does he agree that the best way to nurture a strong relationship between our two Governments and Parliaments, build mutual respect and responsibility and start to restore trust in our politics is to have a general election, to give people a say and to let them vote for change?

I am sorry, Presiding Officer—I was reflecting on the First Minister's last answer, having failed to follow any of it. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-1687)

Knife crime has now reached epidemic proportions in Scotland. It is a contagion that blights every community in our country. Mr Gray's sudden interest in the issue would be a lot more convincing if Labour had done something about it in eight years of government—and if Mr Gray had said something about it in his conference speech. It is interesting that his new-found conversion comes after a Scottish Conservative proposal was published yesterday—46 minutes later, he is on the bandwagon. Where we lead, Mr Gray may, by all means, follow. The Conservative proposal is to have a presumption of custody for anyone who carries or uses a knife, with a minimum sentence of two years. An exemption to that would be available to judges, but it would be granted only in the most exceptional of circumstances. We know that the First Minister likes to talk tough, but is he prepared to act tough and take action against these thugs? Will he support the Scottish Conservative proposal?

If I were reduced to quoting the justice secretary as an authority on anything, I would be in trouble. We are talking about the political process sending out the toughest possible message to thugs, bullies and hooligans. That message is: take a blade outside and you will be going inside. When the public are crying out for that message and for protection and political leadership, why is the First Minister not only failing to deal with knife crime but supporting more automatic early release, more home detention curfews and abolishing prison sentences of six months or less? Why are we stuck in the Scottish National Party's soft-touch Scotland?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-1669)

There are few certainties in life, but we have just been reminded forcibly of one this morning: a First Minister who is desperate to be liked. It is also becoming very clear that he does not have the guts to take tough decisions. The Parliament's Finance Committee took evidence last week that showed that Labour's mishandling of the economy could mean massive long-term cuts to the Scottish budget. The First Minister says—he repeated it this morning—that Labour's squeeze on the Scottish budget will be £500 million from next April. If that is the case, how is he going to tighten his belt—small or otherwise? What is he going to cut, or does he not have the courage to tell us?

Let us be clear that the Labour Party has created this horrific mess. The Conservatives, when elected to government, will have to deal with the consequences of that horrific  mess, and will have the courage to do that. The First Minister does not have the bottle to deal with the horrific mess. The Government is hitting the buffers. On education, the First Minister's Minister for Schools and Skills, Keith Brown—in his Hazel Blears moment—said that the Government must do better. On justice, as the headline in The Sun said this week, the SNP is the criminals' best friend. On taxpayers' money, even the First Minister's own department is way short of hitting its efficiency targets. What kind of political leadership is that? Once again, we need an unpalatable truth. What is the SNP going to cut—or, in the fantasy land of the First Minister, is he denying that any cuts are required?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-1647)

We all agree that it is undesirable to overdramatise swine flu. However, the World Health Organization's decision to declare a level 5 alert—one short of a full pandemic—raises public fears and requires continued clarity from the Scottish Government. The first thing that needs to be done is to separate myth from fact. Will the First Minister confirm that, despite its name, the swine flu virus is spread by human-to-human contact; that pork products are safe and can be eaten safely; and that pork production is not at risk?

We very much hope that the precautionary principle and actions that have been applied in Scotland and the seemingly mild nature of the virus outwith Mexico mean that its impact can be limited and contained. However, such viruses are notoriously unpredictable and can be highly infectious. In the contingency plans that all Governments must have, what is the trigger point in Scotland for curtailing the free movement and association of people, no matter whether they are travelling, are at their workplaces or centres of education or are taking part in leisure activities such as attending football matches? In other words, would such restrictions be triggered by the  number of people infected, the infection's rate of spread or some other factor?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-1624)

Labour's recession has landed the country in an appalling mess. No one is blaming the First Minister for the terrible state of the country's finances, but we are where we are. The Scottish budget is going to be squeezed by around £500 million, based on Labour's wildly optimistic estimates. Scotland needs a First Minister who does not just bawl and shout at Westminster but who confronts reality. What will the First Minister do to deal with Labour's £500 million budget squeeze?

There he goes again. I will draw the First Minister back from the land of fantasy to the real world of Scotland. He might choose to be long on bluster and short on detail, but in these testing times Scotland needs a First Minister with the courage to make difficult decisions. I cannot believe that this First Minister has not given thought to this, considered the options, worked out a plan and faced up to the unpalatable reality, so I will ask my question again. What are the options? How, exactly, is he going to deal with Labour's budget squeeze?

Presiding Officer, may I echo the sentiments already expressed by the First Minister and by Mr Gray? On behalf of the Scottish Conservatives, I express our sorrow at the tragic events of yesterday. We extend our sympathy to the families, friends and colleagues of all those who have lost their lives. For many of us, the petrol in our cars and the heat in our homes are everyday facts of life. It takes a dreadful accident such as this one to give us a stark and sharp reminder of just how dangerous the environment is for all those who work in and support the oil and gas industry in the North Sea. Of course, an inquiry will have to take place. We hope that sufficient facts will be available to explain what happened and why, and whether there are lessons that can be learned. We pay tribute to everyone who took part in the search and recovery operation. As the First Minister has suggested, people from all sections of the community rallied to the call. They are to be commended for their dedicated efforts. The community in the north-east of Scotland is close-knit, as are all those who work in the oil and gas industry. We hope that this Parliament's witness of their grief at this very sad time will bring some comfort.

I apologise to members and to the minister for my late arrival in the chamber. I express to the minister my personal appreciation of his statement to Parliament and thank him for the advance copy of it. It is a timely and constructive response to the Audit Scotland report, which was published last week. I also thank him for acceding to my request for a summit event.  I am delighted that that event is imminent and I look forward to attending it. I begin to feel that, at last, the fresh winds of hope are blowing through this bleak area. When the minister proposes a replacement model for the current alcohol and drug action teams, does that represent the demise of those bodies and the creation of a simpler, more direct structure between Government and delivery, with less bureaucracy? Can the minister confirm that the Scottish Government will ensure that the £173 million that is spent every year to deal with drug and alcohol abuse will be much more transparently expended against visible measurements and outcomes that, in the case of drugs, will reflect a focus on recovery?

I thank the First Minister for providing an advance copy of his statement. It is extremely sad that the Dunfermline Building Society, a name that is synonymous with Scottish prudence and thrift, became engulfed in significant financial difficulties. The Scottish Conservatives hope that the financial security of investors and organisational stability for borrowers and employees will be safeguarded by the takeover. We wish the Nationwide Building Society well in that endeavour. Separate from the detail of the financial issues is the negative impression that has been created about chaotic communication between the Scottish Government and the Westminster Government and between the Westminster Government and the society. The First Minister referred obliquely in his statement to a process that was less than orderly. Given that the Scottish  Government became involved in the issue on 2 March, what was the agreed communications route between the Scottish Government and the Westminster Government and, if no one raised that essential issue, why not? Why did 24 hours apparently elapse between the critical decision being taken at Westminster and the First Minister getting a telephone call at lunch time on Saturday? What did the chancellor say to the First Minister during that phone call and what did the First Minister say to him?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-1575)

Last year, as one of the conditions for supporting the Scottish Government budget, the Scottish Conservatives called for a national audit report on drug abuse. The report published today is chilling. Five people die every  day in Scotland from drink and drug abuse, and the abuse has a wider impact, costing Scotland an estimated £5 billion a year. That is a horrific verdict on eight wasted years under the previous Executive. Alarmingly, the £5 billion figure is only a guesstimate. The audit report makes clear that actual Scottish figures for drug abuse were expected last May, and the Auditor General for Scotland's office confirmed to my office this morning that the Scottish Government commissioned that information. Nearly a year later, why has the First Minister not published the figures? What is being kept hidden?

I hope that the missing report will be published, as that information is urgently needed. Prevention should be at the heart of any strategy, but the report states that only 6 per cent of spending goes into that area. Will the First  Minister commit to increasing that? Will he commit to simplifying the dog's breakfast of funding and treatment structures? Finally, with two thirds of prisoners testing positive for drugs on admission to jail, will the First Minister commit to drugs-free prisons? [ Interruption. ]

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-1548)

Despite what the Scottish National Party Government says, there is no such thing as a free prescription. Abolishing prescription charges will cost the health budget £40 million every year—£40 million every year that will be cut from somewhere else in the health budget. The First Minister needs to come clean and tell the people of Scotland which national health services will suffer as a result of this SNP cut.

There has been only one vote on the reduction of prescription charges this year and it was yesterday. The First Minister should stop ducking the issue and dodging the question. I repeat: there is no such thing as a free prescription. While Two-salaries Salmond over there will be getting his prescriptions for free, patients all over Scotland will be losing out—losing out on 2,000 nurses, or nearly 200,000 magnetic resonance imaging scans, or huge quantities of life-saving cancer drugs, or a massive increase in the budget for hospital cleaning. As ever, the First Minister has chosen cheap headlines over responsible governance. It is not evil, and it is not lack of compassion, to expect those such as the First Minister and every MSP in this Parliament, who can pay for prescriptions, to pay. How can Two-salaries Salmond justify his position, as—

I defer to your position, Presiding Officer.

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-1527)

Yesterday, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice confirmed to the Parliament that the ludicrous and completely unacceptable anomaly of there being no time bar in Scotland to actions under human rights legislation is now being addressed. That legal defect has exposed the taxpayer to millions of pounds in compensation payments to criminals. Why has it taken so long for the Labour Government at Westminster and the Scottish National Party Government at Holyrood to sort it out? What happened in the 14 months between Mr MacAskill's letter to the Lord Chancellor on 25 October 2007 and December 2008 when the Labour Government said that no action would be taken? After all that, can the First Minister categorically confirm that the problem will be fixed before the summer recess?

Regrettably, I think that this disgraceful and expensive episode is further evidence of the broken relationship between the SNP Government at Holyrood and the Labour Government at Westminster. However, let me ask the First Minister about something for which he is exclusively responsible. If the time bar issue is of such importance to him, and if his concern for the taxpayer is as great as he maintains it is, why has he allowed slopping out to continue in Peterhead  prison, which is in his constituency? How much will that cost the taxpayer?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-1501)

The appalling case of little Brandon Muir is a tragic exposure of Scotland's broken society. One alarming estimate today is that 50,000 similar children could be at risk, living in households that are riddled with addiction, poverty and despair. Does the First Minister have any idea of the true extent of that horrific problem? What is he doing to find out? Does he have any clue? If not, why not?

I do not doubt the First Minister's sincerity, but it is deeply alarming that the Scottish Government clearly does not know the full extent of the problem. Unless one knows the extent of a problem, one cannot start to find a solution. We have found that out with the issue of drug abuse. Will the First Minister pledge, as a matter of urgency, to get hold of that information? Brandon Muir's death needs to be a wake-up call to us all. We need to stop family breakdown; we need to tackle the scourge of drugs; and we need to fix Scotland's broken society for the sake of our children.

I am discouraged by the First Minister's failure to answer my question, which was on when he will next meet the Prime Minister. We cannot have an endurance of the Arctic silence that prevailed for 10 months. I think that Scotland expects the First Minister to schedule another meeting as quickly as possible. On yesterday's meeting, there is considerable confusion about what actually happened. Whitehall claims that the Scottish Government agreed to find more efficiency savings in Scotland; the First Minister's spokesman described that claim as "nonsense". Will the First Minister confirm whether the Scottish Government will, or will not, find more efficiency savings?

The First Minister has been vociferous in what he has said on the impact of Labour's recession on the Scottish budget. We know that Labour's misconceived VAT cut has cost Britain £12.5 billion. By the First Minister's  rule of thumb, that equates to a £1.25 billion cost for Scotland—which, by definition, is £1.25 billion that is not available to spend in Scotland. Why did the First Minister order his Westminster SNP colleagues—naturally, he was not there himself—to vote for that cut and land Scotland with a billion pound bombshell?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-1447)

The exchange between the First Minister and Mr Gray highlights two things: that the Scottish Government has indeed scrapped another flagship policy; and that the Labour Party has nothing to offer apart from volumes of verbosity. One thing is clear, however: the council tax remains with us, and only the Scottish Conservatives have a viable plan to reform it, to cut it for every household in Scotland and to go further for our pensioners. In Labour's recession, a council tax freeze is a welcome first step. Just a few weeks ago, the First Minister agreed with the Scottish Conservatives that a council tax freeze is not enough. Given that we are now keeping the council tax, just what does the Scottish Government propose to do?

The First Minister has just stated the absurd. If the local income tax policy were such a sound, solid, workable and fair one, as he claimed at the time of the election, when he was so intent on wooing voters, why is he not prepared to go to the ramparts to fight and argue for it, and to get it delivered? The First Minister knows that his policy has been discredited, that it is unmanageable, that it is  incapable of being delivered and that it has been meeting with increasing criticism and condemnation from just about every quarter of opinion in Scottish society. I thank him for giving credit to the Conservatives for at least having a policy on council tax, but he has failed to tell me what the Scottish Government proposes to do, now that it has ditched its discredited local income tax and is leaving us with the council tax. What exactly has he got that he can tell council tax payers about? We now know—

The jobless total in Scotland has risen by nearly 50 per cent in the past 12 months and all predictions for the economy are chilling. Repeatedly, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance—

Mr Fergusson, given that Mr Gray was allowed five questions, I think that I might be allowed an expanded second one.

The Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth explained that he had the £281 million that would have been necessary to subsidise his now defunct local income tax. Will the First Minister, as the Scottish Conservatives have repeatedly demanded, cut council tax bills for every household in Scotland using that money? That is the only proposal in town at the moment.

The Scottish Parliament is still young, but history will chronicle particular events of singular importance in its development. Among them will undoubtedly be the election to Parliament in 2007 of Bashir Ahmad, our first Asian MSP. Although he was a committed member of the Scottish National Party and an unstinting champion of its cause, I feel that I can use the phrase "our first Asian MSP" because he had an influence in Parliament and beyond that transcended party-political boundaries. His presence made Parliament a better place, and the pride in his achievement was a collective pride that was shared across the parties. Yes, he was a diligent, conscientious and effective MSP and his service on cross-party groups in the Parliament illustrated his wide span of interests in political and parliamentary activity, but it was the way in which he conducted that activity that attracted universal respect and affection. He was the embodiment of dignity and courtesy—gentle in demeanour and gracious in attitude. He was a man who, on meeting me on the Glasgow underground, was more concerned with carrying my suitcase than with getting himself to a formal dinner to meet the First Minister. We shall all miss him. His wife and family are very much in our thoughts and prayers, but they should be proud and take comfort in the knowledge that Bashir Ahmad was a fine ambassador for politics and politicians. His mark on Parliament is a lasting one, not just because of his legacy as an MSP, but because of the challenge that his presence in this Parliament has laid before all the political parties to reflect better the diversity that is today's Scottish society. What better way to remember him than that we, the political parties, should be determined to succeed in that objective.

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-1426)

The First Minister will be aware of yesterday's extraordinary admission by the Secretary of State for Scotland that he did not know whether his boss, the Prime Minister, had met the First Minister to discuss the recession in Scotland. Unbelievably, the secretary of state  seemed to neither know nor care whether such meetings had occurred. I wonder whether the First Minister knows how many times he has met the Prime Minister in recent months to discuss the recession in Scotland. Gordon Brown claims to be saving the world, but is ignoring Scotland. Alex Salmond claims to be saving Scotland, but is more obsessed with breaking up the union. During this period of economic turmoil, how many times has the First Minister met the Prime Minister face to face to find common ways of tackling Labour's recession? How many times have they met face to face to discuss helping our small businesses? How many times have they met face to face to help our high streets in Scotland?

It is extraordinary that in these difficult times there has been no face-to-face engagement between the First Minister and the Prime Minister. Of course, the suspicion is that the relationship between those two people is more akin to permafrost than partnership. Would it not be better if, instead of picking fights with each other, Gordon Brown and the First Minister worked together in the best interests of Scotland? David Cameron has made it clear that if he becomes British Prime Minister, he will work constructively with Scotland's First Minister, whoever that may be. [ Interruption. ]

I say to Mr Rumbles that we all know who the next British Prime Minister will not be. I urge the First Minister to schedule regular talks with the Prime Minister, especially during this Labour recession. In the meantime, I ask the First Minister to endorse the Scottish Conservatives' help our high street campaign. Town centres the length and breadth of Scotland need our help as Gordon Brown's economic downturn hits our streets hard. Will the First Minister today endorse the Scottish Conservative campaign by logging on to helpourhighstreet.com?

Will the member give way to a lady?

As Oscar Wilde said: "There is only one thing worse ... than being talked about, and that is not being talked about." I am therefore delighted by the length of time that Mr Purvis is devoting to me. However, he must accept that my party voted for the budget last week to try to ensure that all essential providers and services in Scotland continued to be funded. Why were the Liberal Democrats unable to do the same? They have secured not one penny more in the intervening seven days.

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-1399)

The latest International Monetary Fund figures show that the United Kingdom will suffer the worst slump of all industrialised nations since the second world war and that the Scottish economy is now falling faster  than that of the UK as a whole. It is precisely because of that frightening backdrop that the Scottish Conservatives negotiated in the budget the abolition of or cut in local taxes for 150,000 of our small businesses; secured the continuing freeze of council tax; and got a pledge for a £60 million town centre regeneration fund to address this real, happening crisis. Sadly, that goal was not shared by every party in this chamber. For Iain Gray and the Scottish Labour Party, this was not about addressing Labour's recession; instead, it was about trying to stage some bloodless debating chamber coup to ensconce him as First Minister. Let me make it clear: I shall have no truck with such antics. Does the First Minister agree that Scotland is already badly served by one Labour Government and that we certainly do not need two? [ Interruption. ]

I am certain that all party leaders will have received this morning the public's views on yesterday's budget debacle. Our first priority must be to get a budget for Scotland passed in the chamber. We must remove the spectre of council tax increases and public service cuts; we need stability, not uncertainty; and clarity, not confusion. It is no victory for anyone in this Parliament for it to be a laughing stock. In an e- mail that I received this morning—an e-mail which, I have to say, is humbling—a correspondent who dismisses every one of us said of the budget: "I don't care how you do it neither does the vast majority in the country just get it done". Does the First Minister agree that the priority is not bloodless coups, debating antics in the chamber or putting parties on a war footing but getting this budget passed?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-1376)

Yesterday, my colleague David Mundell launched a private member's bill at Westminster to make our Scottish bank-notes acceptable everywhere in the United Kingdom. Today, my colleague David McLetchie—the Scottish Conservatives' chief whip—will lodge a motion in this Parliament to back David Mundell's move. Will the First Minister sign up to the campaign?

On the face of it, that is a welcome endorsement. However, as is so often the case with the First Minister, it is, sadly, a hollow one because the SNP wants to ditch the pound and embrace the euro. Under the SNP, we could spend our Scottish bank-notes in Brighton but not in Banff and Buchan. Under the SNP, we could spend our Scottish bank-notes in Carlisle but would have to get rid of them before coming over the border to Kirkcudbright. Alex Salmond would exile all Scottish bank-notes and make them a foreign currency here in Scotland. Is it not the truth that the First Minister's smiling support for our Scottish bank-notes is a load of hypocrisy? He is the man who, given half a chance, would sign their death warrant in Scotland as the SNP rushes to join the euro.

The Scottish Parliament information centre confirmed this morning that the Lisbon treaty does not permit a regionally branded euro note. Even if it did, would that not say it all about Alex Salmond? Rather than keep the pound and our Scottish bank-notes, he would settle for some centralised euro note with a bit of regional branding—probably his own face. [ Laughter. ] I was going to say, "Or perhaps a haggis," but perhaps some people would not know the difference.

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-1349)

Does the First Minister agree that the Scottish criminal justice system must be seen to demonstrate integrity, impartiality and fairness to the victims and to the accused? Can he assure the Parliament that any political decisions taken about the release of Mr Al Megrahi, the Lockerbie bomber, will be consistent with those principles?

Does the First Minister recognise that there would be widespread and deep unease if any convicted terrorist prisoner were allowed to leave Scotland prior to completion of their sentence? This is a very serious issue, and we need a serious answer. We need to know the position of the Scottish Government. Is the First Minister minded to release a convicted terrorist back to their home country before they have served their full sentence? Unfortunately, Tony Blair created confusion around this issue, but I implore the Scottish National Party not to compound that.

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-1323)

In the 1990s, the Conservative Government secured land for a new Forth crossing. In 2007 there was, at least, a Scottish National Party manifesto commitment to realise the plan. The new Forth crossing will be one of the most iconic and important transport projects for Scotland in generations. Surely any First Minister worth his salt would have spent the past 18 months working out not just the design of the bridge but how to pay for it. The public and Parliament want to know why a funding request to the Treasury on such an enormous project, which has such financial implications, was submitted only 14 days before  the announcement. The First Minister just said—I quote him verbatim—that "the Treasury doesnae do anything in two weeks". If the First Minister is serious about the project, why has he spurned my party's offer of talks with our shadow Treasury team at Westminster to find a way forward? Is his refusal more evidence of his real agenda? Is it the case that he does not want to find a solution but wants only another row?

It is a bit difficult for my party's shadow Treasury team at Westminster to hold discussions with the Scottish Government when the First Minister does not even know that the request has been made and special advisers have already spurned the request. That demonstrates the impotent approach to a vital issue. The First Minister knew what he wanted two years ago. He loves the limelight but shirks the hard graft. He would open a can of beans sooner than he would open discussions with Westminster. He would rather burn bridges with Westminster than build bridges in Scotland. There is only one conclusion: for the First Minister, this is not about building a bridge in Scotland but is yet again about picking a fight with Westminster. For him, it is a blame game. It is the politics of grudge and gripe, grievance and girn. Will he admit that this is about not Scotland's national interest but parochial Scottish National Party interest? Will he admit that he is putting his party before his country?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-1295)

In May, Her Majesty's chief inspector of constabulary for Scotland, Paddy Tomkins, published a report revealing that, when it comes to investigating and tackling serious fraud, Scotland is badly behind the rest of the United Kingdom. Specifically, the report called on the SNP Government to establish a national fraud capability and to do so as a matter of urgency—within three months. Seven months later, we do not have it. Given the turmoil surrounding the economy, the markets and our financial institutions, that is an extraordinary and scandalous dereliction of duty by the Scottish Government. All that has happened is that somewhere there is a working party. When did the Scottish Government first receive the chief inspector's report? When was the working party set up, how often has it met, and who sits on it for the Scottish Government?

Those were not answers, but absolute drivel. It is no wonder that Paddy Tomkins, the chief inspector, said on "Newsnight Scotland" on Tuesday that he was "disappointed by the speed of progress to date", adding that the issue "needs to be tackled with alacrity"— a word that may not be in the First Minister's vocabulary but is understood by everyone else. It is inconceivable that, in the briefing tome in front of him—and, interestingly, there have been no whispered sweet nothings from Mr MacAskill, which shows just what a vacuum there is on this subject—the First Minister does not have the information that I, like everybody else, am looking for. The First Minister is forever bleating on about the powers that he does not have while refusing to use the powers that he does have. Will he answer me? Why, on this urgent and overdue matter, has his Government behaved with such inexcusable delay? When are we actually going to get the much-needed and overdue new national fraud capability?

To ask the man who thinks he is saving Scotland when he will next meet the man who thinks he has saved the world. In deference to you, Presiding Officer, I will ask the question that was lodged. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-1271)

In opposition, the First Minister's colleague Michael Russell called for an independent watchdog to be set up to ensure that all Scottish Executive advertising was "justified and non-political". This week, it was confirmed that the Scottish Government is spending nearly £700,000 of taxpayers' money on advertising its discredited home reports. What happened to Mr Russell's watchdog idea and how would a watchdog have justified such spending?

Let us examine what Alex Salmond's priorities really are when it comes to spending taxpayers' money on Government public relations. Here we are: £700,000 is spent on PR for home reports, but the Government is spending less of the advertising budget on child protection, tackling domestic abuse or warnings about sex offenders. This Government clearly thinks that home reports are more important than those issues. Unbelievably, it is spending more of its PR budget on home reports than it has spent on either alcohol or drugs abuse. We now know the warped priorities of the Scottish National Party. Less worthy and important than home reports are the issues of child protection, domestic abuse, the scourge of alcohol and the scars of drug addiction. That is absolutely shameful. What do those lopsided and bizarre priorities say about the Government? Does the First Minister really have the brazen effrontery still to argue that spending £700,000 to advertise a sales tax is justified?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-1242)

Two weeks ago, I challenged Nicola Sturgeon on the deeply disturbing issue of hospital-acquired infections. A lot of the recent discussion has understandably centred on one incident in one hospital, but our focus has to be wider and we must be proactive, not merely reactive. It was clear from what Miss Sturgeon said about monitoring such infections that the Scottish Government is still taking a health board-by-health board, hospital-by-hospital approach and that it aspires to extend that to real-time tracking by clinical specialty. To cut through the technical jargon, that is not good enough. We need to move to ward-by-ward, bed-by-bed real-time tracking if we want to know whether another Vale of Leven crisis threatens at any point in any day in any hospital. We can do more. An electronic bed-management system that is perfectly capable of being extended to monitor bed and ward infections has already been successfully piloted in Aberdeen royal infirmary. Does the First Minister agree that, given what we know is out there, his Government's response to date has been tardy and inadequate? Will he now back the Scottish Conservatives' call for a bed-by-bed infection tracking pilot?

No one denies that these are financially challenging times, not least for the health service. That is why we must spend our NHS resources on clinical imperatives, not on political targets. The technology that I mentioned can save lives. I have a detailed briefing on it, which I am happy to send to the First Minister today. Does the First Minister recognise the urgency and necessity of addressing the problem now? We have the means to do so, but we now need the political will. It is no longer a question of if; it is a question of when. Will the First Minister undertake to make a statement in the Parliament as soon as possible on when and where a bed-by-bed infection-tracking pilot will start?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-1216)

Iain Gray is absolutely right to condemn the SNP's local income tax. Unfortunately for Iain Gray, however, he is the man with no plan; he is stuck in the past with the local government finance status quo. The First Minister's tax on jobs—that is what the local income tax is—is based on three things: a growing economy; a tax rate of 3p in the pound; and a £281 million subsidy. However, we know from this week's devastating and bleak news that those assumptions have been smashed to smithereens. The black hole has more than doubled in size. Can he tell us where he will find the money to plug that bigger black hole of £300 million? If he cannot—I would be astonished if he could—I ask him to come clean: how much will the new tax rate really be? How much higher will it be than 3p in the pound?

The First Minister is either deluding himself or conning the public, because even in his own Government, no one has disputed the existence of the burgeoning black hole. For the First Minister's sums to add up, a 25 per cent increase in income tax revenues would be needed in just one year. That is not going to happen—it is total self-delusion. Britain already faces a tax bombshell from Labour. Now Scotland is going to get an additional tartan tax bombshell from the SNP. There we have it—Brown and Salmond, the architects of insolvency. Gordon Brown has broken Britain's economy. Why does Alex Salmond want to shatter Scotland's? Will he drop the proposed tax on work and cut council tax instead?

There is nothing like a late convert to the cause. I distinctly recall challenging the First Minister, in the chamber, on council tax. I asked, "Is a freeze enough?" and he said, "No." Let us hear how he is going to cut council tax.

I, too, am sorry to hear of the First Minister's indisposition. I wish him a speedy recovery. To ask the Deputy First Minister when the First Minister will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-1191)

I have listened to the exchanges between the Deputy First Minister and Mr Gray, but there are some basic, inescapable and chilling facts. First, Scotland has the highest rate of hospital-acquired infection in the United Kingdom. None of us can be proud of that, and all hospital patients will be deeply disturbed by it. Secondly, and sadly, the Vale of Leven hospital is not unique among our hospitals in having an unacceptably serious level of infection risk. According to the BBC, there are alarming levels of C difficile cases throughout Scotland. Last night on television, the health secretary claimed that what has happened at the Vale of Leven is "not reflective of general practice across the NHS in Scotland." The facts do not support that assertion. Clearly, the health secretary does not know what is going on in our hospitals in Scotland. Does she now accept that the problem is much more serious and much more widespread than she indicated?

The Deputy First Minister needs to take a reality check, in her own words, "to tackle the problem". To tackle the problem, we need to know what is happening, where it is happening, why it is happening and when it is happening. We need robust, real-time data to be provided not on a health-board-by-health-board basis but, at the very least, on a hospital-by-hospital basis—preferably on a ward-by-ward or even bed-by-bed basis. When hospital-acquired infections threaten, we must move from being reactive to being proactive, anticipating what is happening and being able to deal with that, not looking at what has happened and having to analyse why. We are behind the game. The Deputy First Minister said, five years ago: "It is up to the Health Minister to ensure that superbugs are kept to a minimum and that patients enter Scotland's hospitals to be treated not infected". She was right—I could not agree with her more. She is now the health minister, so when is she going to live up to her own fine words and turn the rhetoric into reality?

I thank Wendy Alexander for lodging the motion, and for her kind remarks about the motion that I lodged three years ago. I recall that, on that occasion, Ms Alexander said: "I begin by congratulating Annabel Goldie. In fact, I might go as far as to say that I did not disagree with a word that  she said. This may be the only time for a number of years that I can make that statement".— [ Official Report , 7 September 2005; c 19005.]  I can do no better than quote her words back to her, and say that I entirely agree with her contribution. As Wendy Alexander said all those years ago, when that embryonic thought emerged in the mind of some musical people in Paisley, it was regarded as a pretty brave aspiration and ambition. I recall—as I mentioned in the previous debate on the subject—going to a concert in Paisley one fairly wet Friday evening, at which the suggestion for the event emerged. The venture is, as Wendy Alexander said, greatly to the credit of the organisers—not just the current chairman and his colleagues, but their predecessors—who have seen it through to considerable effect. I remember saying that I thought that the festival had three attributes. First, I felt that it represented a particular spirit of determination, not to mention musical talent, that is to be found in the Paisley area, which is to be applauded. Secondly, I thought that it was a good example of partnership with local organisations, including Renfrewshire Council, which is also to be applauded. Thirdly, I thought that it was important that the Parliament recognised the festival not just as the welcome emergence of a cultural activity in Paisley, but as relaying a bigger message and as a means of putting Paisley back on the map after a challenging period for the town. Wendy Alexander and Bill Wilson have articulated clearly just what a triumph that has been for the organisation. I have a sorry confession to make. This year, for the first time, I was unable to attend any of the festival events. The intrusion of a by-election was more than a little responsible for that. I do not know whether that was a triumph over anything, but cultural enjoyment in Paisley was denied to me, which was a matter of considerable regret. When one considers some of the organisations and musical groups that the festival attracts, one sees just what it has achieved. Wendy Alexander referred to the Swingle Singers, and the festival has also attracted the King's Singers, Capella Nova, the Dunedin consort and the Royal Scottish National Orchestra chorus. Those are prestigious musical groups. Coming from Bishopton, a village just down the road, I feel privileged that such prestigious music can be found a few miles from my door. I think that that is a tremendous cultural achievement for the festival company. As Wendy Alexander said, the economic benefits of the festival have never been lost sight of, and I think that they play a role in the festival company's activities. There is no doubt that Paisley is blessed with many rich architectural gems, such as the abbey, the Thomas Coats  memorial church and the church of the Holy Trinity. To be able to contribute to their fabric, wellbeing and preservation is very important. I know that the local council aspires to have Paisley identified as a suitable venue for the Royal National Mòd. That is something that all of us from the local area would applaud. If there were any possibility of that happening, we would do everything that we could to promote that objective. In my opinion, Paisley would be a very fine location indeed for the Mòd. The other, less direct, activity of the festival company and the festival in making links with other organisations, musical education and other institutions in Paisley and the west of Scotland has again been brought to fruition. It has resulted in a good and healthy engagement with the University of the West of Scotland, Reid Kerr College and the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama. Those important connections extend out into the University of Glasgow's school of Slavonic, central and east European studies, with the visit of the Estonian Philharmonic chamber choir. Those are not names just to bandy around; they are solid evidence of what the festival is achieving in the area. I am very glad to take part in the debate and thank Wendy Alexander for bringing it to the Parliament. It is an opportunity for us all to pay tribute not just to the town of Paisley, which is deserving of praise, but to people such as Alistair Campbell, the directors of the organisation and all those who assist with the festival for doing such a splendid job. I think that I am correct in saying that, this year, the schoolchildren's concert was unable to go ahead. That ought to be able to go ahead in the future because, of all the events that I have attended at the festival, it really stuck in my mind as a showcase for the talent that is to be found among young people in Paisley. We should also keep a focus on what brings in the money. What is esoteric may be good entertainment for the cultural high-brows of the world, but musical pops are more likely to pay the bills. So, a pragmatic eye must be kept on the economics. I applaud the resolve, fortitude and resilience of all those who have made the festival happen, and I conclude with a couple of suggestions. First, the festival choirs should come and sing for us here in the Parliament. I am sure that, if Wendy Alexander and I promised not to participate but merely to facilitate, the rest of the Parliament might be minded to support that endeavour. The company would find a very warm welcome awaiting it here. Secondly, given the tremendous heritage of the Paisley pattern, the Paisley Choral Festival could have a musical tie or scarf in which the Paisley pattern is interwoven with a tonic sol-fa or two—or  whatever it is that, in musical parlance, might be interweaved in such matters. It has been a great pleasure to take part in the debate to support and encourage the participants and organisers of the Paisley Festival Company.

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-1166)

Yesterday, official figures revealed that 126,000 Scots are out of work. The much respected Fraser of Allander institute has predicted that, at worst, a further 117,000 jobs could be lost, and that there will be long-term negative effects on many of our businesses. Already, countless families in Scotland are feeling the pain of recession and fearing for their futures. Fewer people will be in work, more jobs will be lost and tax revenues will fall. That harsh reality impacts on Scottish Government policy. Does the First Minister accept that his Government's cosy assumptions about a local income tax are now smashed to pieces? Is it not time to ditch that discredited, unmanageable and now economically flawed tax on work?

The First Minister revels in creating the illusion that he is an economics guru, or Scotland's very own financial prophet—the Brahan seer of Buchan. Earlier this year, he said: "The Scottish banks are among the most stable financial institutions in the world." If only. What we need now is real help in tough times. The Scottish Conservatives have laid out how we can bring such help to every council tax payer in Scotland. In these unprecedented times, is the First Minister arguing that a council tax freeze is enough? Is he seriously ruling out any cut in council tax for the duration of this parliamentary session?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-1143)

This week, it was confirmed that the national health service in England should not withdraw treatment from patients who choose to pay privately for additional drugs. Will the First Minister confirm that that facility will now be available to NHS patients in Scotland?

The First Minister rightly misses no opportunity to laud Scotland's virtues, but it is unacceptable complacency if he fails to address negative impacts with the same urgency. Health care in England is now more flexible and, therefore, arguably better. Why should some NHS patients be forced, particularly at a time of grave ill health, to make a choice between staying in Scotland or selling up and going to live in England to benefit from that improvement? How is that, to quote the First Minister's words from only a few moments ago, "the politics of hope and expectation"? What is he going to do about it?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-1116)

Our First Minister's priorities are revealing. Yesterday, when he could have been in London not just to meet but to question both the Prime Minister and the Secretary of State  for Scotland, his priority was to campaign in Glenrothes and put his party before his country. As the First Minister was in Glenrothes, however, he will understand the importance of doing everything possible to drive forward the local economy including, for example, improving transport infrastructure. His colleague Tricia Marwick has supported the Scottish Conservatives' calls for the A92 around Glenrothes to be dualled on economic and safety grounds. However, I am told that the Scottish National Party candidate for the Glenrothes by-election said at a hustings this week that such a move was "not a top priority". Where there should be clarity about a key transport project in Fife, there is now total confusion. What is the First Minister's position?

If there is confusion in the SNP on roads, confusion does not begin to describe its attitude to buses. The people of Fife depend heavily on bus services that are operated principally by a long-established family firm and by Stagecoach—a name that is more than familiar to the First Minister. On buses, I understand that the same SNP candidate said last night: "I hope the party's not listening. Bus companies don't work when privately owned." Oh really? Is that the SNP's position? Is that the First Minister's position? Is it goodbye to family firms and "Sling your hook, Mr Souter"? Are the  days of Stagecoach in Fife over? What is the position?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-1087)

I hope that the fact that the conversations were amicable has not bowled over the new Secretary of State for Scotland. May that conciliatory mood continue. All political parties support the action that the United Kingdom Government has taken in the past 24 hours to restore confidence to the markets and in our banking system. However, everyone—whether lender, investor or taxpayer—recognises that life will never be the same again, particularly in relation to borrowing. The First Minister has referred to that. The Scottish Government is contemplating several significant capital projects. One of the most vital is the new Forth bridge, which has a price tag of £4 billion. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth, Mr Swinney, confirmed last month that he expects to make a decision on funding before the end of the year. Given recent events, will the First Minister confirm that the project will go ahead as scheduled and that an announcement on funding will be made to Parliament in the next two months?

I must confine my comments to matters that Parliament and I are competent to deal with. Interest rates are for others to determine. We all agree that when times are hard, charity begins at home. In Scotland, 93 per cent of firms have 10 employees or fewer. The First Minister has shown his support for small businesses by adopting the Scottish Conservative policy of providing additional rates relief to small businesses from next April. I was delighted to hear today his commitment that the Scottish Government will assist those businesses by paying bills timeously, but I noticed his phrasing. I understood him to say that the commitment was restricted to money that the Government owes to those businesses. Will he confirm that that welcome dictate extends to Scottish Government agencies?

The Scottish Conservatives welcome the First Minister's statement on the Scottish Broadcasting Commission. I also endorse his comments in relation to Mr Blair Jenkins, the work of the commission and the late Ray Michie. It was the Scottish Conservatives who first promoted the idea of a Scottish digital channel. That was at the heart of our submission to the Scottish Broadcasting Commission. The decision of the independent commission to recommend the creation of a digital channel is, therefore, welcome. In a spirit of conciliation, I congratulate the First Minister on his co-operation—yet again—in delivering another Conservative policy. However, the fundamental issue of funding for the new digital channel remains, the cost of which is estimated to be about £75 million. There must be concern about who will be responsible for providing that funding. Does the First Minister agree that it would be unfair to burden taxpayers with another significant financial commitment, particularly in the context of the current global  financial crisis? Does he accept that it would be sensible to fund the channel commercially, either wholly or partially, through advertising or sponsorship? The commercial sector has expressed that it is willing and able to become involved in both funding and operating the new channel.

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-1058)

The First Minister's attempt to defend his proposed criminalisation of responsible young adults must be among the most bizarre that the Parliament has ever heard. Alcohol abuse can be dealt with by targeting underage drinking and law-breaking licensees. It is not necessary to create a new set of criminals—we just need to clamp down with the existing laws. Later today, and not for the first time, the Parliament will provide the common sense that is so patently lacking in the First Minister. That brings me to another issue on which common sense has flown out of the window. In March this year, I asked the First Minister what the Government would do with the prisoners if any of our prisons were damaged or destroyed and could not be used. The First Minister told me: "Contingency plans are in place."— [ Official Report , 27 March 2008; c 7449.]  Will he tell us what they are?

The difference between the First Minister and me is that the Conservatives in Government ensured that the prison population virtually matched prison capacity and put in place plans for a new prison in Kilmarnock. That is a far cry from the mess that the First Minister is in. We must deal with the crisis in our prisons that is here now, right in front of us. The First Minister wants to gloss over the crisis, but the chief executive of the Scottish Prison Service is clear about it. This week, he said: "There is no contingency plan", which, I presume, explains the lack of an answer  from the First Minister to my question. The SPS chief executive continued: "there is no spare capacity in the system to absorb a loss of accommodation."—[ Official Report , Justice Committee , 30 September 2008; c 1142.] He gave the chilling warning that the only option is an emergency release of prisoners. In other words, if an emergency hits one of our prisons and hundreds of places are lost, hundreds of prisoners will be released into the community. That is the First Minister's plan B and it is just not acceptable. We need extra prison capacity now, as there is a current crisis and a threatening disaster. Will the First Minister join the Scottish Conservatives to find that extra capacity? That is a real plan B—a plan to keep prisoners in prison and to keep Scotland safe.

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-1029)

Yesterday, the Lloyds TSB business monitor described Scotland's economy as having ground to a halt in the summer and warned that overall business turnover will slump in the next six months. The Scottish housing industry estimates that it has lost 30,000 jobs, and house sales have plummeted. The housing industry is crying out for help and house owners are desperate. What they need is help, not the hindrance of the costly and unwanted home report. At this critical time, why does the First Minister insist on saddling every house seller in Scotland with a levy of more than £800?

I was a lawyer, not an economist, but even I know that before someone can buy a house, someone has to be selling it. Let us face facts. The home report pilot was an unmitigated disaster. The price has rocketed by more than a third, and the report has a shelf life of only a few weeks. The Scottish Consumer Council says that it will hit the lowest paid the hardest, and there are warnings that it will destroy our already fragile Scottish property market, yet the First Minister still thinks that it is a good idea. Against the background of that overwhelming condemnation, and for the sake of desperately worried home owners, will the First Minister scrap this deeply damaging proposal? If he does not  have the courage or even the humility to do that, will he at least postpone this nightmare?

I declare an interest as a shareholder in the Royal Bank of Scotland and a customer of HBOS. I welcome the opportunity for Parliament to debate the implications of the proposed takeover of HBOS by Lloyds TSB and I thank the First Minister for facilitating the joint meeting with the Scottish Council for Development and Industry, which was informative and helpful. The first indication that financial turbulence was hitting the United Kingdom was the crisis that surrounded Northern Rock back in 2007. That company was subsequently nationalised in February 2008. Northern Rock has a small presence in Scotland, so the underlying tremors perhaps seemed slightly remote to us then, but they were felt more directly when, in April 2008, the Royal Bank of Scotland announced that it needed to raise £12 billion from shareholders, which it at least managed to do with only marginal reliance on underwriters. The tremors became fault lines in May, when HBOS sought to raise £4 billion from its shareholders. The rights issue was largely spurned by the shareholders and massive support was needed from underwriters. At that time, the vulnerability of HBOS became clear. Last week, that vulnerability delivered its own Scottish financial shock wave. HBOS, wounded and bleeding, needed help. The problem delivered to Scotland's doorstep the full impact of market turbulence—an impact that affects thousands of employees, hundreds of thousands of small shareholders, millions of customers, and billions of pounds. It is essential that the faltering of one Scottish financial institution should not be characterised as a crisis of the whole Scottish financial sector. That sector has a critical mass and a tremendous reputation for skill and acumen that will endure. It  would be unpardonable folly if extravagant rhetoric or unguarded comment were to undermine that reputation. We should all remember that there is a sensitive period ahead for HBOS and Lloyds TSB, pending the takeover's becoming unconditional, because another bid might emerge during that period: it is not a done deal. None of us knows what lies ahead, but I am clear that it is infinitely preferable that the challenge that confronts HBOS be resolved by the banking industry rather than by its being laid at the door of the Treasury and at the feet of the taxpayer. We are where we are, and our duty now is to look for the opportunities, not just for the employees, small shareholders and HBOS customers but for the broader Scottish economy. The new banking entity will be a huge institution and, at the joint meeting with the Scottish Council for Development and Industry and at the meeting that I had yesterday with Lloyds TSB, I made it clear that I expect its presence to fortify and enhance Scotland's financial sector. In fairness, I should, like other members, point out that with its existing activity in Scotland Lloyds TSB genuinely understands both the Scottish financial sector and the Scottish economy. It is helpful that Mr Archie Kane, who has been charged with fronting the takeover at the Scottish end, has already played a leading role in the merger between Lloyds and the TSB and in Lloyds's tie-up with Scottish Widows. What will be singularly important to customers, particularly business customers, is that substantial decision making on financial advice and support continues to come from Scotland. The tendrils of HBOS activity reach into a huge number of areas of Scottish life and the support and advice that it currently extends are vast. Mr Gray has already referred to some of those areas. At the SCDI meeting, Duncan Osler of Macroberts said that HBOS could be seen as a number of different business units. It is vital that that input is not lost. HBOS also plays a very important role in Scotland's physical infrastructure, not just as a lender and investor but as a facilitator. Its roles in tourism and in the sphere of corporate social responsibility have also been mentioned. It is essential that the new entity recognises both the social importance and economic significance of that contribution and that it determines to continue it. Lloyds TSB also has an obligation to assuage the real concern that reduced competition in the banking sector will prejudice the service to business, particularly small businesses. For such businesses, a local branch network is essential, and smaller businesses that want to grow need to have access to affordable capital. I am clear that politicians and this Parliament can make cogent  representations on all these issues to Lloyds TSB, which has indicated its willingness to continue to meet party leaders. That line of communication is very welcome. I turn to broader issues that are not the responsibility of this Parliament but are relevant to Westminster and the Financial Services Authority. My party thinks it right to suspend competition rules, having regard to the broader public interest, and will support measures to stabilise the banking system. We also welcome any short-term action that will bring stability to the markets. However, it is emerging that the extent of short selling of HBOS shares was greatly exaggerated. We all have to understand that short selling is a symptom, but not the underlying cause, of the problem. The fact is that an economy with excessive property inflation, excessive debt, over-borrowing and a dysfunctional regulatory system has to face corrosive challenges. My party positively supports changes to the capital rules for banks to ensure responsible lending; we would, for example, protect depositors by protecting the first £50,000 of a person's savings. Those broader issues will be dealt with in another place and will certainly be discussed as an election approaches. For the moment, this Parliament can advance many positive arguments to Lloyds TSB in its proposed takeover. As someone whose party is committed to a strong and confident Scotland within a strong and confident United Kingdom, I am absolutely clear that recent events could have been neither stopped nor meaningfully influenced by an independent Scotland. In an independent Scotland, we would have been pitched like a coracle in the tossing seas of financial tumult. I find comfort in being part of the United Kingdom: it might have the wrong captain on the bridge, but that vessel is nevertheless much better placed to withstand the buffeting of this economic storm.

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-1009) The question obviously has particular poignancy, given recent events. I, too, welcome Iain Gray to his new position.

The shock waves reverberating through the financial world have today reached into virtually every home in Scotland. There are Bank of Scotland employees, savers, borrowers and small shareholders throughout the country. I want to make it absolutely clear that it is totally unacceptable to spread malicious rumours in markets and to benefit from short selling. No one takes pleasure in people making money out of the misery of others. In Scotland, we must deal with the circumstances as they now are, and we are all in the same boat. Does the First Minister agree that the Parliament should send out the clearest possible message that we will do everything that we can to argue the cause for Scottish banking jobs and for the pre-eminent status of the Scottish financial sector?

Over the centuries, Scotland has always shown a remarkable facility for creating opportunity out of adversity, and surely one of the best ways in which this Parliament can reflect that spirit is by urging this new bank to embrace the expertise, reputation and status of the jewel that is our Scottish financial sector. Given those attributes, does the First Minister agree that there is no reason why Scotland could not be the headquarters base for a bank of this significance?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-985)

There will be after the next election. Last week, I asked Nicola Sturgeon a simple question to which she had no answer. Let me repeat the question to the First Minister: by how much could we cut everyone's council tax bills if the £281 million subsidy that he says he can find for his Scottish national income tax were used to cut council tax instead? As I am ever ready to help the First Minister, I can give him the answer. With that money, the Scottish Conservatives would cut the council tax bill of every single household in Scotland—there are 2 million of them—by £150. In every year in which he can find that money, we can cut the tax for those 2 million households. Whatever their bill is, we will cut it by £150. In these rough economic times, real help is needed as soon as possible. When will the First Minister find this money so that we can pass it on to those 2 million households?

The only thing that matters is that the First Minister finds the £281 million, because in every year in which he can find that money we can cut the tax for 2 million households. Whatever their bill is, we can cut it by £150. The sooner he finds that money, the sooner we can start. Last week, the Deputy First Minister said: "the vast majority of people in Scotland would be better off under a local income tax than they are under the council tax."— [ Official Report , 4 September 2008; c 10509.]  Quite simply, that is no longer correct, because the majority of people in the 21 examples that the Scottish Government cherry picked for its website would now be better off under Scottish Conservative plans. When will the First Minister find even some of that £281 million, so that we can make a start in cutting the council tax bills for 2 million Scottish households?

I just want to clarify that my party's commitment to cutting the bills of older pensioners remains, so they would receive a double benefit if the First Minister would kindly even consider the good sense of what I am advising him to do.

I do not know what I am reeling from more: the prospect of Nicola Sturgeon as First Minister, or of her having constructive discussions with the Liberal Democrats. To ask the Deputy First Minister when the First Minister will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-954) I assume that it will not be in Glenrothes.

Yesterday, the First Minister proclaimed with unabated bravado that he has found £281 million to subsidise his unfair, unworkable and totally discredited Scottish national income tax. By how much could we cut everyone's bills if that subsidy was used to cut council tax? Only when we have the answer to that question can Scotland have a true choice, a real debate and a proper comparison.

It is disappointing that among such verbiage there was not an answer to the question that I asked. Most people understand that  the problem with the council tax is the amount that they have to pay. That is the problem with many taxes—people are concerned less about structure and more about bills. The SNP's totally spurious claim is that 80 per cent of Scots households would be no worse off under its plans but, under the plans of the Scottish Conservatives, 100 per cent of council tax payers would be better off; our older citizens would be very much better off. Let us get real. The Green party will not support the Scottish national income tax. The Lib Dems have had three positions in 12 hours—no change there. Jeremy Purvis said no, Tavish Scott said maybe—perhaps that is definitive for him—and their MP Ed Davey is unconvinced. That is total flip-flop and fluster. The SNP's proposal is brazen opportunism—it is a con. A local income tax is just not going to happen. Does the Deputy First Minister now accept that the £281 million that she says that she can find would be much better used to cut the council tax bills of every household in Scotland? In these hard-pressed times, we do not need a new tax on work; we need a tax cut for all.

It is great to be back. Some things might have changed—some people have gone and others have arrived. I, too, welcome Tavish Scott, fog and all. I hope that the First Minister is pleased to see that I am back and raring to go.  It is clear that the First Minister is also raring to go. It is obvious that he wants to replicate Olympic pace in the political arena. I take this opportunity at the first meeting of the Parliament since the Olympic games to praise and congratulate team Great Britain and our fantastic Scottish contribution to its Olympic success. [ Applause. ] I am looking forward to London 2012. I am certainly looking forward to Westminster 2011. The Scottish Conservatives in this Parliament will continue to do what we did last year. Our approach will be issue by issue and vote by vote, to do what is best for the interests of Scotland. The Scottish Conservatives will continue to make the difference in Scottish politics. For the avoidance of doubt, will the First Minister confirm that by 2011 police numbers will be 17,261? That was the deal that the Scottish Conservatives secured in the budget. The First Minister lauds his proposed net tax cuts of £281 million. If he can find that money, I can spend it better and cut the tax bill for every council tax payer in Scotland. What on earth is the point of abolishing the council tax, when the proposed substitute, a national income tax, has been comprehensively rubbished and ridiculed? On the proposed criminal justice and licensing bill, does the First Minister seriously intend to persevere with the ludicrous proposal whereby a responsible adult aged 20 could buy alcohol at the pub but could not take a bottle of wine home to celebrate the birth of his child? Finally, can the First Minister confirm that he has given up on his pledges to cancel student debt and reduce class sizes, given their omission from his statement?

I, too, wish Wendy Alexander a full recovery. Wendy Alexander without a voice is a strange phenomenon. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-926)

The First Minister has just celebrated what is popularly known as his paper anniversary, but he should not let romance go to his head. Some of the brave promises that attended his arrival in government are, one year later, turning out to be more brash than brave and, in some cases, more brazen than brash. However, let us not be churlish. I congratulate the First Minister on finally admitting that he is not the master of political infallibility and that even he can get things wrong. I congratulate him on ditching the first-time buyers grant. Will he demonstrate continuing humility by indicating to the chamber on this anniversary which other parts of his manifesto are not worth the paper they are written on?

Many of us have good reasons to look forward to the recess, but respite from the historic concordat must be at the top of the list. I return to the hair-shirt opportunity that I am giving the First Minister to show a little humility, however alien an experience that may be for him. For example, the policy on class sizes is seen by most councils as financially untenable and by the Scottish National Party-led City of Edinburgh Council as undeliverable in law. Is it not time to ditch that promise and to concentrate our resources on the things that really matter in our classrooms? Throughout Scotland, from the business community to students to Glasgow City Council, local income tax is being lambasted and ridiculed. Is it not time to drop that promise and cut council tax instead? Finally, if something is really beginning to unnerve the public, it is the SNP's unrelenting drive to create a soft-touch Scotland and its continual dumbing down of Scotland's criminal justice system, which have led to the emptying of our prisons, the extension of home detention curfews and the setting free of prisoners to commit more crime. Above all else, will the First Minister please use his forthcoming recess to go home and think again?

The last bit of the First Minister's response does not worry me in the slightest, but the first bit does and I must be given the opportunity to correct him. When the Conservatives were in government, crime in Scotland was falling and the prison population virtually matched prison capacity. I also point out that we planned the building of Kilmarnock prison. Let us hear no more nonsense from the First Minister on that matter. On automatic early release, as the facts—not the First Minister's fiction—show, the Conservatives repealed the policy in 1997, but Labour refused to implement that decision. Indeed, the facts are that, on numerous occasions in this Parliament, Labour, the Liberal Democrats and—yes—the SNP have blocked Conservative attempts to end automatic early release. We have had enough of the First Minister's attempts to hide his discomfiture by lashing out at others.

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-898)

There has been deep concern throughout Scotland about the tragic outbreak of Clostridium difficile at the Vale of Leven hospital. Our thoughts are with all the families who have been affected by that lethal infection. In 2003, when MRSA levels increased by 4 percent, the then shadow minister for health and community care, Nicola Sturgeon, said: "It is up to the Health Minister to ensure that superbugs are kept to a minimum and that patients enter Scotland's hospitals to be treated not infected". She went on to add: "These figures highlight that so far the Minister has failed". We are now dealing with a much worse situation, caused by Clostridium difficile and the consequent death toll. In November the Scottish Government announced a range of measures, including surveillance monitoring for C difficile. Will the First Minister undertake to publish this afternoon details of the incidences of C difficile in every hospital in Scotland this year?

The disquieting aspect of the First Minister's response is that there is so much that we do not know. How can we tackle a problem when we do not know where it is or how serious it is? One thing is clear: the tragic outbreak at the Vale of Leven hospital arose because of a basic lack of hygiene practice on the wards. Five years ago, Ms Sturgeon was right to say that "patients enter Scottish hospitals to be treated not infected". Does the First Minister agree that we need to restore in every ward and hospital in Scotland a clinical presence such as a supersister, who is a visible point of authority and is empowered to enforce the application of robust hygiene standards? That could make the difference.

I have to say that, to me, the statement is not so much "Blah" as "Eh?" I note the First Minister's intention to appoint a panel of former Presiding Officers to advise him on the application of the ministerial code, but that is the first Achilles heel in his proposals. Although those distinguished gentlemen may bring with them the wisdom of Solomon, the judgment is that of Salmond. He is still the gamekeeper. The second Achilles heel is that the gamekeeper who enforces the code turns out to be the poacher who wrote it. If the framework to regulate ministers is to have any credibility, not just in the chamber but throughout Scotland, both the code and the process to arbitrate on breaches of that code must be separated from the First Minister. That is all the more pressing in a Parliament of minorities. Does the First Minister accept that there should be a truly independent commissioner who is appointed by the Parliament, that the ministerial code should be approved by the Parliament, and that the commissioner should report their findings not just to the First Minister but to the Parliament?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-870)

One does not know who to feel sorry for. It used to be that criminals and their crimes grabbed the headlines; it is now the criminal justice system that is hitting the headlines. This week, we have read about the increasing number of criminals who are not even being prosecuted. Today, we read that the First Minister had to plead with a mother whose son was thumped in an unprovoked street attack not to flee the country because she no longer feels safe in Scotland. I understand that a similar case of another son who was assaulted will hit the headlines tomorrow. Public confidence in our criminal justice system is haemorrhaging and it will be beyond the power of the First Minister to intervene in every case and to plead with every family of every victim. How will the First Minister stem the haemorrhage and restore confidence?

My party does not question the Crown Office's right to allow fiscals to use discretion, but we are certainly entitled to question whether that discretion is being exercised satisfactorily. Our criminal justice system exists to deter, punish and protect, and it is failing on all three counts. I hope that the First Minister read with concern the letter in today's Herald from the Society of Solicitors in Airdrie, in which the society expressed its alarm about the dumbing down of our criminal justice system, including cases involving "charges of lewd and libidinous conduct against children, assault to severe injury and permanent impairment, a variety of indecency cases (again involving children)". That is in just one sheriffdom. It is part of a growing trend and it is clearly just the tip of the iceberg. People can seek to blame individuals in the criminal justice system, but the bottom line is that we are seeing a damaging consequence of the Scottish National Party's relentless drive to empty our jails. Does the First Minister agree that we need to get back to a criminal justice system that is there to deter, punish and protect? Does he agree that we need to get our criminal justice system out of the dock and get criminals back into the dock?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-844)

I will ask the First Minister about a condition that does not hit the headlines but which the chief medical officer in England has described as "a Cinderella issue" and as one that "is known internationally as the silent killer." I refer to thrombosis, which is commonly known as a blood clot. I think that everyone in the Parliament is familiar with the tragedy that confronted the McPherson family of Langbank. I pay tribute to Gordon McPherson for his courage and the excellent work that he has done. Most people will be astonished to learn that thrombosis is responsible for more than 12,000 deaths a year in Scotland. When I say that that is nearly four times the combined total of all those who die from breast cancer, HIV/AIDS and road traffic accidents, we can all see that the description "silent killer" is chillingly apt. I am aware that guidelines are being reviewed and that a consultation on draft guidelines is expected in 2009. Given the condition's seriousness, does the First Minister really think that expecting a consultation on draft guidelines some time next year is treating the subject with the urgency that it deserves?

It is estimated that one in 20 people carry a gene that increases their risk of  developing a blood clot. Acquired conditions such as pregnancy and cancer also increase the risk of developing a thrombosis. Given the magnitude of annual deaths from thrombosis in Scotland, does the First Minister accept the urgent need to consider intervention such as testing for that gene, for which a simple test is available? Will he consult his chief medical officer and report to the Parliament as soon as practicable? We can no longer sit back and ignore the silent killer.

It is with pleasure and a sense of hope that I speak in the debate. In previous debates on drug abuse in Scotland, although I had no doubt about the sincerity of the  speeches, I always felt a sense of frustration and dismay that the debates seemed to be characterised by an attitude of managing the problem rather than trying to bring forward solutions to the problem. Indeed, when I look back at a debate in the Parliament in November 2002, I recall that my party was roundly criticised for suggesting that, although intentions were good, what was happening in practice was clearly not implementing the good intentions. What was clear then was that there was an absence of any universal national strategy for dealing with drug abuse in Scotland and an over-reliance on harm reduction—something that I think is now not disputed. I remember saying in another debate that harm reduction had become the predominant response to drug abuse. It meant that many methadone patients were parked on methadone—they were in a cul-de-sac. We were not looking with sufficient urgency at a range of options, including rehabilitation, to try to get people off addictive substances; rather, we were concentrating effort on a state-funded continuance of addiction. One of the early challenges was the lack of information held centrally. At times, it was impossible to get basic facts. Much information was patchy, incomplete or anecdotal. I pay tribute publicly to Professor Neil McKeganey of the University of Glasgow, who with his research both added significantly to the information bank and brought out into the open the fact that more than half of methadone patients wanted to get off drugs altogether. Professor McKeganey's research also exposed the myth that most people on methadone stop using illegally. Every drug addict whom I have encountered has confirmed that, although they were mainly on methadone, initially they continued to use illegally. We knew that all around us drug misuse was like a contagion, raging through every community in Scotland. Drug-related deaths were increasing, instead of reducing, and our courts and children's hearings were experiencing increasing evidence of drug abuse in the people who appeared before them. Tragically, our children's hearings showed that some parents and carers—and distressingly, some young people—were affected.

I am sorry, but I cannot give way. I seek the indulgence of the chamber—the debate is very short, and I want to say what I have to say. The statistics confirmed that, whatever good intentions were present—I do not doubt that they were—the situation was getting worse, not better. Against that backdrop, as I travelled around  Scotland, I found it astonishing that many charitable and voluntary rehabilitation facilities had spare capacity. They could help and wanted to help, but they did not seem to be allowed to provide help because they did not fit into the official structure. I am immensely encouraged by the fact that in the new strategy there is a visible change in political thinking, which has taken us from a cul-de-sac on to a road to recovery. That road will be challenging and in places very rocky, but at least we are on it. I commend the Minister for Community Safety for embarking on that journey and hope that everyone in the Parliament will support it. People should not be precipitate in demanding detail on the new strategy that cannot be provided at this stage. What matters is that we should all sign up to the new direction towards recovery and allow the Audit Scotland inquiry that my party insisted was an essential component of any new strategy to take place. Vast amounts of money are currently spent through multiple channels with the intention of dealing with drug abuse, but we do not know how much is spent, where and to what effect. It is imperative that those questions are answered, with the publication of the Audit Scotland report early next year, before we rush to judgment on how the strategy will be implemented in detail. I listened carefully to what Paul Martin said but, for the reasons that I have just articulated, I consider the Labour amendment to be premature. I am pleased that the strategy has been informed by input from diverse groups, organisations and individuals who have direct experience of dealing with drug abuse in Scotland and whose contribution has been allowed to influence the way forward. For too long, many of those people were not listened to. I thank the Scottish Government for having the political courage not just to invite their contributions but to be prepared to listen to what they had to say. Nowhere is the malign extent of drug abuse more obvious than in our prisons. My colleague Bill Aitken will speak about that issue, including the Pennsylvanian model, in greater detail, so I will say just that it is folly for us to think that we cannot learn from others. It is now universally accepted that there is an appalling problem of drug abuse in Scottish prisons, so I urge the Parliament to look elsewhere—in particular, to the experience of Pennsylvania—to see what others have done. I do not ask the Scottish Government to follow that model to the letter—some aspects may not be competent to the Parliament or competent in our law—but I ask it at least to look at the model, given the dramatic success that has been achieved in Pennsylvanian prisons, to see how much of that success we can translate to Scottish prisons.  I am both encouraged and reassured by the minister's response to the amendment in my name. In light of his comments and the undertaking that he has given, I shall not move the amendment. It is better that we should all go forward with a general sense of progress than that we should not go forward at all.

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-818)

The Scottish Government promised a lot during the past year and is faltering on a number of fronts, but I give credit where credit is due on one area: the Scottish Government's willingness to chart a new direction in the battle against drug abuse, which was evident in Fergus Ewing's statement to the Parliament this morning. I hope that much of the detail of that will be constructively debated next week. Drug abuse in prisons is a serious aspect of the problem. This year, we are heading towards record finds of drugs in our jails, despite a plethora of protocols, guidelines and initiatives, which are simply not working. According to my information, by the end of the year, drug finds in jails could be up 20 per cent on last year. Does the First Minister agree that the problem is so serious that it is time to stop talking tough and start getting tough?

In our Scottish jails, the facts speak for themselves. Drug finds in prisons are soaring and yet, unbelievably, no record is kept of either the substances or the quantities that are found. How do we know what is going on? People outside are astonished at how drugs are circulating so freely in prisons, of all places. Surely the time has come not just to get prisoners clean in our prisons but to clean up our prisons. Why are our jails becoming the 21 st century drug dens of Scotland? The Scottish Conservatives have published a raft of robust measures that are based on a zero tolerance approach to drugs in jails. Will the First Minister back them?

I, too, thank the minister for the advance copy of his statement. I also thank him for the constructive meetings in which he has engaged with my party in the past year. Today should—indeed, must—be the start of a new chapter in Scotland and the beginning of a new fight in the battle against drugs abuse. I congratulate the Scottish Government on coming to terms with the failures of recent years, which have been characterised by an attempt merely to manage the problem rather than attack it head on. Too many addicts have been parked on methadone, and not enough has been done to move them to recovery. The new national drugs strategy is years overdue, but it is very welcome. It marks a sea change in attitude and political will. When coupled with the essential—and it is essential—continuing audit of drugs services and spending, we will at last be able to chart the way forward to a new approach based on recovery and abstinence. Scotland has found the political will to fight back. For too long we have left those who have surrendered their lives to drugs devastated and in despair. Let today be the day when we offered, from the Parliament, new hope and real help.

Turning to the statement, when the minister spoke of early intervention, he seemed to imply the prospect of more children being taken into care even earlier. Is that what he intends? In dealing with drug dealers, will the Scottish Government examine the Proceeds of Crime (Scotland) Act 1995 with a view to putting the onus of proof on criminals to prove that their assets were acquired legally, and not requiring the Crown to prove the propriety of that ownership? Will the minister consider extending DTTOs to all Scottish courts and to our children's hearings system?

What a pity. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-795)

The First Minister certainly has a better chance of meeting him than the voters of Crewe and Nantwich do. Yesterday, a highly respected sheriff felt compelled to launch a blistering attack on Scottish Government policy allowing the early release of prisoners. He said: "I would be failing in my duty ... if I did not make it clear that, in my opinion, judicial disposals are largely meaningless and the system is being brought into disrepute." There we have it from the bench: confirmation that we live in the Scottish National Party's soft-touch Scotland. I know that and the public know that. Is the First Minister seriously going to suggest that that sheriff is wrong?

I do not think that the First Minister understood the question that I asked him. I was not talking about the broken system of community sentencing—although it is not working, and Henry McLeish is absolutely right to criticise it. I am talking about a frustrated and angry judiciary, whose custodial sentencing policy is being undermined by the SNP's soft touch on early release. If he does not listen to Sheriff Drummond, he should listen to victims and their families. Early release is being seen for the nonsense that it is, and it is rightly being attacked from all quarters. Is the First Minister seriously prepared to limp on with the SNP's soft-touch policy of releasing more and more convicts into the community, rather than keeping prisoners in prison? Why is the Scottish Government unrelenting in standing up for criminals, when it should be standing up for victims? Enough is enough.

I, too, associate myself with the remarks of the First Minister and Wendy Alexander in relation to the late Tommy Burns. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-764)

If he can find the secretary of state, perhaps the First Minister can ask him for his view on the referendum—if the First Minister has time to spare. This has been a week of policy U-turns and acrobatics. There has been a major clash of policy between a party leader at Westminster and his colleague at Holyrood—who is apparently responsible for tactics and policy—of whom the First Minister said: "I think her position is untenable, you can't reconcile what she's been saying over the last few days ... Either she has to go or he has to go, he's not going to go, therefore I suspect that her position has become untenable." On issues of such national importance, does the First Minister hold to that principled position?

The First Minister has never been a man to be shy of verbosity, and he cannot hide from his words. What is sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander—in this case the goose is the First Minister and the gander is the Minister for Schools and Skills, Maureen Watt, and her U-turns and acrobatics on physical education in schools. Four weeks ago the First Minister denied scrapping his policy and said that we should not believe everything that we read in the papers. On Tuesday evening on Radio Scotland, Maureen Watt said that the election guarantee of two hours of quality PE each week delivered by specialist PE teachers could include walking to school. That was subsequently contradicted by the Government and slapped down by the First Minister in the Parliament yesterday. Such confusion on as important an issue as the future health of our nation is utterly unacceptable. Will the First Minister implement his own advice? Is he going, or is his Minister for Schools and Skills going?

I, too, congratulate Rangers, which is the second Scottish football club to reach the UEFA cup final in the past five years. We wish Walter Smith and the entire Rangers squad all the best in Manchester tonight. I thank the First Minister for the advance copy of his statement; there are, of course, measures in it that I welcome. Labour's referendum mess of the past 10 days has meant that the primary purpose of the Parliament and the real role of the Opposition, which is to hold Government to account, have been completely hijacked by a debate, which although it is important, must not be allowed to obscure the reason why we are here.  This week, we have seen Labour make a series of spectacular U-turns, but sometimes U-turns can be positive, so I had hoped to hear some from the First Minister. Why is there no U-turn on the extension of home detention curfews? Why does the SNP's policy remain one of emptying our jails rather than keeping prisoners in them? Why is there no U-turn on the SNP's unremitting hostility to the private sector's valuable role in delivering our public services? Why is there no U-turn on the SNP's refusal to mutualise Scottish Water, which would free up £200 million of taxpayers money every year? Even worse, why is there no U-turn on the SNP's prejudice against housing stock transfer and the First Minister's refusal to collect more than £2 billion from Westminster to write off all Scotland's council housing debt? I look forward to answers to those questions, and to confirmation that a draft national drug strategy for Scotland will be published by the end of May, as promised.

The First Minister met regularly with the Rev Ian Paisley, who is now departing from office. He met regularly with Bertie Ahern, who has now departed from office. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-741)

George Robertson famously said that devolution would kill independence "stone dead". Well, Gordon Brown and Wendy Alexander are now doing their damnedest to warm up the corpse. Who would have thought that a Labour Prime Minister and a Scottish Labour leader would be the SNP's greatest allies in breaking up Britain? The future of Scotland in Britain may not matter to the Labour Party, but it matters to David Cameron and it matters to me and to those millions of people in Scotland who want devolution to work. The Labour Party may have abandoned them, but the Conservatives have not. Does the First Minister accept that, whatever his views about his political opponents, a referendum on something as important as the constitutional future of Scotland—a country that we all love—cannot be allowed to become a vote on the unpopularity of Gordon Brown and Wendy Alexander? That is an unacceptably dangerous road to take.

I am here to ask the questions, First Minister. Whatever turmoil has raged over the past four days, devolution is what we have and I am confident that it is what we shall continue to have. Does the First Minister agree that the politics of grudge, gripe and grievance between his Government and Gordon Brown's Government is unattractive, unimpressive and negative? Does he agree that with the exciting prospect of a general election—yes, bring it on—the time has come to construct a new relationship between Scotland's two Governments? The Conservatives are committed to that. Is he?

I, too, am sorry to learn of the First Minister's indisposition. Personally, I blame the opinion polls. There are sometimes aspects indigestible; of course, there are sometimes aspects more palatable, which are welcome. However, I hope that he makes a speedy recovery. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-719)

This morning, we were greeted by disturbing headlines about the alarming toll of underage youngsters with alcohol problems. We know that the underlying causes of such problems are complex and diverse and that many of the solutions will take a generation or more to succeed, but there are things that we can and must do now. In 2006, there were more than 17,000 liquor licences in Scotland and more than 1,300 licensing offences were recorded, but—this is a significant but—only 30 licences were suspended. Is the Deputy First Minister, like me, surprised by that?

The Deputy First Minister might not be aware that for many years my parents ran a licensed grocer's. Yes, I am a grocer's daughter. I can tell the chamber that my parents knew one thing—just one breach of the law and they could lose their licence. Ten days ago, the Scottish Conservatives revealed that one in seven premises sold alcohol to underage youngsters during test purchasing. Unbelievably, there were premises that failed that test a second time. Does the Deputy First Minister find it acceptable that those who flagrantly break the law and endanger our children should continue to hold a liquor licence?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-699) Not everyone seeks special access to the First Minister, Presiding Officer. I can assure you and him that that is a matter of personal taste.

The Grangemouth oil refinery is a pivotal part of Scotland's economy, and I am sure that everyone shares a deep disappointment at the fact that the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service talks have broken down. The issue has immense national implications for Scotland. Can the First Minister assure us that the emergency provisions that are in place are sufficient to allow Scotland to operate normally? If not, can he specify where the impact of the strike will hit, to what extent and at what cost?

I thank the First Minister for what I realise is a very considered response. While accepting that the dispute is not about the right to strike, more and more of the public are now questioning whether the strike is right, given its immense potential—I emphasise potential—for damage to our economy and disruption to essential transport, whatever the intentions of the respective parties. Will the First Minister therefore join me in sending a message from the Parliament that everyone involved in the dispute should calm down, sit down, get back round the table and, in the meantime, call the strike off?

I shall not ask the First Minister about obesity—no doubt to our respective mutual relief. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-671)

This weekend, the First Minister will be at Heriot-Watt University, for less of a spring conference than an SNP love fest. Spring used to be just for the birds; now it is birds, bees, nats and all other forms of winged life. I am sure that when he is there, the First Minister will meet some of the 200,000 higher education students who are currently domiciled in Scotland. How many of them currently pay council tax?

Let me make clear what the First Minister desperately wants to keep hidden. In government, the Conservatives ensured that students were exempt from council tax. Last year, the First Minister spoke of the financial barriers facing students, many of whom have to work their way through their studies and many of whom pay income tax. When the First Minister is at Heriot-Watt University, what excuse will he give students for landing them with a new financial barrier—the SNP's nationalist tax on learning? How is that fair?

I, too, thank the First Minister for a copy of his statement. I cannot help noticing that last year we had tartan week and this year we have had Scotland week. I presume that next year we will have Salmond week—we are agog with excitement. The First Minister has given a glowing account of his trip to the States. One is tempted to conclude that very few people on the eastern seaboard were spared a meeting with him. Does he have any independent evidence from the American end of the impact of the annual visit? Does he propose to make available details of American media coverage of the visit? More specifically, last week I learned an interesting fact about New York, which I did not have to travel 3,000 miles to find out. While the First Minister was away, a report published in Scotland by Reform Scotland informed us that there is now more violent crime per head of population in Glasgow than there is in New York. When he was in New York, what steps did he take to find out why New York is so much better at dealing with violent crime than we are? What feature of the criminal justice system there most impressed him?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-648)

Presiding Officer, "We do not cut crime by cutting the prison population; we cut the prison population by cutting crime." Those are the words of my colleague John Lamont in debate this morning and I cannot improve on them.

At decision time tonight we will be asked to cut the prison population by reversing two decisions of the Parliament: one that was taken by the Justice Committee; and one that was taken two weeks ago by the full Parliament. The will of the Parliament was that home detention  curfew licences were not appropriate for serious criminals. How can the First Minister justify flaunting what he once called "the basic tenets" of parliamentary democracy?

That is rank hypocrisy, First Minister. When the previous Scottish Executive reversed a decision of the Parliament on fishing, it was lambasted by Richard Lochhead, condemned by John Swinney, and derided—yes, derided—by Alex Salmond for doing so. The hypocrisy is for others to judge, however. I return to the core problem of too many prisoners and not enough prison places. In the words of the First Minister this morning, it is "a crisis". However, there is a safer option than allowing serious criminals out on to our streets earlier than is the case at present. What would happen if any part of the prison estate were to be rendered unusable through storm damage, flood or whatever? Surely the Government has emergency or contingency measures in place. What are those measures? Why does the Scottish Government not use them now to get us through this crisis? If not, perhaps the dangerous truth is that there is no plan B. perhaps no such emergency plans are in place.

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-616)

This week the Robert Foye review laid bare the gaping inadequacies of a system that, appallingly, resulted in the rape of a schoolgirl. Yesterday the Scottish Prison Service admitted that high-risk prisoners such as Mr Foye could still be considered for transfer to an open jail; unbelievably, it could all happen again. As if that were not bad enough, next week the Scottish Government proposes to allow even more dangerous criminals out of jail even earlier, on home detention curfew. That is just the latest move in the Scottish National Party's unrelenting drive to empty our jails. Why is the SNP so soft on crime and criminals?

The public wants prisoners in prison; the SNP Government wants convicts in the community. Who would have thought that when the SNP cried "Freedom!" it had in mind the prison population? The chilling facts are that home detention curfew will mean that more and more prisoners will get out earlier and earlier, and, disturbingly, the system that will run home detention curfew is precisely the same one that failed so appallingly in the Foye case. Instead of being soft on the prison population, will the Scottish Government be strong for victims, stand up for the public of Scotland and abandon the impending disaster of home detention curfew?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-589) I endorse the congratulations to Scotland's rugby players on winning the Calcutta cup. I tell them to be of good heart, as every time Scotland has won the grand slam it has been under a Conservative Government. There is not long to wait, boys.

That is a matter of private interest but not something that I would ever discuss with the First Minister. The Scottish National Party has, at long last, introduced its plans for a Scottish national income tax. Will the First Minister confirm how much Scottish national income tax someone will pay if their income derives wholly from share dividends and bank interest?

Even allowing for the fact that it is the First Minister, that is a very coy way of saying nothing. I think that we are detecting the early signs of retreat. What the First Minister cannot confirm is that his charter is to encourage the wealthy to switch income from earned to unearned while clobbering the hard-pressed wage and salary earners of Scotland who have no such room for manoeuvre. The First Minister must face the fact that his Scottish national income tax is unravelling by the day. He must reform the council tax and follow our lead by cutting—not just freezing—council tax for everyone. Under a Scottish national income tax, the dustman will pay but the duke will not; the bus drivers of Scotland will pay but the bus owners might not; the dividends of ministers will be Scot free, but the wages of Scottish workers will be hit hard. How can that be fair?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-568)

We know that the First Minister's much-vaunted pledge of a local income tax—he set a 100-day deadline, but it has become 300 days of dither—will now, perhaps, finally surface next week. On a point of basic principle, can the First Minister confirm that the proposal is still for a nationally set tax?

Whatever else a tax set nationally is called, it is not called a local income tax. Let us be clear: we are dealing with a Scottish national income tax and it will not happen because there is no majority in this Parliament for a Scottish national income tax. Not even the Lib Dems would provide it, unless the First Minister is praying that when Nick Clegg orders opposition to the proposal there is a collapse in the Scottish ranks and they rush to the aid of the First Minister. Let me offer the First Minister a way out and a way ahead. If he still insists that his sums add up and that he can find a way to fund the universally acknowledged black hole in his plans for a Scottish national income tax, why does he not do something that has one feature of compelling attraction to the First Minister—it is popular? Why does he not scrap the plans for his complicated and unwieldy new Scottish national income tax and consider using the money, which he insists that he can find, to cut council tax for everyone? Scotland has a choice and the First Minister has a  choice: an unwieldy 15 per cent hike in income tax or a simple, easily administered cut of 25 per cent in council tax for everyone. What is it to be?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-541)

In the past seven days, the First Minister's gloss has tarnished visibly. Last week, I gave him a chance to distance himself from his party's hostility to the private sector. Instead, he reaffirmed his undiminished affection, not only for himself but for state control. This week, we had the unwelcome and unsavoury comments by the First Minister's official  parliamentary liaison officer—the formerly anonymous but now notorious Christopher Harvie. Mr Harvie, who is forever consigned to history as Mr Knickerbocker Glory, unbelievably kicked Lockerbie, of all places—a town that we should support, not denigrate. Then we had Christine Grahame's disgraceful and repugnant comments about the George medal, which were a slur on the heroism and courage of all those who have been honoured with it. The truth is that the SNP is a rag bag of publicity-seeking individuals with only cheap popularity and a desire to break up the United Kingdom in common. The more intelligent members on its benches will know when to keep quiet. The truth is that good government is about taking hard decisions and facing up to real challenges, such as the perilous future that now confronts our universities. Will the First Minister put aside the populist gestures and the easy headlines, and take the hard but correct decision to back the independent review of further and higher education for which the Scottish Conservatives have been calling?

Unfortunately for the First Minister, the headlines that have prevailed are those borne out of cheap publicity stunts. Let me make it clear that if our amendment passes, we shall support the Graduate Endowment Abolition (Scotland) Bill at 5 o'clock tonight. However, the question remains: why should the future of our universities rest on an internal Government discussion, rather than on a robust, evidence-based, independent commission? Such an  independent commission is supported not just by Andrew Cubie but by Brian Lang, principal of the University of St Andrews, by student leaders and, just this morning, by the University and College Union Scotland, which represents the people who actually deliver the learning and research. If that is their view, why is the First Minister right and all of them are wrong?

I apologise to the Presiding Officer and the First Minister for arriving late in the chamber for the latter's statement, for which I thank him. I, too, am glad that the summit in Dublin was so constructive. In the discussions on drug abuse, was thought given to co-ordinating the work of the respective law enforcement agencies of the jurisdictions that are represented on the British-Irish Council? If it was, will the First Minister confirm that the Scottish  Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency will be a primary body in that co-ordination? In addition, is it proposed to devote part of the positive forum of the British-Irish Council, when it meets in Scotland in September, to a continued discussion on drug abuse, given that the new drugs strategy for Scotland will have been published by then?

I am delighted to hear Wendy Alexander acknowledge that the only Opposition party in the Parliament to use the budget to deliver for the people of Scotland was the Scottish Conservatives. [ Interruption. ]

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-00517)

Headlines this morning proclaimed that ministers are set for a U-turn on mutual status for Scottish Water. It is clear to me having listened to speeches this morning that, far from ministers being set for a U-turn, they are stuck in a U-bend—in Labour's case, a Unison bend. The truth is that neither party in that left-wing alliance is offering a review—[ Interruption. ]

Neither party wants a review. Both back nationalisation and reject mutualisation. There is a choice: between a perpetual burden of subsidy on the taxpayer and a progressive utility fit for purpose for this century returning money to its customers. Let us cut through the meaningless candy floss of the Labour amendment in this morning's debate and ask the First Minister a simple question: does he support for Scottish Water the nationalisation model of the previous century or a new, progressive, mutual model fit for the 21 st century? He cannot have both.

The First Minister has recently returned from Ireland. He has clearly had an encounter with the Blarney stone—we wonder who was kissing whom. The bottom line is that the First Minister presides over a Government that is thirled to state control in which ministers know best. It is a Government in which his Cabinet Secretary for Justice has a bilious prejudice against the private sector and in which his Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing disdains the private sector—and the First Minister has just confirmed by his attitude to Scottish Water his Government's love affair with state control. Is it not remarkable that the first love-in between Labour and the SNP has united them in glorious amity on nationalisation? What a time warp, and what a shame. Will the First Minister explain why every household in Scotland has to pay a massive subsidy of £100 every year for Scottish Water on top of its water bill when under mutualisation he could be giving money back?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-493)

There are some offers a girl can refuse. [ Laughter. ] In 2004, the then First Minister, Jack McConnell, made a statement to the Parliament about the abhorrent abuse that had taken place in residential care in Scotland over a period of decades. The current First Minister addressed the issue in June of last year, when he made particular reference to the report on Kerelaw. This morning, the Minister for Children and Early Years responded to that review, and the Scottish Government now proposes to set up a Scottish truth and reconciliation forum. Everyone views with revulsion the abuse of children. As I said in 2004, "when its perpetrators are those who have been entrusted with the care of children, and in whom those children have placed their fragile trust, it is a particularly vile and odious betrayal."— [ Official Report , 1 December 2004; c 12392.]  Anything that helps to shine a light through that period of blackness in Scotland's history is to be welcomed. However well intended the truth and reconciliation forum is, is the First Minister satisfied that the culture of silence that prevailed and which countenanced the continuance of this depraved and awful activity is being addressed effectively? Will the proposed initiative encourage and support people in coming forward and reporting abuse and fears of potential abuse?

Although we all agree that the first obligation is to support victims who have suffered the nightmare of abuse, equally we must be sure that in providing that support we do not inadvertently prejudice or jeopardise any criminal proceedings, because, for victims, justice is as important as truth and reconciliation. Can the First Minister assure the Parliament that he has sought and received advice from the Lord Advocate that that laudable forum will not compromise such criminal proceedings?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-470)

On such a dreich day, it may be uplifting to talk about a blaze—the blaze of quangos to which the First Minister referred yesterday. Admittedly, his blaze was a bit of an overstatement. In fact, it was variously described in the newspapers as a "barbecue" a "campfire" and a "vanity of the bonfires". The reality is that, in playing to his party gallery in Aviemore last year, the First Minister plucked from the air the arbitrary figure of 25 per cent. I presume that, since then, he has had his officials scurrying around, valiantly trying to meet his whim. The result? It is nothing more than renaming, rebadging, mergers and amalgamations—not real cuts. Despite, I am sure, the best briefing, the First Minister hid behind his fig leaf of an alleged 26 per cent cut in the number of quangos and refused to answer the real question, so I will ask it again. Let us take as read all his fulsome generalisations, evasions and spin of yesterday and cut to the chase. Will his blaze reduce the number of persons who are employed and the cost to the taxpayer by more than or less than 26 per cent?

I will happily compare the number of quangos and all the other appendages of state that we have now with what we had when the Conservatives were in government. I listened to the First Minister's response. My argument is about fairness and transparency for the taxpayer. The whole exercise will have very little significance unless we have some feel for, or indication of, whether the cuts will mean reducing staff numbers and costs to the taxpayer. At least some light has been shed on the situation: we now know that there will be no more than a 26 per cent reduction in either of the components to which I referred. So, let us try and shed more light on the situation. I will be generous to the First Minister by saying that if he cannot give me a specific answer, can he give me a ballpark figure? Is it some per cent or no per cent? Surely he can answer that one.

I do not think that Lord Foulkes has ever applauded me before, Presiding Officer—I rather like it. What we have here is a pack of cards being reshuffled and redealt, leaving us still with 52 cards. That is not how we should approach effective government. In principle, my party supports a reduction in the size of the state,  although I confess to a penchant for police and prisons. However, that reduction is not achieved by renaming, rebadging, mergers and amalgamations. The test of whether this statement is just craftily spun candy floss or a statement of substance that represents a real rolling back of the state is not whether there are 26 per cent fewer quangos, but whether there will be a 26 per cent cut in the cost to the taxpayer. The questions that every taxpayer wants answered are these: how many fewer people will be employed in the public sector and how much money will be saved to the public purse by today's announcement? The First Minister must surely be briefed on those aspects. Will the reduction in persons employed and the saving to the public purse be more or less than 26 per cent?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-447)

I, too, want to question the First Minister on the appalling case to which Ms Alexander and Mrs Craigie have already referred, and I want first to say that the horror, disgust and revulsion that all members feel is nothing compared with the pain, anguish and trauma of the young woman and her family. I have listened to the First Minister say that the all-embracing, longer-term Prison Commission is the appropriate way to deal with the situation. I could not disagree more. In October last year, my colleague Bill Aitken called for a review of Castle Huntly prison to ensure that it is fit for purpose and that prisoners sent there are fit to be there. The First Minister must accept that that review—not the more extensive one that is being contemplated—is now overdue and must be implemented immediately. What will he do?

I am more concerned by the people who are not in the prisons—wherever and however well refurbished they are—because they have fled from them. The immediate horror presented by the appalling case that has been mentioned is sadly just the latest incident in a spiralling pattern of prison escapes. We know three things. First, from a written answer received today, we know that everyone in our open prisons is serving 12 months or more—that is, they are higher-risk prisoners. Secondly, Scottish Prison Service figures reveal that nearly half of those who walked out of our open prisons had a violent background. Thirdly, we know that, in the past five years, the number of prisoners escaping from Castle Huntly alone has nearly trebled. That cannot go on. Will the First Minister tell me two things: how many escaped prisoners are still on the run, roaming the streets of Scotland; and does he accept that underpinning any review must be the unbreakable principle that those who pose a danger to society never deserve the benefit of the doubt?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-428)

It is always good to see the First Minister supporting devolution in any form, so we welcome that. I raise with the First Minister a subject dear to his heart: opinion polls, which are never dearer to him than when they are about him. In politics, we are all allowed our little bit of egocentric vanity. The opinion poll that I want to talk about was carried out by the Scottish National Party's favourite pollster, YouGov, and was reported this week in the Scottish Daily Express . I was tempted to refer to the poll finding of a record high support for devolution, but why talk about what the rest of us know already? What intrigued me more about the poll was the compelling majority support—70 per cent of those who were questioned—for keeping in Scotland a mix of energy sources, including nuclear power. Last week, John Swinney said: "Scotland does not want or need new nuclear power." Will the First Minister admit that his favourite pollster got it right and that his favourite minister got it wrong?

I am interested in that reply because, not for the first time, the First Minister ignores what Scotland wants. However, let us deal with his attempt to deal with what Scotland needs. It is not only the YouGov poll that gets it right. It is perfectly clear that, to provide a secure and affordable low-carbon base load energy supply in Scotland, we need a mix of energy provision in which renewables and nuclear power are complementary. That fact is supported by an impressive array of independent experts. The bottom line for Scotland is that for more than half our energy production we rely on finite and diminishing fossil-fuel sources. Yes—let us grow our renewables, but let us not risk the lights going out in Scotland because of the blockheaded parochial dogma of one man and his party. Does the First Minister really want that to be his legacy?

It is with pleasure that I open the debate for the Scottish Conservatives. The complete shambles that we saw at the May 2007 elections raises material questions about the management of elections in Scotland. All members will agree that it is unacceptable that more than 146,000 ballot papers were rejected in the Scottish Parliament election alone. That sorry mess cannot be repeated, because it demeans the political process and, much more important, it erodes public confidence in the political process. I make it clear at the outset that the Scottish Conservatives agree with the Gould report that the Scottish Parliament should have responsibility for the administration of the elections to the Scottish Parliament—I emphasise the word "administration". The Scottish Conservatives do not agree that the devolution of responsibility should extend to empowering the Scottish Parliament to hold referenda or change the electoral system for the Scottish Parliament. Those matters are outwith the scope of the Gould report and they are not for current consideration. Because of time constraints it would be impossible for me to go through even half the recommendations in the Gould report, but I will highlight the most important. The biggest folly that  led directly to the election fiasco was the Scottish Parliament and local government elections being held on the same day.

There was a cocktail of events. Mr Gould was looking at one issue in isolation. I am pointing out that I think that a conjunction of factors led to a very understandable confusion on the part of the voters. They included the new design of ballot paper for the Scottish Parliament vote and the fact that the votes used different systems. The chamber will recall that the Conservatives called in the Parliament for the elections to be decoupled. It was clear to us at the time that the conjunction of elections was a major cause of voter confusion. Members will also recall that our arguments were ignored by the Labour Party in this Parliament and at Westminster. I say to Mr Kerr that I hope that the Labour Party can lay its past resistance to rest.

I will just proceed with a point that I want to make. I say to Cathie Craigie, who intervened on Bruce Crawford on this point, that there is overwhelming support for the elections to be decoupled. I invite her to listen to a few of the views that have already been expressed. In oral evidence to the Local Government and Communities Committee, Mr Gould said: "Separating the two elections would minimise complexity, and many of the problems that arose this time would be avoided."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee , 21 November 2007; c 268.] The Electoral Commission said: "in the Scottish context, early consideration should be given to the timing of the next Scottish Parliamentary and Scottish local government elections, with a view to 'decombining' them." That is Electoral Commission speak for decoupling.

I am encouraged by that comment and I agree with it. The Scottish Conservatives further believe that such decoupling will increase local government accountability. If people vote for their local councillors according to their performance on the council, decoupling will strengthen local democracy as more people become aware of local elections and, hopefully, become engaged in local politics.

I seem to be doing two things here, Presiding Officer, and I hope that I can reassure Mrs Craigie. I am pointing out my party's clear view about the implications of the conjunction of elections on the same day for electoral understanding and clarity for voters. I am also correct in saying that, if Mrs Craigie looks at the text of today's amendments, she will see that her party's amendment, which my party supports, subject to a further amendment by my party, respects the roles of the bodies to which she has referred. It is appropriate that those bodies should have their say, and the general debate would benefit from it. In its deliberations, the Parliament must not lose sight of the importance of local government elections in Scotland. In his inquiry into the electoral fiasco, Mr Gould set out his belief that the local government message cannot get across when its elections compete with parliamentary elections. I said to Mrs Craigie that an impressive series of opinions is now being expressed on this subject, and those opinions indicate that decoupling is not only desirable but a priority. As my friend Mr McLetchie will highlight in his speech, we must focus on that matter, because there are some very important timing implications not just for serving councillors but for candidates of all parties who might seek to be elected to local government at the next election. I am comforted by Mr Crawford's intervention and urge the SNP Government to commit itself to decoupling. If my party is not satisfied with progress on the issue, we will certainly reintroduce our member's bill to achieve that aim. It should never be forgotten that the people of Scotland were let down unacceptably in this election fiasco. It is the responsibility of everyone in the chamber to ensure that such a fiasco is not  allowed to happen again. I reiterate that we broadly welcome Mr Gould's recommendations, with the caveat that any devolved responsibility should cover only the administration of existing elections. We call on the UK Government to work with the Scottish Government to take these matters forward. We will support the Labour amendment if the amendment in my name that amends it is agreed to. I move, as an amendment to amendment S3M-1110.3, amendment S3M-1110.3.1, to insert after "its own elections": "and the decoupling of future elections to this Parliament and Scotland's councils".

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-400)

This week, there have been two disturbing criminal cases in Scotland of sex offenders coming before our courts, and sheriffs feeling powerless to act to protect the public. In particular, in Perth sheriff court, a violent rapist who was imprisoned for a subsequent sexual offence involving a 13-year-old girl was released after only six months of an 18-month sentence on conditions that he broke within three days. The sheriff described the man as posing a "high risk of re-offending". Is the First Minister content that predatory sex offenders get early release, only to breach their release conditions? I am not. We cannot continue to betray victims and imperil public safety. Does he agree that it is time to scrap early release?

When it comes to protecting the public, the Scottish Conservative position is absolutely clear: we would end early release. We would certainly not extend home detention curfews as the SNP Government is hell-bent on doing. Mr Salmond may think it acceptable to have an ever-increasing number of convicts in the community, but I do not.  On the issue of sex offenders, when we met the Scottish Government seven months ago to discuss Scottish Conservative proposals for compulsory lie-detector tests and GPS satellite tracking, we met an encouraging response. Sadly, seven months later, instead of taking forward those sensible proposals, the Scottish Government seems to be more interested in emptying our jails. Why is it betraying victims and the public?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-354)

On Thursday 29 November, Aberdeenshire Council rejected the Trump application—a final decision in terms of the council's procedures. On Monday 3 December, the First Minister met the Trump team in Aberdeen. That same day, the Trump team made it clear to journalists that no appeal would be lodged and that there were only 30 days in which to save the development. On the following day, the Scottish Government called in the planning application—a decision that raised eyebrows in planning circles, because no appeal had been lodged. Why, contrary to point (iii) of paragraph 6.11 of the Scottish ministerial code, did the First Minister meet only the developer during that critical period of four days? Why, in so doing, did he take action that, according to the code, "might be seen as prejudicial to that process"?

I remind members that the only party that the First Minister met after the rejection of the application was the developer. I have noted the First Minister's emphasis on his attendance at the meeting as a constituency MSP. Presumably that is why the First Minister arrived at the constituency meeting in a Government car, accompanied by a Government special adviser. The First Minister has failed to comply with the ministerial code. He has made inappropriate use of Scottish Government facilities, and he did not display the visible neutrality that is required of any Government minister when they are dealing with a planning matter. Astonishingly, as the First Minister, he was not even-handed, he was cack-handed. Either that is ignorance or arrogance, and ignorance is not a condition with which I associate the First Minister. [ Laughter. ]

Was the meeting of 3 December ever denied and, if so, why? What individual issued the press statement that was eventually given to a local paper about that meeting, which the First Minister insists he attended as a constituency MSP? When, on 4 December, the Government's chief planner telephoned the chief executive of Aberdeenshire Council to advise that the application was being called in, was any other party present or participating in that telephone call? How the First Minister has conducted himself in this matter is of material importance to the process, and those specific questions need specific answers.

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet  the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-327)

Amidst all the recent turmoil, we must not forget what we are here to do, which is to hold the Government to account. I remind the First Minister of another pledge from his party's manifesto: "it is time that we dealt firmly and effectively with the crime and anti-social behaviour that disrupts the lives of ... our citizens." That was the rhetoric; what is the reality? Will the First Minister please explain how making early release even earlier and putting more criminals into the community is dealing "firmly and effectively" with crime? Surely the sentence should fit the crime, not the available prison space.

The last lot were bad enough, but this lot are beyond the pale. The First Minister is failing to uphold the most fundamental obligation of government—the protection of the public—and he is blatantly breaking another pledge from his already tattered manifesto. He mentions police; by Jove, he has a brass neck. Let us go back to that manifesto. On police numbers, the Scottish National Party's pledge has gone from 1,000 plus to 500 maybe. On early release, the SNP has stuck with the Lib-Lab pact's scheme for even earlier release and made it even earlier release plus. There are get-out-of-jail-free cards for all. The First Minister wants to empty our jails and the SNP believes in convicts in the community, not prisoners in prison. The SNP is soft on crime and softer on criminals. Is the sad and simple truth not that the First Minister, Alex Salmond, and his SNP minority Government are now the law breaker's best buddies and the criminal's new best friends? [ Interruption. ]

rose—

rose—

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. This point needs to be clarified. If I heard correctly, Ms Cunningham referred to her party as being the majority party—

I withdraw the point of order.

If a week is a long time in politics for some people, 10 years can take us to a different era. Ten years ago, the Conservative party had lost the general election and was opposed to devolution, but 10 years on it looks forward to winning a general election—not something that the SNP can anticipate. [ Interruption. ]

Ten years on, the Conservatives are positive participants in devolution. That is why we are well placed to be objective but constructive in contributing to a review of devolution. We are in a new era, and political debate must reflect that. That is why I open the debate for the Scottish Conservatives with great pleasure. Over eight years in the Parliament, I have spoken on important matters on many occasions, but today is different: this debate is the most important in which the Scottish Parliament has so far engaged, because it is the start of devolution phase 2, a process that will chart the direction of the Parliament and the future of Scotland in the 21 st century. The process is more important and bigger than any one political party, and the challenges that individual parties or politicians face at this time are secondary to the overstraddling political importance of taking it forward.

In eight years in this Parliament, I have always found Mr Neil's taste to be too racy for my comfort, and I would certainly not pledge my or this country's future to the direction in which he wants to travel. In this Parliament and in Scotland, there are two approaches to Scotland's constitutional status. The minority Administration, comprising the Scottish National Party as the Scottish Government, seeks independence; the majority presence in the Parliament, comprising the Labour Party, the Scottish Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats, supports our continuing partnership with the United Kingdom. The minority view—the SNP view and the nationalist conversation—is all about tearing up our constitution and ripping Britain apart. My desire—our desire and the majority desire—is to build on what we have and take it forward.  There we have it: the minority political presence that wants to weaken, waste and wreck is on the margins of public opinion, while the mainstream of Scottish public opinion—the majority view—is our view, which seeks to strengthen, support and secure.

It is clear to me that what the motion embraces and what the commission would be charged to do would all operate within the existing constitutional framework of the United Kingdom. That would not require a referendum. I do not support the Scottish National Party's objective of independence, but I support the present constitutional status of Scotland and I share the other two unionist parties' objectives of wanting to secure that position and explore any possibilities that will improve our devolved governance. I will make it clear how I, as a Scottish Conservative, regard Scotland in 2007. I am proud to be a Scot and I am proud to be British. The two are not mutually exclusive—indeed, they happily co-exist. During the Scottish Parliament elections, I argued that being part of the United Kingdom opens doors for Scotland, that it gives us influence in world affairs and that that influence, if wisely exercised, gives us authority in world affairs. At the same time, devolution has responded to our country's desire for a greater say over its domestic issues. As a Scottish Conservative, I am driven by an overarching goal of creating a strong and prosperous Scotland within a strong and prosperous United Kingdom. I am driven by what unites us in these isles, but the nationalists are driven by a desire to divide the nations of the United Kingdom. Rejecting independence is not anti-Scottish or unpatriotic; it is quite simply wanting the best for our country. I say clearly to Alex Salmond—wherever he is—that the Scottish National Party does not have the monopoly on Scottish patriotism. It is a proud and deep emotion, shared by millions of people outwith the Scottish National Party. Our saltire and the lion rampant are the symbols of our nation, not the badges of nationalism. The Scottish Government's nationalist conversation is not the one that matters; what matters—the real debate and the real challenge— is taking devolution forward. Independence is a minority aspiration, and the Scottish Conservatives represent the majority aspiration. Precisely because of that, we acknowledge that, after eight years of devolution, it is appropriate to examine where the process has got to and to support debate about where it goes. That was our manifesto commitment in May. The Liberal Democrats also considered such a review timely, and I commend the Labour Party for now recognising the merit in, and need for, such a review. This tripartite agreement is significant. Strengthening devolution while continuing to secure the position of Scotland within the United Kingdom is not just an honourable but a highly important commitment. It is bigger than any one political party, because it dwarfs party politics. We are talking about shaping the constitutional direction of travel of our nation for the future, not just because it is sensible and pragmatic to do that eight years on, but because it overwhelmingly reflects what Scotland wants to happen. Today's debate gives Scottish parliamentary breath to that overwhelming public aspiration. I thank Jack McConnell for his initial support of the process and I thank my counterparts, Wendy Alexander and Nicol Stephen, for the constructive discussions that have brought us to the stage of agreeing the need for an independently chaired commission to review devolution in Scotland. I also thank them for agreeing that the remit of the commission should be to review the provisions of the Scotland Act 1998 in the light of experience and to recommend any changes to the present constitutional arrangements that would enable the Scottish Parliament to serve the people of Scotland better, that would improve the financial accountability of the Scottish Parliament or that would continue to secure the position of Scotland within the United Kingdom. This debate and tonight's vote represent significant political progress for Scotland. It is not for us to prejudge the outcome of the commission or any of its recommendations. When the day comes, the Conservatives will give serious and careful consideration to those outcomes before judging what will best serve the interests of Scotland and what will continue to secure our position within the United Kingdom. I said earlier that this is the start of devolution phase 2. The next stage will involve our colleagues at Westminster. However, today is about a new watershed in Scottish politics as we embrace the political reality of 2007 and the desire of the overwhelming majority of people in Scotland to take devolution forward. Tonight, we will cast an historic vote; tomorrow, we will take forward a secure future for our country. I reject the SNP  amendment and support the motion in the name of Wendy Alexander.

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-305)

The First Minister will have read with concern the Audit Scotland report on overseas staff in the national health service, which was ordered after the Glasgow terrorist attack. It revealed that background criminal checks on overseas workers in the NHS in Scotland are not routinely carried out. Alarmingly, this is not just about the NHS or terrorism. It is a much wider issue: the suitability of every individual seeking to work with children or other vulnerable groups in Scotland. There is a robust system for UK applicants through Disclosure Scotland, but there is no such system for overseas applicants. Indeed, in a written answer on foreign workers, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice said: "It is the responsibility of the person concerned to provide information from her or his home country if that is sought by an employer."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 26 September 2007; S3W-4302.]  Does the First Minister really think that that is robust enough? Is that good enough?

I listened to what the First Minister said, but I am pointing out to him that the issue is wider than the health service. Let us consider the facts: we should not be relying on self-declarations that might not even be asked for; there is no robust or comprehensive system for bodies in Scotland to run criminal checks with other countries; Disclosure Scotland currently has no jurisdiction to obtain criminal records from other countries; and even within the European Union a possible solution is at least three years away. In short, the robust procedures that exist for any UK citizen applying to work with vulnerable groups in Scotland do not exist for applicants from outwith the UK. Surely the body responsible for vetting the criminal background of any UK applicant seeking to work with children or vulnerable groups in Scotland—Disclosure Scotland—should also be responsible for vetting the criminal background of all such applicants. Does the First Minister agree?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-285)

In today's Scotsman  and on the BBC, Dr Andrew Cubie has called for a root-and-branch review of our universities. He said that there should be  "a properly commissioned, evidence-based and widely drawn review, independent of government." He is right. That is what the Scottish Conservatives want. By stark contrast, all that Fiona Hyslop has offered is a "future thinking" exercise—not even a conversation. Although such an exercise might find a short-term answer to an immediate budget problem, it cannot deliver the long-term solutions that are needed. We need a fully independent review, which has the freedom and the courage to ask tough questions and find long-term solutions; we do not need an internal discussion in the pocket of Government. Will the First Minister say why he will not set up a properly commissioned, evidence-based, widely drawn review independent of Government? What is he scared of?

I am accustomed to broadsides from the First Minister, but that was a pretty dismissive description of Dr Andrew Cubie's proposal. The First Minister talks about his review in relation to the budget settlement. Clearly, what the First Minister cannot see is the absence of a long-term strategy for higher education in Scotland. There is no strategy—there is a void, a vacuum. His review—the one that he has just referred to—is not a properly commissioned, evidence-based and widely drawn review that is independent of Government, so let us not pretend that it is. I cannot blame Universities Scotland for grasping at any straw in the hope of resolving a short-term budget impasse but, once upon a time—and this does read like a fairy story—the Scottish National Party agreed that there should be an independent review. It said: "We will reconvene the Cubie Committee with a remit to review financial support for students at present, as well as the overall context of further and higher education funding. The committee will not be restricted in its remit". That was a commitment that the SNP gave in its 2003 manifesto—yet another broken promise.  Why was the SNP so strong, resolute and determined in 2003 and yet is so weak, feeble and afraid in 2007?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-267)

Before the election, the SNP set out its spending plans in its document, "A platform for success." Specifically, there was to be an extra £24 million for drugs rehabilitation. After the election, however, we find in the draft budget not an extra £24 million, but a virtual freeze. Significant resource has been allocated to dealing with alcohol abuse, but I had been encouraged to think that the First Minister was committed to political leadership on our drug abuse problem. To his credit, he has demonstrated willingness to progress the issue. However, it cannot progress without more resource. On that crucial issue that scars Scotland, why on earth has the First Minister caved in?

I am genuinely grateful for that clarification because, as a mere politician, I go with the text of the budget document, in which it is difficult to compare like with like. The Scottish Conservatives treat the budget document as the start of the process, not the finished product. My party will analyse the draft budget line by line and measure it issue by issue, but the starting point is not encouraging. I will not rehearse the many quotations about the broken  pledge on police numbers but, before the election, the First Minister, nailing his colours to the mast, made it plain that police numbers were a priority and that money was no object. Before the election, the Scottish National Party promised £78 million for 1,000 extra police but, after the election, that was the first budget to be cut and the first pledge to be broken. In other words, the pledge on police numbers was 1,000 plus, but now it is 500 perhaps. Does the First Minister agree that the draft budget is not the finished article? When the Conservatives introduce proposals to fund more new police officers, assuming that we get the support of other parties in the Parliament, will the First Minister give them serious consideration or is his mind now closed on the issue?

I, too, welcome the First Minister back from Sri Lanka and thank him for the role that he played there on behalf of Scotland. He said that Friday was a great day of celebration—it certainly was. I never thought that on the same day I would be required to embrace Nicola Sturgeon and Wendy Alexander. The First Minister was probably immensely relieved to be thousands of miles away. I echo the First Minister's congratulations to the bid team and all the other individuals at local and national level who, whether in a political capacity or otherwise, contributed to this triumph. It is also a tribute to Glasgow's greatest asset—its people—and it is certainly a feather in Scotland's cap. However, I think that the First Minister will agree that, amidst the jubilation, serious issues have to be addressed and challenges met. I listened with some concern to his response to Wendy Alexander on the M74 extension. If we are to have the games at all, the extension will have to be completed and open long before 2014, to ensure the movement of essential goods and services that will be necessary for the construction work. Can he confirm that the transport project will happen, and is there a timescale for it? Does the First Minister also agree that, as well as the physical legacy for Glasgow that will arise out of the games, there will be an important sporting legacy in terms of the thousands of young Scots who, I am sure, will be inspired to take up sport? What will be done actively to channel, nurture and support that enthusiasm throughout Scotland?

I, too, welcome the Deputy First Minister to her place and entirely endorse the comments that she and Wendy Alexander have made about the Commonwealth games bid. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-249)

I am very interested in the Deputy First Minister's concluding observation to Ms Alexander. I remind the Deputy First Minister that, in the chamber in December last year, she said: "The SNP are absolutely clear that we will freeze council tax".— [ Official Report , 14 December 2006; c 30436.]  Statements do not come any clearer or more absolute than that. The Scottish Conservatives proposed a 50 per cent council tax cut for all pensioners aged 65 and over in Scotland. That pledge was fully costed, guaranteed and deliverable by Government. Is the SNP pledge fully costed? How is it deliverable by Government? In other words, how is it guaranteed at all? How could Ms Sturgeon be absolutely clear a year ago that she would freeze council tax? How could she give that guarantee?

Here we go again. I have never doubted that the Deputy First Minister is a determined woman—heaven knows, we have  seen evidence of that in all directions—but I just wish that her energies were better directed at times. She may be determined, but that is not the same as a guarantee. The SNP was clear and strident in opposition but, given the keys of government, it has ducked and dived and bobbed and weaved and broken its pledges one after another. Whether on police numbers or class sizes, on student debt or council tax, it seemed that the SNP would do anything and say anything just to get its hands on power. Is the Deputy First Minister's manifesto commitment a Government-guaranteed pledge or is it—like so much else—just a vague aspiration, full of ifs, buts and maybes?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-231)

We will all find out in two weeks' time just how few extra police the First Minister's Government will give Scotland. We now know that it will not be the 1,000 extra officers that the First Minister promised in his manifesto. However short on numbers the budget announcement is, I believe that we can do more. I ask the First Minister whether he agrees that "Community wardens are nothing more than an attempt to provide policing on the cheap. They have no law enforcement powers and therefore can't provide communities with the protection against crime and anti-social behaviour that they need. 30 million pounds"— which is roughly the annual bill for community wardens— "would pay for a lot of extra police officers. It is time that the Scottish Executive started listening to the very people they say they want to help." Does he agree that community wardens are nothing more than "policing on the cheap"?

We read at the weekend that SNP ministers and their party are bemused and bewildered over the SNP's broken police pledge. For the benefit of the bemused and bewildered, hands up all those on the SNP benches who back the First Minister in breaking his police pledge. [ Interruption. ]

Just look at them showing the unconvincing mute loyalty of the divided, the riven and the split.

There is more. The First Minister is now at odds with his deputy. Those were Nicola Sturgeon's words that I used; it was she who said in 2004 that community wardens were "policing on the cheap" and that she wanted the money switched to provide more police. She agreed—sound woman—with the Scottish Conservatives then. Why does the First Minister not agree with her now?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-212)

Presiding Officer, "education, health and policing are top three priorities ... hugely important ... top of the public's concerns." Those were the First Minister's words at the Scottish Police Federation conference in April. I should know—I was there and, yes, I agreed. So how do the deeds of Alex Salmond compare with the words of Alex Salmond? Last week we saw a crisis in the care of the elderly, and then there was the continuing fiasco  about the broken police pledge, but what were the First Minister's top priorities? He was planning an emergency statement on his holidays in America. [ Interruption. ]

Not content with that, he was busy writing to dictators in Iran and Zimbabwe on issues that have nothing to do with his devolved Government. I remind the First Minister that his political duty to Scotland begins at home. Will the First Minister finally admit that the cast-iron promise on policing that he made in the SNP manifesto has been broken and that when he pledged 1,000 more officers and described them as new, that was simply not true? Will he admit that when he said at the Scottish Police Federation conference in Peebles that he will "allocate funds to policing if more funds are needed in addition to the thousand extra officers", he was just spinning a line? Will the First Minister come clean and admit that the SNP cannot be trusted and that he has betrayed the public and our police?

David Cameron was doing something important in America. He was preparing to do something that the First Minister will never have to do—to be Prime Minister of the United Kingdom. I have to say that the First Minister's response to my question was a distasteful display of wriggling, squirming and writhing. The First Minister does not fool me and he does not fool the police, but I will offer him one last chance of redemption. He promised 1,000 extra police. Scotland currently has 16,261 officers. When will we have 17,261? Is the truth that, under the SNP, the answer is never? Let the First Minister come clean, tell the truth, own up, and apologise.

I, too, thank the First Minister for an advance copy of his statement. I do agree with him that we must rebuild confidence in our electoral system. The root cause of all the problems on 3 May was the holding of two elections on the same day. Surprisingly, and regrettably, the First Minister relegated that most important aspect to a footnote in his remarks. It is perfectly clear that a different voting system, electronic counting and a combined ballot paper were always, individually, going to be challenges, but chaos was frankly inevitable when they were all put together through having two elections on the same day. That, not the manufacturing of some illusory spat with Westminster, is the kernel of the problem. Does the First Minister agree that, if Labour and the Liberal Democrats had backed the Scottish Conservative bill in the Parliament in 2005 that  would have decoupled the elections, the mayhem would have been avoided? What mechanism does the First Minister propose for a decoupling bill and what is the timescale? We certainly owe it to serving councillors and our councils to enable them to plan for the consequences of decoupling.

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-192)

Scotland currently has 16,261 police officers on the payroll. When will we have 17,261 police officers on the payroll?

When it comes to verbal smoke and mirrors, Alex Salmond and Gordon Brown are two peas out of the same pod—one promises to send home troops who are already back home and the other pledges more police officers by recycling those who are already recruited. The Scottish National Party manifesto of May 2007 said: "we will set out plans in our first Budget for Scotland for 1,000 more police ... We want to see these new police officers becoming part of the fabric of communities". During the election campaign, Alex Salmond said to the annual conference of the Scottish Police Federation: "It's top of the public's concerns and should be top of the budget priorities". I ask the First Minister again: no ifs, no buts, no maybes, when will the Scottish Government produce 17,261 serving police officers on the payroll?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-169)

Recently, figures were published that show the worryingly high numbers of criminals who breach their tagging orders. In response, the First Minister's Government said that "the level of failure to comply does not suggest electronic monitoring does not work. Rather it demonstrates that all failures to comply with the order are reported". Let me try to understand the Government's logic. Does it mean, for example, that if there were a breakout from one of our prisons, all that would  matter to the Government is that there was someone there with a clicker to keep the tally? "Don't panic!" says the First Minister. "We've counted them." Is that laid-back indifference now the hallmark of his Administration?

As Wendy Alexander said, very gloomy statistics earlier this week revealed that more than 2,500 children are on the child protection register in Scotland. That is a 13 per cent increase on last year. More than six children are referred every hour of every working day. That is chilling. So, how did the Government respond? A year ago in Opposition, the SNP showed justifiable concern over the issue, but now that the party is in Government we get complacency. I quote the Minister for Children and Early Years, who said that "more people understand this and are taking action to report their concerns". Once again, the attitude of the SNP Government is, "Never mind those vulnerable children and never mind the underlying problems—just so long as we've counted them." I listened with interest to what the First Minister said in response to Wendy Alexander; I heard a lot of good intentions but no specific policy. I therefore ask the First Minister again: is this laid-back indifference now the hallmark of his Administration?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

The First Minister has already graciously dealt with the issue that I had intended to raise. However, I would like to confirm the happy status in life of Mr Bill Hughes. He is alive and kicking and is a fine embodiment of Conservatism in Scotland.

I, too, welcome Wendy Alexander to her place for First Minister's questions. The First Minister will be fearful of a petticoat strangle every Thursday. I am sure that we will do our best to oblige. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-150)

The First Minister is enthusiastic about introducing a local income tax. Indeed, he has said that it would be a "fair" local income tax "based on ability to pay."— [ Official Report , 5 September 2007; c 1366.]  I want to ask him about that fairness and that ability to pay. Am I right that, under the SNP proposals, a hard-working nurse would pay the tax, but that, for example, a comfortably off man with a nice little portfolio of shares who received a dividend income of, say, £20,000 a year—

He would not pay a penny of the SNP's income tax on that dividend income. Is that fair?

Is the First Minister aware that within this Parliament—indeed, within his party and even his Government—there is a self-proclaimed expert on tax avoidance? During a debate on Tommy Sheridan's plans for local taxation, no less a person than Mr Stewart Stevenson said: "Here is how I would avoid the tax in total and pay not a penny."— [ Official Report , 1 February 2006; c 22919.]  Indeed, Mr Stevenson's speech in that debate was a master-class on tax avoidance. It is compelling reading for accountants. The truth is that wealthy individuals such as Mr Stevenson, who have substantial dividend income, will, as he said, "pay not a penny" of the SNP's income tax on any of that dividend income. The First Minister says that that is fair; I think it stinks. There is hypocrisy at the heart of Government. Does the First Minister still adhere to his proposals?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Secretary of State for Scotland. (S3F-127)

The First Minister will be aware of the Scottish Conservatives' commitment to abolish double jeopardy, so that persons who have been acquitted of serious criminal charges can be tried again if new and compelling evidence comes to light. That will mean that in Scotland victims of serious crime and their families will have access to the same level of justice as is currently available in England and Wales. I will remind the First Minister of what the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, Mr MacAskill, said during a Scottish Conservative debate on the issue in February—a debate in which, interestingly, Labour voted against the principle of abolishing double jeopardy. A conversion to the Conservative cause, however late, is always welcome. I remind the First Minister of what Mr MacAskill said: "The questions about how we should address the issue ... are for the Administration that is in place after 3 May. However, we accept that the matter must be addressed and we will do so."— [ Official Report , 22 February 2007; c 32379-80.]  Will the First Minister honour that commitment?

I accept the premise that such matters must not be entered into lightly, but this is  almost a stand-alone issue. I am sure that the First Minister must be as frustrated as I am that, four years after the law was strengthened in England and Wales, victims and their families in Scotland still do not have the same opportunity for justice, because of the neglect of Labour and the Liberal Democrats. To ensure that the necessary change is made as swiftly as possible—the programme for government is silent on the matter—will the First Minister consider either an early amendment to existing legislation or a new short bill that would be restricted to the issue?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-114)

That is the least of the First Minister's worries. The Scottish Conservatives are committed to building the prison capacity that Scotland needs to contain those whom the courts decide should be in jail. In contrast, the First Minister's proposals to give burglars, muggers and others the softer option of community sentences shows that he is clearly more interested in emptying our jails than in protecting the public. When it comes to tackling crime, the public wants prisoners to be in prison; it does not want convicts in the community. Does the First Minister have the political will to build another prison if protection of the public demands it?

The Cabinet Secretary for Justice recently cast a slur on the prison staff at HMP Kilmarnock—a prison that is recognised for dealing with offending behaviour and combating addiction—by suggesting that officers are vulnerable to bribery and corruption. Given the First Minister's comments yesterday about that prison, it is disturbing to think that he backs Mr MacAskill. The truth is that the First Minister and his party are openly dogged and dogmatic in their prejudice against the private sector, whether it be  in prisons, the health service, or any of our other public services. Will the First Minister reconsider his attitude to the private sector and apologise for his cabinet secretary's unfortunate comments?

I very much welcome this opportunity to debate the issue of tackling drugs misuse and congratulate the cabinet secretary on bringing the topic to the chamber at such an early stage in the new session. Mr Ewing said that drugs misuse is "the most pernicious social challenge of our time", and I endorse every word of that. I also feel comforted. Scotland has entered a new political age, and there can be no dispute about the new political mix and attitude in the Parliament. I genuinely detect a change in political will with regard to drug abuse. At this point, I put on record my respect for and acknowledgement of the First Minister's role in that change of direction. The launch of the directory to which Mr Ewing referred is indicative of such progress, and I am encouraged by the willingness to consider the possibility of extending the ability to issue DTTOs to district courts, which is something that my party advocated in its manifesto. I accept, however, that that will have resource implications. It is vital that we put past failures behind us. We have spent far too much time ignoring direct evidence not only from the wide range of people who work with addiction but from addicts themselves, and we have been far too reluctant to challenge methods of and approaches to dealing with drug abuse that were conceived 15 or 20 years ago. Things must change—and quickly. However, I am confident that if members of the Parliament work together in the way that Mr Ewing has called for we can achieve real and lasting change. We need to move into a new era in which none of us is scared to face up to the real challenge of eradicating drugs from our society. None of us is scared to face up to the reality of what is going on. As other speakers have pointed out, the situation in Scotland is singularly depressing. Indeed, Margaret Smith referred to the fact that the number of drug-related deaths has recently soared to 421. However, as depressing as the picture is, I pay tribute to the outstanding professionalism and commitment shown by individuals throughout Scotland who fight drug abuse every day. We  should be very proud of their efforts at grass-roots level, and we must ensure that approaches and practices that demonstrably work are encouraged by recognition, support and resource. As I have indicated, the Conservatives support the expansion of the use of DTTOs in our courts. After all, it is believed that 70 per cent of court cases have a drug-related aspect. That said, we must get things into a logical, sensible order. Although increasing and expanding referral and intervention facilities is an attractive option, unless we can get the basic rehabilitation sector ready to deal with individuals we will simply be putting the cart before the horse. An important part of what we are trying to do involves our prisons, where I believe we need a comprehensive system of drug treatment and testing. After all, if we do not know the extent of the problem, how on earth can we address it? If we can find the political will to tackle the problem in our prisons, the benefits to society will be great.

I am not able to agree totally with Dr Simpson, although his attitude probably explains why we now have such an unprecedented drug addiction problem in our prisons that even our prison officers are at their wits' end to know what to do. At the moment, there is no information base on which to assess the best way of dealing with drug-addicted prisoners. That said, I accept the latter part of Dr Simpson's proposition. It is, of course, not just a question of finding out who is addicted; the prison must have the support facilities to begin to deal with the problem. If we can start to tackle what is by any assessment an appalling problem in our prisons, we cannot lose. We will have lower levels of reoffending, less crime and a safer prison environment, which will be good for addicts, families and society as a whole. Moreover, we urgently need a proactive rehabilitation programme—not just within our prisons, I should add—that allows agencies to work with addicts in prison to prepare them for release into the community.  I will not rehearse the statistics that other speakers have quoted, but they say it all about the scale of the problem that we face. We should all acknowledge that they are not simply sterile facts on bits of paper; they are depressing, disturbing and horrifying, and should stop us in our tracks. We need a clearer strategy that rehabilitates those who have been caught up in a life of drugs and helps them on the way to abstinence while adopting a zero-tolerance attitude to drugs and, especially, to drug dealers. As politicians, we must ensure that such a strategy is in place and that we manage to provide a coherent and robust rehabilitation programme. On harm reduction, I have in the past said publicly that methadone has a role to play, but only as one of a range of options. The Conservatives want an end to the overreliance on methadone as a dominant response to addiction. I endorse and applaud the minister's approach. We can make progress with this matter, but only if we refrain from managing the problem. We must now be prepared to tackle it, and I pledge my party's unstinting support in charting that new direction. We will do everything that we can to help mend our broken society and, in that regard, I support Mr MacAskill's motion.

The programme seems to be less of a Queen's speech and more the musings of a man who would be king. Mercifully, the programme seems shorter than the speech. Let me not be grudging, however, because the Administration's first 100 days or so have been full of promise, progress, pizzazz and excitement. Tolls are to be abolished on our two main bridges and cuts in business rates are coming. There is a new focus and new political will to tackle the scourge of drug abuse and fresh thinking on how to protect the public from predatory sex offenders. There is an intention to decouple local elections and Scottish Parliament elections and to have a register of tartans. There is a pledge for rural schools and more. We should give credit where it is due—but that is enough about the Scottish Conservatives. I turn to the programme for government. Being legislation light is not a fault in my book. However, I want to question the First Minister on the details of the programme that he has just announced, as many of the real tests have yet to be addressed. This session is not just about new laws and acts—it is also about ministerial orders, public service priorities and budgetary matters. The real issue is not so much what is present in the programme, but what is missing from it. When will the First Minister's Government match the Scottish Conservatives' commitment to launch a £1 billion assault on crime and drugs? Why has there been such timidity when it comes to protecting the public? Why the silence on dentistry? Barnardo's has confirmed that there is a crisis in Scotland—what is the First Minister doing about it? Where is the immediate cut in council taxes for Scotland's pensioners? If the First Minister will not commit to the Conservative pledge of 1,500 extra police  officers in our communities, when—that is all that the public are interested in—will his 1,000 additional officers reach our streets? The programme is not so much the sleek racehorse of Scottish government—it is more a three-legged nag with a limp. The great pundit of the political racecourse promised us milk and honey, but the programme that has been announced is not milk and honey. I would settle for bread and butter, but it is not even that. The honeymoon is clearly over.

As I have previously indicated, the Scottish Conservatives are not hostile to the principle of a council of economic advisers. However, it is now clear from the details that have been given that the council usurps—there is no other word for it—the function of providing macroeconomic advice to Government that is currently discharged by Scottish Enterprise. We cannot continue with the replication, duplication and confusion that would be brought about by the creation of yet another group of economic cognoscenti. The place is positively hoatching with them—it is not a "decluttered landscape", to use the Scottish National Party's jargon. What does the First Minister now propose to do about the urgent need for reform and rationalisation of Scottish Enterprise? When will that reform commence?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the new Prime Minister. (S3F-98)

I think we all agree that the First Minister's relationship with the new Prime Minister could not be any worse than his relationship with the previous one, but the omens are not encouraging. Mr Brown has in the past described Mr Salmond as someone who had "lost the power of communication, but not the power of speech." That prompted Mr Salmond to respond by saying: "He's out to get the big job but has forgotten the people back home." In the interests of ensuring that there is no question of Mr Brown, now that he has got the "big job", forgetting "the people back home", and in the interests of proving that the First Minister has not "lost the power of communication", what will the First Minister do to create a more interactive engagement between his Administration in this Parliament and the Prime Minister's Government at Westminster?

After he congratulated the new Prime Minister, the First Minister said yesterday: "I'm very confident that both us can put aside our long-term ambitions for the country in constitutional terms and direct our sights to what we need here and now for Scotland and that's to work in the best interests of the Scottish people." Will the First Minister therefore pledge today that he will put aside his personal preference for constitutional change and prioritise our domestic bread-and-butter issues? Those issues are: more police officers on our streets; a new agenda for drugs abuse in Scotland; an urgent expansion of affordable housing; restoring governance and discipline in our schools; and providing help with the council tax for our older citizens. On all those issues, people are crying out for political leadership here and now in Scotland. Will he make that pledge, and will he put delivery before divorce?

rose  —

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-75)

I have been considering the First Minister's honeymoon period and will give praise where praise is due. Mr Salmond is mastering the arts of his office—oratory, eloquence, intellectual stimulus—but there is one first ministerial trait at which he excels: the U-turn. Student grants and loans were going, but now they will not go. School assault statistics were going to be released, but now they will not be. Class sizes were going to be cut immediately, but now they will not be. Tuition fees for Northern Irish  students in Scotland were going to be scrapped, but now they will not be. There have been other U-turns. Will the First Minister clarify whether another U-turn is looming? Is he now abandoning a local income tax? Does he support a land value tax?

In this Parliament, what the First Minister wants and what he gets might be two very different matters. All the indications are that he will find it extremely difficult to win support in the Parliament for a local income tax. I ask him again whether, given that the council tax—whatever he thinks of it—is currently the burden that bears most oppressively on our older citizens, he will support some kind of council tax discount system for our pensioners.

I, too, read with shock, anger and deep concern the press coverage of the report into the alleged abuse at Kerelaw residential school in Ayrshire. People will be filled with horror that Kerelaw, instead of being an environment for the provision of care, seems to have become an environment breeding a culture of abuse. The First Minister might have partially answered my question in his reply to Mrs Oldfather, but does he agree that the first priority is to take immediate steps to trace those individuals referred to in the  report who apparently could still be working with young people and to ensure that they are suspended from working with young people or other vulnerable individuals pending the conclusion of any investigations or court proceedings?

Edmund Burke said: "All that is necessary for the triumph of evil is that good men do nothing." Does the First Minister agree that it is deeply troubling that it would appear that, according to the report, there were people at Kerelaw who had "knowledge and information about abuse and potential abuse and were unwilling or unable to address this abuse"? Is the First Minister satisfied that procedures now exist in Scotland to ensure that people will be able to come forward safely and in confidence to report any such fears in the future? Will he investigate the reasons why those individuals felt that they could not speak out?

I thank the First Minister for prior sight of the statement and for very properly bringing the matter to the chamber. The circumstances surrounding the statement are deeply troubling. Tony Blair has, quite simply, ridden roughshod over devolution, and he has treated with contempt Scotland's distinct and independent legal system. As a unionist—and there is none more trenchant and determined than I am—I have to say that that is unacceptable arrogance towards the Scottish Government and the Scottish law officers. First of all, the agreement signed by the Prime Minister and the Libyans must be made public, and I will certainly press my colleagues in the House of Commons to pursue the matter immediately. However, the following questions must be clarified either by the First Minister or—as matters might be outwith his knowledge—through him by the Prime Minister. Why was the First Minister not consulted before the agreement was signed? Was the Chancellor of the Exchequer, as Prime Minister-in-waiting, consulted before it was signed? Why were Scotland's law officers not consulted before it was signed? Does the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom have the legal and constitutional authority to release a person serving a life sentence in a Scottish jail? Who is ultimately responsible for and has jurisdiction over the release of such a prisoner? I am deeply alarmed by the Prime Minister's actions, which, on a practical, political and legal basis, amount to frankly shoddy and shabby conduct by the incumbent of that office.

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S3F-28)

I hope that those vital issues will include sentencing. The Scottish Executive plans to replace jail sentences of less than six months with community sentences. Is the First Minister really telling us that people who pose a risk to the public, such as muggers, housebreakers and violent individuals who assault and terrify their partners, will not get the punishment that would give their victims justice?

As to who should be in our prisons, I prefer to leave that to our judges, not to the opinion of the First Minister. The First Minister cannot ignore the legitimate concerns of victims and their entitlement to justice. They want prisoners in prison, not convicts in the community. The First Minister will be aware that the Scottish Conservatives have consistently appealed for the end of early release. The Custodial Sentences and Weapons (Scotland) Act 2007 replaces the old system of early release with a new system of early release, whereby short-term and long-term prisoners may be released from prison halfway through their sentences. If the First Minister takes steps to end that absurd system for good, the Scottish Conservatives will back him. Will he do that?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister and what issues they will discuss. (S3F-2)

I understand that it takes two to tango and that the First Minister's Downing Street dance partner is nothing if not coquettish. However, most people are astonished that, although Her Majesty the Queen can travel to Edinburgh to meet Mr Salmond, Mr Blair is not big enough to even acknowledge the democratically elected First Minister of Scotland. One thistle that needs to be grasped is the question of local government finance. I am aware that the First Minister wants to inflict a national tax increase on Scottish earners that, apart from being a burden on families and a nightmare for employers, will drive a coach and horses through the idea of local autonomy and local democracy. Furthermore, let us not forget that a £1 billion shortfall will hit our councils every year. Can he tell me when, even approximately—in the unlikely event that the First Minister gets that proposal through Parliament—the new system will hit Scotland?

I thought that the new politics would mean that the new First Minister would, unlike his predecessor, actually answer the questions that he was asked, but already there has been a bit of a disappointing wobble.  I asked him when his new system would hit us. Let us face it: it is obviously four or five years away, at best. In the meantime, many of our older citizens are being clobbered each month by the current levels of council tax. Does the First Minister agree that the Conservative party's proposal to cut in half the council tax bills for households whose occupants are aged 65 and over will bring immediate and welcome relief to those pensioners? Is he prepared, like his colleague, Alex Neil, to look favourably on that proposal?

I, too, thank the First Minister for his statement and for the advance copy. The next four years are about delivery not divorce. When Mr Salmond says in the first line of his statement that "it is time to get down to business", I agree. I would like to ask him about the "smaller government" to which he affirmed his commitment last week. What is the reduction in the number of spin doctors, special advisers, civil servants and quangos? Moving to business, the First Minister announced the proposed appointment of a council of economic advisers, but that begs the question about the role, remit and future of Scottish Enterprise. Is he prepared to adopt the root-and-branch reform that is proposed by the Scottish Conservatives? The First Minister said that he intends to get Scotland's economy moving by working to remove or reduce the burden of business rates on our small businesses. The only question for business is when—will he confirm that that will be achieved by next April? I thank the First Minister for his recognition of the role that has been played by the Scottish Conservatives in the debate on drug abuse. As he knows, I have argued that Scotland needs the biggest assault on drugs and crime that the country has ever seen and I advocated a £1 billion investment in the lifetime of this Parliament, including an extra £100 million per year for drug rehabilitation. Will the First Minister match that commitment? Turning to council tax, we know that the First Minister wants to introduce a local income tax, to which he referred earlier. Today is not the time to rerun the arguments against it, but even if he can  get agreement to introduce a local income tax, its implementation is years away. Will he agree today to introduce immediately a pensioners' discount to cut in half the council tax bill for every householder aged 65 and over? Finally, with reference to the constitution, which the First Minister mentioned at the end of his statement, has he given up on a referendum? Does he agree that there is no need for a white paper?

At this time it would be churlish for me not to pay tribute to the previous First Minister, Mr McConnell. I may have had my political differences with him, but I never doubted that he had the best interests of Scotland at heart. He fought his corner with passion and discharged his role with dignity. I extend to him the best wishes of the Scottish Conservatives for the future. This is a proud day for Alex Salmond. Politically, it is a day of great significance; a huge responsibility rests on his shoulders and those of his colleagues. On behalf of the Scottish Conservatives, I congratulate him and wish him well. I am aware that Mr Salmond's wife and sister are in the gallery. I say to them, "If you are not around to keep this man in check, there is another woman who will do so."

This is a new and young Parliament, but today represents a watershed in its development. For the past eight years, the political regime has been characterised by a condition that some may argue was consensus, but which, to others, was cosiness. It was an incumbency where the ruling politicians felt in control, unchallenged in their political administration. Consensus had become complacency. The recent election shattered that mould. Some would say that a fresh wind has blown through the Parliament; some would say that pragmatism has entered the Parliament, as well as realism. I may stand here as a candidate for First Minister, but Scottish Conservatives are realistic: I do not expect to become First Minister—yet. The  assumption is that Alex Salmond, as the leader of the largest party in the Parliament, will be selected as First Minister to lead a minority Government. I think that the prospect of a minority Government is exciting. Almost a year ago, I broke another consensus—the consensus that coalition was the only way to form a Government in this Parliament. I pointed out that a single-party minority Administration was also an option. I said then—and I hold to this view now—that that could provide greater transparency and sharper political focus, and that there would be less political distortion and greater candour with voters. However, such an Administration brings with it great challenges, not just for the incumbents, but for the whole Parliament. A fresh wind can quickly become a chill one. Pragmatism can easily be replaced by paralysis. I am quite clear about what Scotland is looking for at this time from her Parliament. She wants the political parties in this place to act on principle, and she wants posturing and petty playground antics to be left at the door. I understand that, and we in the Scottish Conservatives will respect it. We shall support a Parliament that decides issues on their individual merits, week by week; a Parliament that pursues the real goal of constructive agreement, not the charade of a contrived consensus; and a Parliament that strives for the highest political common denominator, not the lowest. Scotland today needs a Government that recognises that delivery—not divorce—is the only way forward. It needs a Government that measures its success not by how much it can spend, but by how much it can achieve. We need smaller government, more focused government, far less legislation, fewer rules and regulations and a dramatic cut in state interference. This Parliament and this minority Government must understand and respond to people's priorities. The Scottish Conservatives, as a principled and robust Opposition with a clear sense of what those priorities are, will argue relentlessly and tirelessly for more police on our streets; more drugs rehabilitation; more measures to cut crime; more affordable homes; more regeneration for our town centres; more real effort to cut costs for our small businesses; more determination to stand up for Scotland's families in child care, health care and wealth care; and more help for our older pensioners by cutting their council tax bills in half now. I know that those are the real challenges and that they are the people's priorities. Those are what we shall fight for. If our new minority Government does the same, we will back it; if not, we shall oppose it and be vehement in that opposition.  Members should be under no illusion: there is no mandate for constitutional turmoil. Scotland did not vote for it and Scotland does not want it. If the minority Administration does not recognise that, it will have the Scottish Conservatives to reckon with. I recognise and respect the principle of minority government and I recognise and respect Scotland's demand for change. However, every MSP in this Parliament must respect the voters, who have had enough of posturing, politicking and process and who, instead, want policy, purpose and progress. I do not think that that is too much to ask. The Scottish Conservatives will do everything that we can to meet that challenge. The next four years are about delivery, not divorce.

Presiding Officer, since coming to the Parliament you have been styled in several ways, the most attractive of which has been as Hercules, but by far the most impressive is as Presiding Officer. We know that you will bring to the job integrity, principles, wisdom, commitment and, in accordance with your Herculean attributes, fortitude. We have been lucky to have two exceptional Presiding Officers in the Parliament. I am in no doubt whatever that you will continue that distinguished succession. We wish you every good fortune in your new role. We know that our Parliament is in sure and steady hands. To you go our congratulations and our very best wishes.

I, too, pay tribute to MSPs who will leave the Parliament today and I share in the sentiments already expressed. From our benches, we will lose Lord James Douglas-Hamilton and Phil Gallie. Lord James was the exemplar of courtly and articulate conduct in this chamber. I am not saying that Phil Gallie was not such an exemplar, but perhaps Phil will be best remembered for his robust contributions—I doubt whether the  Parliament's sound system will ever be similarly challenged again. I thank them and all the others who are leaving for their contributions to the Parliament in the past eight years. On behalf of the Scottish Conservatives, it is my pleasure to join in this tribute to our Presiding Officer, George Reid. George, I realise that your previous life required you to bind, heal and bring succour. That was no doubt an invaluable experience for anyone aspiring to be a Presiding Officer of this Parliament. We all realise that when you took on the job, there were probably more shoals of rock than there were channels of clear water. However, you navigated them with an assurance and quiet competence that won universal respect. There is no doubt that proceedings in the chamber have benefited from your authoritative and fair stewardship. A whole devolved institution has been enhanced by a canny ambassador and sage diplomat, and Scotland has been the wider beneficiary of such attributes. Presiding Officer, we thank you for all that service and commitment, but also for being at all times and above all else a very decent gentleman. You gave us wise counsel when you said of this building, "Now we've moved in, it is time to move on." As you move on, we wish you and your family good health and happiness. [ Applause. ]

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Scottish Executive's Cabinet. (S2F-2802)

With only five weeks to go before the election, I hope that the First Minister will focus on articulating the positive case for remaining within the United Kingdom. Does the First Minister realise that it is possible to value and applaud the union without belittling Scotland? By using the language of the apocalypse, he is simply playing into the hands of the nationalists. Will the First Minister start to make the positive case and paint a picture of a confident Scottish nation that, as part of the United Kingdom, shapes the world and gives our people the best of both worlds?

The First Minister has a very small window of opportunity. He must realise that any increase in poll ratings for the nationalists is not about Nicola Sturgeon or Alex Salmond—and it is certainly not about independence, for which there remains little appetite—but about the First Minister and his Lib Dem cronies. The people of Scotland are so fed up with their failure that they are desperate to make devolution work better.  Does the First Minister accept that if he had not squandered the first eight years of devolution he would not be in this mess?

The Scottish Conservatives are doing what the First Minister will not do, cannot do, but should have been doing. The Scottish Conservatives are making sensible proposals to sort out the bread-and-butter issues on which the Lib-Lab pact has failed. We have made proposals on affordable housing, on defeating drugs and cutting crime and on standing up for families. It is about time the First Minister realised that the only way to save the union is to save devolution; and the only way to save devolution is to start making it work for the people of Scotland and sorting out the issues that matter most to them. Making this Parliament deliver for its people is the only way to save our union from the nationalists. The First Minister and his Lib-Lab pact might not be up for that fight, but I and the Scottish Conservatives certainly are.

The future of Scotland is indeed now in the hands of the Scottish people. There are two stark choices: devolution or isolation. Those are the only two games in town. I believe that the best future for Scotland is within the union of the United Kingdom, and there is no stronger supporter of the union than the Conservatives. "Unionist" is in our name; it is in our DNA. What the isolationists have totally failed to demonstrate is this: why losing influence in  Europe is better for Scotland, why losing influence in the United Nations is better for Scotland, why weakening our defence facility is better for Scotland and why turning our closest neighbour into our biggest competitor is better for Scotland. Those are not the imagined consequences of isolation; they are the stark realities. The Scottish National Party has failed lamentably to prove its case. What is becoming increasingly clear is that the voters do not want to court independence. They want devolution to work better and politicians to get to grips with the bread-and-butter issues of crime and drugs, the provision of affordable housing and standing up for families in areas such as health care and child care. What about the Lib-Lab pact's failure? That pact has failed devolution and those parties have failed the people whom they claim to care about the most. The gap between the poor and the rich is widening, waiting times are going up and the numbers of crimes and offences are higher than they were in 1999. Council tax has increased by 63 per cent, economic growth is lagging behind England and 100,000 manufacturing jobs were lost between 1997 and 2005. What about drug abuse and cutting crime? Our drug problem is escalating out of control. There is a drug death in Scotland almost every day, 37 new patients ask for drug addiction treatment every day and more than 1,200 methadone prescriptions are handed out every day. The Scottish Conservatives have promised to invest an extra £100 million a year in drug rehabilitation, which will save an estimated £1 billion a year in policing, health care and other social costs. To cut crime, we will hire 1,500 extra police officers and get them out on the beat. We will restore the balance of our criminal justice system to one that stands up for the victim and punishes the criminal. The Lib-Lab pact may say that it has ended automatic early release, but it has not. No prisoner will serve their full sentence in custody. The Scottish Conservatives will stand up for victims. We will ensure that anyone who is sentenced to custody on three or more occasions will have an additional tariff imposed that is proportionate to the previous three sentences.

It is predictable that Mr Purvis, a representative of the desperately failed pact that has presided for eight years over the disintegration of our criminal justice system, would seek to raise  a smokescreen. He well knows that my party's proposals are about robust sentencing and ensuring that people who are sentenced to jail stay there. What about affordable homes? The future for aspiring home owners in Scotland is bleak, which is why addressing the need for affordable housing is among my party's highest priorities. We already know that home ownership is too expensive for many people, including key workers such as teachers and nurses. We need to ensure that they are given help to climb on to the housing ladder. Indeed, the Executive's own economic report from 2006 reveals: "In the past year, first time buyer activity reached its lowest level in 25 years." We support the shared ownership housing schemes, but they are too narrow and they do not benefit enough people. That is why the Scottish Conservatives will form affordable homes trusts, which will be worth £100 million every year and will be run by trustees who are independent of the state, to which would-be home owners will be able to apply for assistance in the local areas in which they seek to live. We will ensure that our older people can stay in their homes, with a 50 per cent council tax discount for pensioner households aged 65 and over. That is better than an empty plea about a local income tax that will mortgage hard-pressed families at the most critical time of their lives and for the rest of their lives. The future of Scotland depends on its families. The family is the most important institution in Scotland, and it comes in many forms in the Scotland of 2007. The Scottish Conservatives will stand up for those families. We will help them with their child care, their health care and their wealth care. We will encourage parents to have more choice over who cares for their children and where they receive their nursery education. We will support local health and dental services and offer closer, faster, better health care. We will retain local emergency and maternity services and we will improve the system for elective treatments by allowing patients to choose which hospital will perform their operation. As increasing numbers of people become ill, Scotland needs a stronger focus on mental health care. My party will begin with a £10 million investment to improve care for patients and support for their families.

I want to make progress. The Executive has also failed in its stewardship of the economy and our transport infrastructure. I  cannot help noticing that those two policy areas have been the responsibility of successive Liberal Democrat ministers over the past four years—maybe that is a coincidence; maybe it is not. Economic growth and new business start-ups have trailed the UK as a whole. What about regulation? The Scottish Liberal Democrats are new-found converts to the cause of doing something about regulation. It is a shame that the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning over the past two years—a Liberal Democrat—has done nothing about that.

My party has a comprehensive manifesto of fully costed proposals to revitalise the economy, including an imaginative and positive scheme for business rates relief. We will allocate an extra £20 million a year to town centre regeneration. We will deal with regulation. We will reform public procurement. On education, in the eight years of the Lib-Lab pact, strategies, initiatives and targets have been produced. We have seen the Lib-Lab pact interfere with the work of hard-pressed professionals in our educational sector and we have seen it challenge the ability of those dedicated professionals to deliver the service that Scotland needs. That is why my party will propose a new education act to enhance the powers of head teachers. We will strengthen parent power by restoring school boards—a popular Conservative concept that proved too much for Lib-Lab ideology. Turning to the Scottish National Party, I will not use the bone-chilling rhetoric of Labour. I believe in Scotland every bit as much as Alex Salmond does. What I do not believe in is the sterile destination of isolation that is the founding platform of SNP policy. What alternative does that party bring to Scotland? Is it the voice of the people? Opposing eight Executive bills in eight years is not a voice, it is an echo. This morning, Nicola Sturgeon said that we should judge a party by the sum of its policies.

Ah well—a revised view from the SNP benches. Either way, the SNP's sums still do not add up, and there is nothing it can do to hide that. People in Scotland do not need to take a risk to make a change. They do not need to vote for the nationalists to make the Scottish Parliament deliver for them. My party may have had a smaller presence in the Parliament than Labour and the nationalists, but we have led the debate on issues such as business rates, early release, drug abuse, police numbers, violence in schools and free  personal care—and we have made a difference. We will continue to focus on the areas in which the Scottish Parliament has failed to deliver: affordable homes, standing up for Scotland's families, and crime and drugs. Those issues are Scotland's issues, and my party will bring delivery, not divorce.

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister and what issues they will discuss. (S2F-2790)

I sincerely hope that at the top of the agenda for discussion when the First Minister and the Prime Minister next meet will be how the European convention on human rights has been incorporated into our law. Stewart Potter is a 43-year-old prisoner who is in jail for assault and robbery—an incident during which he held a knife to a shop assistant's throat. He is aggrieved that when he makes a phone call, the recipient hears a recorded message to warn them that the call comes from a prison. Potter finds that "embarrassing". Should not Potter be embarrassed by how he has wronged society? Is the First Minister embarrassed that, once again, the criminal is coming first and the victim a very poor second?

The public are becoming sick and tired of the First Minister refusing to take any responsibility for what is going on in this country. This contemptible farce is happening on his watch. Prisoners—people who have wounded and scarred our society, including some who have killed—now claim that they should be able to vote. Stewart Potter, who held a knife to a woman's throat, complains about his phone calls. It is pathetic. I pledge that my party, with my Westminster colleagues, will review the integration of European human rights laws, so that victims, and not criminals, come first. Will the First Minister pledge to do the same?

Was that not just typical of this First Minister? He is Scotland's very own Pontius Pilate, washing his hands of this perverse system—a system that puts prisoners first. Some of us have a bit more courage. Today, my party unveiled a £1 billion assault on crime and drugs—the biggest programme to tackle the issues ever seen in Scotland. I ask the First Minister, who is running this country—him or the criminals?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Scottish Executive's Cabinet. (S2F-2778)

Earlier this week in England, Rahan Arshad was sentenced to life in prison for the horrific murders of his wife and three children. The judge stated that, in Arshad's case, life meant life. Will the First Minister confirm that, if Arshad had committed that crime in Scotland, the judge would be required to specify a punishment part and will he further confirm that it is not possible for a judge in Scotland to tell a convicted murderer that life means life?

The family of a murder victim goes to court to see justice done. To them, a punishment part that is in single figures is galling. In addition to being anxious about the misuse of the term "life", the people of Scotland have, for some time, been worried about the Lib-Lab pact's policy of allowing non-lifers to stroll out of jail early. The First Minister has tried to talk his way round the provisions of the Custodial Sentences and Weapons (Scotland) Bill by saying that prisoners will serve their total custodial sentences in jail. What he cannot say is that prisoners will serve their total sentence in jail because, under his new  mongrel system, the sentence is split in two: the custody part and the community part. Is the truth not that the bill is simply designed to make the First Minister sound like the friend of the victim when the fact is that Labour and the Liberal Democrats are still on the side of the criminal?

Eight years of failure by the Lib-Lab pact cannot be spun away in eight minutes at FMQs. The First Minister is kidding nobody. Just now, prisoners stroll out of jail either half way or two thirds of the way through their total sentences. Under the First Minister's new legislation, all prisoners could stroll out of jail half way through their total sentences. If it looks like early release and smells like early release, it is early release. If the First Minister were actually tough on crime and tough on criminals, his Lib-Lab pact would have backed our amendments this morning, as they would have kept criminals in jail longer. We have made it clear today, as we have done for many years, that we want criminals in custody. However, the Lib-Lab pact and, shamefully, the SNP, have made it clear that they want criminals in our communities. When will the First Minister stop standing up for criminals and start standing up for Scotland?

Is the minister's position that, if the interests of justice in Scotland, the interests of victims and the protection of wider society require more prison capacity, she would rather dodge the issue and find complicated legislative compromises in order to avoid that solution?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister and what issues they will discuss. (S2F-2762)

I doubt that the First Minister will be too keen to discuss the situation on our railways. As has been said, thousands of commuters face misery as they struggle to get to work and back home because of the strike by signalling staff. The First Minister has just said that he spoke to Network Rail this morning. Was that his first intervention?

The First Minister cannot wriggle out of the question so easily. Bob Crow—not a man whom I am given to quoting on any occasion—said that the "Executive sat on its hands and did nothing to help". The implications of the strike are far wider than commuters' not being able to get to work. Some of the people who will not get to work on time are doctors, nurses, ambulance drivers, policemen and firemen, so not only will the roads be congested and the economy suffer, but lives may be put at risk because Bob Crow has decided that Scotland is a soft touch for disruption. What has the First Minister been doing to tell Mr Crow that Scotland has moved on and that his views belong in the past?

Perhaps the difference between me and the First Minister is that the internal  memos of my party do not end up in Scotland Yard. [ Applause. ] The simple fact is that people like Bob Crow belong to an age that is far removed from modern Scotland. Is not it about time the First Minister showed a bit of leadership? Being First Minister is not just about patting oneself on the back when something half decent happens, but about standing up and taking charge when Scotland's rail network is in chaos. Is the First Minister as blasé as his Minister for Transport, Mr Scott, or will he stand up for Scotland's people and take action?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Scottish Executive's Cabinet. (S2F-2750)

I hope that time will be found to talk about the implementation of the legislation that governs free personal care for the elderly. The First Minister will be aware that an independent report that was published yesterday shows that half of Scotland's councils still have queues for assessment for free personal care. He will also be aware that, in the past few months, the Scottish Conservatives have exposed the scandal that some pensioners have been charged wrongfully for meal preparation. Does the First Minister accept that the guidance that was issued to local authorities has been a farce? Can he tell me who is to blame for that?

It is all very well for the First Minister to tell us that bits of the free personal care policy are working well, but if a pilot told him that bits of a plane were working well, would he still go up in it? The First Minister attempts to ignore the bits that are not working well, which is entirely predictable. The bottom line is that, in 2001, the Parliament passed legislation that entitled our older people to free personal care but, six years later, hundreds of them are still waiting for assessment for care and thousands more have been robbed of an estimated £20 million, as a result of being charged for services that should have been free. How does the First Minister propose to ensure that those pensioners are reimbursed fully and swiftly?

Nowhere in that was an answer to the question that I asked about the pensioners who have been robbed of resource to pay for care that should have been free but was not. How does the First Minister propose to ensure that those pensioners are reimbursed fully and swiftly? The fact remains that the situation is symptomatic of the rule of the Liberal-Labour pact, which promises everything but does not deliver. Six years on from the introduction of the legislation on free personal care, there are deficiencies in the implementation. On such a simple issue, in which pensioners—who could be more vulnerable?— were robbed of money to pay for services that they should have got free, we have no answer and no leadership from the First Minister as to what is to happen to them. He can blame whom he likes, but is it not the truth that the Lib-Lab pact wants to blur responsibility so that it can take the credit for everything and the blame for nothing?

I remind the First Minister that crimes and offences are up. Indeed, a crime or an offence is committed in Scotland every 30 seconds. Even more worryingly, that is just reported crime. The recent Scottish crime survey showed that three out of every four crimes are never reported. Why do the people of Scotland have so little confidence in Scotland's criminal justice system?

The figures that I quoted to the First Minister are the Scottish Executive's. Crimes and offences are up. The First Minister has many shortcomings, but self-delusion is clearly at the top of the list. He will be aware that, at present, prisoners who serve sentences of four years or less are released after serving half their sentences, while longer-term prisoners walk out after they have served two thirds of their sentences. His new sentencing proposals will mean that all prisoners—even those who serve sentences of more than four years—may be able to stroll out of prison at half-time or even earlier. Last week the Scottish Conservatives lodged stage 2 amendments to the Custodial Sentences and Weapons (Scotland) Bill, which would have led to all prisoners serving at least 90 per cent of their sentences in jail. We know that the SNP is soft on crime and on criminals, but the First Minister claims to be a tough guy, so why did the Lib-Lab pact vote to give criminals an easy ride?

For the first time, the Scottish Executive will tie the hands of our judges by prohibiting them, by statute, from giving custody-only sentences. Let me give the First Minister another chance to send a message to the Scottish people that he is on their side. The Scottish Conservatives propose that the criminal law in Scotland be changed so  that persons who have been acquitted of serious criminal charges can be tried again if new and compelling evidence comes to light. If the Lib-Lab pact is really committed to justice, will it drop its amendment to our motion on double jeopardy and support the victims of crime in Scotland?

I have noted two points in Mr Harvie's line of argument so far: finality and the recently stated point about time limits. Will he confirm whether he believes that justice for a  victim and their family in the event that new and compelling evidence emerges that is probative of the acquitted accused's implication in the crime should be time barred or cut off by the word finality? I am unclear about that.

I want to establish whether Mr Purvis is sympathetic to the principle of what we propose in our motion. I understand his natural concern with detail. I was at pains to say that I am not convinced that the qualifying list of offences in schedule 5 to the Criminal Justice Act 2003 is necessarily the list that we want to emulate here, but that is just detail. I am anxious to establish whether Mr Purvis supports the principle that victims in Scotland in this particular context—I agree that it is a very specific context—should be offered the same protection as victims in England, to ensure that justice is done.

Will the minister take an intervention?

I am trying to establish whether the Executive is still sympathetic to the proposal in my motion or whether it has departed from the position that the Labour Party held two years ago. It made a clear commitment in its 2005 manifesto. Is it now retreating from that?

Usually, in chamber debates on the Scottish criminal justice system, more seems to divide the parties than to unite them. However, in speaking to the motion in my name, I hope that we might all find some common ground. Over the decades, other jurisdictions have tended to borrow from and copy many of our distinctive Scottish legal system's excellent attributes. This morning, I suggest that we look to borrow from our neighbours south of the border a change to the criminal law of England and Wales that was effected by the Criminal Justice Act 2003. That legislation abolished double jeopardy, which is the rule that a person who has been acquitted or convicted of an offence cannot be charged with the same offence again. After the tragic murder of 18-year-old Stephen Lawrence in 1993, Sir William Macpherson was commissioned to conduct an inquiry into the Metropolitan police's investigation of the murder. His report not only delivered a damning assessment of the institutional racism in policing, but made numerous recommendations aimed at improving attitudes to racism. For example, recommendation 38 stated: "consideration should be given to the Court of Appeal being given power to permit prosecution after acquittal where fresh and viable evidence is presented." In 2001, the Law Commission in England recommended that it should be possible for the Court of Appeal to have the power, in murder cases only, to quash an acquittal if reliable and compelling new evidence of guilt emerged and if a retrial would be in the interests of justice. Because I want to focus this morning on the general principle—we can leave the detail for another day—I have phrased my motion in broad terms. Indeed, it virtually restates what was in the Labour Party manifesto for the 2005 general election, which is why I am somewhat disappointed by Johann Lamont's amendment. Labour support for what was an electoral commitment two years ago appears to be wavering. That said, I understand that, in principle, the Scottish National Party supports the abolition of double jeopardy.

Mr Stevenson raises an interesting and important point that is worthy of consideration in the broader debate. However, it is not really part of the case that I am presenting to the chamber this morning. Double jeopardy was an historical safeguard for the acquitted accused, as it ensured that a fresh prosecution could not be raised. Of course, such an approach derived from the days when evidence was either of an oral or tangible character, in which case it existed and was produced for the trial, or it did not exist. In the days before advanced technology, all available evidence was obtained after a crime was committed, and that complete body of evidence constituted the prosecution case. We now live in an age in which forensic science has become much more sophisticated and, even after many years have elapsed, it might be possible to find new evidence that is robust and might be probative of an individual's involvement with or connection to a crime. Given Sir William Macpherson's recommendation and the subsequent change to the law of England and Wales, there is an imperative to consider such a change to the law in Scotland. The public will find it unacceptable that, faced with the possibility of a new prosecution, victims and their families are given an entitlement to justice in England and Wales that they are denied here. It is our duty in this Parliament to ensure that victims and their families in Scotland receive the same entitlement. I fully accept that a rigorous assessment process would have to be gone through before any new prosecution could be raised, which is why I suggest that evidence would have to be not only new but compelling. Interestingly, I have tried to help the minister in the way that I have phrased my motion, because I felt that the wording in the 2005 Labour Party general election manifesto was too broad to be safe. We must be clear that there are two significant criteria in the proposal, and that they would need to be satisfied. In Scotland, the appropriate mechanism would be that the Lord Advocate would require to seek the consent of the Scottish court of criminal appeal to bring a new prosecution. We would also need to consider what crimes should be competent for fresh prosecution. In England and Wales, schedule 5 to the 2003 act contains a lengthy list of qualifying offences. The matter should be the subject of thorough debate and it should, perhaps, encompass the issue that Mr Stevenson raised. I accept that, at  Westminster, my party thought that the offences should be restricted to murder and rape, but in Scotland culpable homicide is a serious criminal charge, as are arson and certain offences that are prosecuted under statute. The offences that would be included would require careful consideration, but that is a matter of detail. Today's debate is about the principle. I submit that, under the criminal law of England and Wales, victims and their families enjoy an entitlement to see justice done. I want victims and their families in Scotland to have a similar entitlement. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the criminal law of Scotland be changed so that persons acquitted of serious criminal charges can be tried again if new and compelling evidence comes to light.

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Scottish Executive's Cabinet. (S2F-2720)

Last week at First Minister's question time I asked the First Minister whether he was in favour of introducing road tolls throughout Scotland—whether he will carry out the wishes of the Secretary of State for Scotland and Secretary of State for Transport, who wants tolling on roads throughout the UK. In character, the First Minister entertained us with his usual bluster and waffle, so I will try again: is the First Minister in favour of tolls on Scotland's roads?

It is all very well for the First Minister to pretend that he has made his position on road tolling clear, but he should speak to the Minister for Transport, the self-styled viking. Last week the First Minister told me: "There are currently no plans to pilot such a scheme in Scotland."— [ Official Report , 8 February 2007; c 31953.]  That is fine, but this week Tavish Scott said: "We need to make it happen more quickly in Scotland." Is that the official policy of the Lib-Lab pact? If not, will he seek Mr Scott's resignation as Minister for Transport?

I think that the First Minister's tie has gone to his head. The answer is simply not good enough. The people of Scotland look for and should get clear political leadership. It has been an interesting week. On Wednesday Tavish Scott announced that there will be a new Forth crossing. On Monday he announced that we need to make quicker progress on road tolling in Scotland. The people of Scotland are now expected to believe that one of the announcements is Government policy and the other is not. The coalition Government is shambolic. The Scottish Conservatives oppose any additional nationwide charges for using Scotland's existing roads. The public want to know what the position of the Lib-Lab pact is.

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister and what issues they will discuss. (S2F-2702)

This morning, the Lib-Lab pact made it abundantly clear that it believes that the Forth and Tay bridges should continue to be tolled. There is more than a whiff of political dogma in those decisions. Scotland's taxpayers have already paid for their roads, and it is utterly unfair to expect residents and commuters to pay to cross the Forth and Tay bridges when others can drive over toll-free bridges in the west and north of the country. Can the First Minister tell me why what is good enough for the west and north of Scotland is not good enough for the east?

I listened with interest to that answer. The debate is not just about tolls on the Forth and Tay bridges; there is another agenda altogether, about tolling drivers generally. We know that the Labour Government at Westminster favours a tolling system all over the United Kingdom that will charge motorists to drive on roads that they have already paid for. Can the First Minister confirm that, before any such road toll scheme could operate in Scotland, the Scottish Parliament would have to agree to it?

I am not sure that I feel reassured by that answer. The facts are stark. We know what the Lib-Lab pact wants to do about tolls on the Forth and Tay bridges, and we know that the Lib-Lab pact previously backed an absurd road tolling scheme for Edinburgh. Two successive secretaries of state for transport and Scotland at Westminster—both of whom represent Scottish constituencies—have expressed their desire for a national road tolling scheme. I cannot be the only one who smells a rat. Can the First Minister give us an unequivocal answer: is he in favour of tolling Scotland's roads—yes or no?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Scottish Executive's Cabinet. (S2F-2684)

The First Minister is well aware of the horrific problems that Midlothian Council has with its social work department. Unlike some, I do not seek to blame him directly for the situation. It is right that local authorities deal with such issues, and they should be judged by the electorate. That said, it is important to establish the Lib-Lab pact's role in and knowledge of this deeply worrying affair. We know that Midlothian Council has been aware of the problem since 2004 and has apparently been sitting on a report since September 2006. Therefore, will the First Minister tell me when he knew about the problem, in which other councils it is replicated and how many Scottish children are in similar danger?

I thank the First Minister for that helpful response. As I said, I realise that he is not directly implicated in the affair. However, when it comes to the care, welfare and development of children, the record of the Labour Party and the Lib-Lab pact is abysmal. As has already been said, we were informed this week that there were 1,000 more exclusions from schools than in the previous year, which is apparently contributing to a rise of almost 20 per cent in the past three years alone. Added to that, in the past school year almost 1 million pupil days were lost to truancy, and nearly one in five pupils plays truant. Faced with that stark information, why does this former teacher have so little faith in his former colleagues? Is it not about time that he gave more power to head teachers to provide effective school management—something that the Lib-Lab pact and their local government colleagues have shown themselves utterly unable to do?

Let us return to the environment of our schools. The clear message I am getting is that good, competent head teachers are hamstrung by state diktat from getting on with the jobs that their professional qualifications and experience equip them to do. The First Minister said that the Lib-Lab pact has improved devolved school management. How does the abolition of school boards do that? On school discipline, my party previously revealed that there is an attack on a member of staff in a school every 12 minutes. What did the Lib-Lab pact do to rectify that problem? Did it give heads more power over exclusions? No—nothing as sensible as that; it stopped publishing the figures, and no wonder. The response to a recent Conservative freedom of information request—not a Conservative propaganda initiative—showed that physical violence in schools was up by 25 per cent in the past year alone. Will the First Minister start publishing those statistics again and stop hiding from Scotland's parents the true scale of violence in Scotland's schools?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister and what issues they will discuss. (S2F-2668)

The First Minister will, no doubt, be aware that his Labour colleague, John Reid, has ordered English judges to stop sending  prisoners to jail, except those who commit the most serious offences. It is clear that Labour in England has given up on the fight against crime. Can the First Minister guarantee that neither he nor any member of his Executive or the civil service has ever, whether in writing, verbally or by implication, ordered or asked a judge or sheriff in Scotland to consider prison space before passing a custodial sentence, or suggested that they should do so?

I am sure that Scotland's judges and the public will find that an intriguing answer from a Lib-Lab pact whose attitude, frankly, is, "To hell with the victims. Let's pander to the prisoners." If we needed more proof of that, yesterday, the First Minister's Labour colleague, Pauline McNeill, effectively conceded that some prisoners will get the vote.

Indeed, his Lib-Lab pact colleague Jo Swinson said that prisoners have a fundamental right to vote. In relation to the fiasco about prisoners' having a right to vote, which is completely unacceptable, the First Minister is seeking to blame the European convention on human rights, Westminster, Tony Blair or anyone else he can find, but he has already tried that trick with slopping out. Conservatives allocated the money to end slopping out, but Jack McConnell used it for something else. He cost the taxpayer £58 million—

How much will the latest botch up cost?

I listened to the answer, but the trouble is that there is a credibility issue at the heart of the First Minister's position because, just last year in Westminster, Labour and the Liberal Democrats rejected a Conservative proposal to keep the ban on prisoners voting. Scotland's justice system has lost its way and the First Minister has lost control. Criminals are having money chucked at them to compensate for slopping out; convicts are sauntering out of jail halfway through their sentences; the Labour Party is begging judges to empty the prisons; and now prisoners are to be given the right to vote. It is little wonder that ordinary Scots are asking, "Why are criminals in Scotland getting off scot free?" Answer that, First Minister.

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Scottish Executive's Cabinet. (S2F-2656)

I hope that the Cabinet will discuss the increasing drug abuse that we have just heard about, which is a serious issue afflicting Scotland today. I sincerely hope that the First Minister is aware that there is a drug-related death almost every day in Scotland and that, every day, 37 new patients seek treatment for their addiction. If I heard correctly, he said a moment ago that cocaine addiction is increasing. Will he therefore explain why the discontinuance of the project in Aberdeen for dealing with cocaine addiction represents progress in the fight against drugs?

I suppose that we should be familiar with a First Minister who does not answer questions; he certainly did not answer the question that I asked. I did not mention the Scottish Executive cutting funding; that was not what I averred. I asked whether, in the light of the increasing cocaine addiction in Scotland, it makes sense strategically to withdraw or discontinue a resource that has apparently been used to cope with that increase. Leaving that issue to one side, I find it utterly depressing that drug abuse is scarring communities the length and breadth of the nation. The problem is not just the dozens of new people who seek treatment every day; it is the fact that drug-related crime is soaring. We need to assess what help is available to deal with the growing epidemic. I agree with the First Minister's comment that the important points about facilities are the availability of places and their effectiveness. Will he establish a directory of Scottish drug rehabilitation facilities so that we can quantify what we have got and how many more we need?

Like the temperature in the Arctic, we move from one extreme to the other when the First Minister answers questions. I am uplifted, because something positive has at long last been  announced. I genuinely pay tribute to the First Minister. Tardiness is an art form for him, but never mind—we have an answer now. The First Minister referred to what his Executive has endeavoured to invest in rehabilitation facilities. The amount is clearly inadequate, given the extent of the problem that we know is out there. Today, my party pledged to invest an extra £100 million per year in drug rehabilitation facilities. That would be a tremendous investment and the most significant step ever taken in Scotland to deal with drug abuse. As I think that the First Minister knows, estimates show that an investment of £100 million to combat drug abuse with rehabilitation facilities could save up to £1 billion in health care, police and legal costs. Will he join us in acknowledging that we are in danger of losing thousands of our people to drugs, and will he agree that our initiative is a welcome start to addressing that appalling problem?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister and what issues they will discuss. (S2F-2642) I wish the First Minister a happy new year.

On Monday—a working day for most Scots—a group of MSPs, who are paid by Scottish taxpayers to represent them on the issues that are devolved to the Scottish Parliament, chose to mount a demonstration on an issue that is reserved to Westminster. Of course, Scots have the right to protest, and I might add that a nuclear deterrent helps to retain that right. Does the First Minister agree with his Labour colleague, Duncan McNeil, as I do, that those MSPs are self-serving self-publicists and that they owe an apology to Scottish taxpayers?

I thank the First Minister for that answer. He well knows the true cost of the actions of people such as the leader of the Scottish branch of the SNP, Miss Sturgeon. While her main aim is to get her picture in the paper, the true cost of her actions and those of her socialist brothers and sisters is a multimillion-pound policing bill. That means diversion of police resources, increased vulnerability for victims of crime, an unnecessary use of precious court resources and more overcrowding of our prisons. Does the First Minister think that that is a good advertisement for the Parliament?

I am delighted to say that no Conservative MSP protested at Faslane and no Conservative MSP will. The priorities of the Scottish people are not submarines. They are to tackle crime and offences, which are up under the Executive; to reduce drugs abuse, which is rising under the Executive; to provide more affordable housing for those who are struggling to get a foot on the ladder, which is an increasing problem under the Executive; and to save local health and dental services from being cut by the Executive. Does the First Minister agree that whatever our political differences on those issues, they are the issues and they are why we are here?

I extend our best wishes to the First Minister and hope that a speedy recovery awaits him. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Scottish Executive's Cabinet. (S2F-2630)

During last week's First Minister's question time, the First Minister derided the concept of a local income tax. He was right to do so, on the basis that a local income tax would be a disaster for hard-working families in Scotland, costing them hundreds of pounds extra a year. Can the Deputy First Minister confirm that the First Minister was speaking on behalf of the entire Scottish Executive in making those statements and that the First Minister enjoys the full support of his deputy in that regard?

What a revealing answer. If I did not know any better, I would say that there might be an element of unseasonal discord between the Deputy First Minister and his boss, but let me ask him another question. Last week, the Deputy First Minister's colleague, the Minister for Justice, briefed the Sunday press that the Executive is considering a welcome and  overdue change on drug policy. We are told that the Executive is considering moving away from its exclusive dependence on methadone towards abstinence-based options. Will the Deputy First Minister today state his unease about overreliance on methadone and confirm his total support for the Minister for Justice's proposals?

I am pleased to witness an uncharacteristic departure from taciturnity on the part of the Deputy First Minister, and I welcome his words in so far as they say anything. However, I am seized with unease. Does the Deputy First Minister accept that he is jointly and severally responsible for seven and a half years of rampant drugs-related crime, escalating methadone prescriptions, soaring cocaine use, a completely discredited know the score initiative, and a political vacuum on drugs strategy? Is he proud of his role in all that?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister and what issues they will discuss. (S2F-2615)

Five weeks ago today, the Burt review of local government finance, which was commissioned by the Executive, published its plans for an annual tax on home values. The First Minister's spokesman indicated that Labour would not support the rate but has not ruled out the  principle. The Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform indicated that the proposal "remains under active consideration". The First Minister, true to form, said that he had made his position clear, even though he had not. Will he now make his position clear? Regardless of the rate, does the First Minister reject the principle—yes or no?

If that was clarity, it was straight out of the Bute House bubble handbook—or perhaps that should be the Bute House babble handbook, as it was clear as mud. I think that we have it on record that the First Minister is not ruling out a Burt-style home value tax. If he is not ruling it out, he is ruling it in. The only question now is what rate the Executive has in mind. Is it the same 0.6 per cent rate that Labour is imposing on Northern Ireland? Is it 1 per cent? Is it 2 per cent? What percentage is it?

The First Minister now seems to be confirming, as is his wont with so many issues, that he does not know, that he has no plans and that he is not intending to tell anyone. If the First Minister does not know what his Executive will propose next May, if we assume that we are currently working with the council tax system, and  if we assume that the First Minister will dismiss a nationalist proposal for a 6.5 per cent local income tax—he is quite right to dismiss it—will he support what the Conservatives propose for pensioner households: a 50 per cent cut in their council tax? Will he support us in achieving that?

Earlier this week, the Scottish Executive, or what passes for the remains of it, announced its national transport plans. I say, "plans", but the announcement amounted to yet  another glossy brochure that said nothing at all. The Executive committed to delivering the existing programme—how bold is that?—taking forward another strategic review and publishing yet more plans. Can the First Minister tell me what specific new proposals—or proposal; one will do—he has?

Miss Goldie did not ask for a history lesson on proposals that are already in the public domain; Miss Goldie asked for a specific new proposal. Let me give the First Minister a true reflection of the Scottish Executive's transport record. The Executive froze the extensive Conservative programme and then reinstated bits of it—big deal. Scotland wants to know about the First Minister's stance on big issues such as a fast rail link between Edinburgh and Glasgow and, perhaps most important, the Forth road bridge. Will he tell us exactly what he plans to do about a new Forth crossing and when he plans to do it?

Rather than say every week that he has made his position clear, why does the First Minister not just actually make his position clear? After eight years, I would have thought that the Executive would be beyond publishing expensive brochures that promise only more expensive brochures. The 2002 transport delivery plan promised a car park and a roundabout and we thought that we were short-changed then, but the 2006 version does not even give us that. Ten years ago, the then Conservative Government had identified and secured ground for a crossing over the Forth. Is it not about time that the Executive stopped waffling and got on with the business at hand, including immediate work on a new crossing for the Forth?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister and what issues they will discuss. (S2F-2577)

The First Minister will be aware of the increasing and worrying level of fuel poverty in Scotland today. Some 328,000 households now live in fuel poverty. That represents a worrying 14.5 per cent increase—a rise of 42,000 households that the Scottish Executive described as "not statistically significant". I am sure that that clinical description will be of little comfort to those who struggle to pay the bills. Having listened to Nicola Sturgeon, I am also sure that the First Minister agrees that the protectionist policies of the nationalists, the like of which would have prevented Scottish Power from expanding in the first place, are certainly not the answer. Will the First Minister tell me what he plans to do to relieve the financial burden on those hard-pressed families?

The First Minister will be aware that one of the groups that suffer acutely from rising energy price policies is Scotland's pensioners. Shockingly, a third of them are trapped in fuel poverty. They are usually on fixed incomes and have pensions that rise only at the rate of inflation while their council tax and energy bills rise at well over the rate of inflation. Although the First Minister cannot interfere with private businesses, he can do something about council tax. Will the First Minister join the Scottish Conservatives and say to every 65-and-over pensioner household in Scotland, "We will cut your council tax bill in half"?

I am sorry to say that it is for reasons such as those that the popularity in Scotland of the First Minister is dropping like a stone. Talk about putting devolution at risk—it is exactly that vacuum at the heart of Government that puts devolution and the union at risk. In the First Minister's Bute House bubble, Scottish pensioners are happy as Larry but, in the real world, life is no bed of roses. Many of Scotland's pensioners are sliding into poverty because their council tax bills are devouring more and more of their income. They will want to know, as I do, when the First Minister will provide some dignity for the elderly and cut their council tax?

So heartening.

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Scottish Executive's Cabinet. (S2F-2561)

Last weekend, the First Minister told newspapers that he wondered whether the past five years had all been worth it. Just as the people of Scotland were breathing a sigh of relief at the prospect of his departure, the rain clouds gathered and the First Minister said that he would stay on for another five years. In his bid for the most laughable statement of the year prize, he said that Scotland was in a better position now than it was five years ago. If that is the case, why has Scotland lost 17 per cent of its manufacturing jobs during that time?  Why is the business rate poundage still higher in Scotland than it is in England? Why has economic growth stuttered at a lower level than in England? Is that really a record to be proud of?

That was the same Conservative Government that created an economy that any Chancellor of the Exchequer would thank his almighty Lord for inheriting. It is very sad that the Bute House bubble is so big that the First Minister actually believes that this country is in better shape than it was when he took over. The First Minister mentioned crime, so let us ask: What about crime? In his five years, the figure for total crime and offences has gone up. Crimes of indecency are up, rape and attempted rape are up, and fire raising and vandalism are up. Handling of offensive weapons is up and the number of persons recalled to prison from licence is up by almost 100 per cent. That is what the Executive's own statistics show. Is that really a record to be proud of?

So, the Bute House bubble has obscured the sluggish economy and is making the First Minister believe that Scots are safer than they were five years ago. It must be the best small bubble in the world. However, even it cannot hide the First Minister's performance with regard to our public services. In-patient waiting times are up by a quarter, several hospitals have been run down or closed, nearly 8,000 more people are without a dentist, physical attacks on teachers have risen by a quarter in the past year alone and, in most local authorities, more pupils are now failing to meet the Executive's minimum standards in reading, writing and maths. Is that really a record to be proud of?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister and what issues they will discuss. (S2F-2545)

Yesterday, Craig Nimmo was convicted of the culpable homicide of Bryan Drummond, an innocent man who, like so many others, was in the wrong place at the wrong time. Nimmo was originally charged with murder but pled guilty on a reduced plea and was sentenced to nine years. Can the First Minister tell me when he expects Mr Nimmo to be walking our streets again?

It will be a matter for the Prison Service working under the law that the First Minister and his Executive have persisted in maintaining. The First Minister may pretend that he is abolishing early release, but he is merely replacing the existing system of early release with a new system of early release. Nobody is fooled. Since the First Minister has neglected to answer the question, I will. Under the current early release system, Nimmo will be released after only six years. Under the First Minister's new early release system, he could be released 18 months earlier, after serving only four and a half years, unless the judge deemed the circumstances exceptional. At 20 years old, he will be free once again. It is common knowledge that the Conservative party has tried to end the current discredited sentencing practice, which is opposed by every other party in the Parliament. Does the First Minister accept that, if our changes had been enacted, Nimmo would not be entitled to automatic early release on his full nine-year sentence?

I would have thought that the First Minister would be conversant with his Executive's bill, which redefines "sentence". Under the bill, with the exception of life sentences, a "sentence" will become a mixture—a mongrel—that is partly served in jail and partly served in the community. The difficulty for the First Minister is that he has to accept that that is a radical departure from traditional custodial sentencing in Scotland. I suspect that other victims' families would not be impressed by his answer. Let us consider Frances Getgood, who was stabbed by her husband 10 times while he was out on early release from a sentence for a previous attack on her. Last week, he was sentenced to five years and four months. The First Minister can argue until the cows come home, but under the current automatic early release system, that offender will be coming out of prison after three years and six months. Under the proposals in the Custodial Sentences and Weapons (Scotland) Bill, he is likely to face a reduced period of detention of just over two years and eight months. Less time in prison is not a sentencing improvement. Will the First Minister therefore support Conservative amendments to restore honesty to custodial sentencing?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be  discussed at the next meeting of the Scottish Executive's Cabinet. (S2F-2527)

Yesterday, three sadistic thugs were jailed for the murder of Kriss Donald. One of those men was Imran Shahid, who viciously attacked an innocent woman in September 2002 and was subsequently sentenced to two and a half years in prison. If he had served his full term, he would have been released in March 2005, but he did not and he was released in December 2003. In March 2004, with others, he murdered Kriss Donald. Does the First Minister agree that, because of automatic early release, Imran Shahid was free in March 2004?

My colleagues and I certainly pay tribute to Mrs Donald, but I have to say to the First Minister that the people of Scotland would be astonished if the issue of automatic early release were not raised with him in the Parliament today. The matter is a political issue because politicians  in the Parliament have responsibility for sentencing in our criminal courts. The First Minister is not exempt from that political responsibility. In 1997, at Westminster, the Conservatives passed legislation to abolish automatic early release, but Labour did not put it into force. Time and again, my party has tried to end automatic early release, but time and again we have been blocked by every other party in the Parliament. Does the First Minister accept that the Custodial Sentences and Weapons (Scotland) Bill will mean that prisoners still get out of jail halfway through their sentences?

It is imperative that politicians are prepared to talk in the chamber about the issues that concern the people of Scotland. I endorse what the First Minister says about the robust way in which the case was prosecuted and he is right to pay tribute both to the family of the victim and to the criminal justice system. I am merely pointing out that issues have been raised that go right to the heart of public confidence in our criminal justice system. I ask the First Minister again about his proposed changes to sentencing, because they are not guaranteed to keep violent offenders in prison. My party's proposals would. Currently, an offender who has been sentenced to six years will spend four years in jail. Under the First Minister's proposed system, that offender might spend only three years in jail. Will the First Minister explain why that is an improvement and how on earth that will make Scotland a safer place?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister and what issues they will discuss. (S2F-2509)

When they meet, I hope that the Prime Minister and the First Minister will discuss the proposals that were mooted in the report by the chief inspector of prisons that was published yesterday. The First Minister will be aware that, under his leadership, the people of Scotland are used to lengthy waiting lists for hospital treatment,  but so far they have not been subjected to the ludicrous proposal of a waiting list for prison, whereby criminals who should be locked up would be loose on our streets. Yesterday the Minister for Justice said that she would not make criminals queue "at this time". Will the First Minister please rule out that idea immediately, for all time?

That response compels the question: why was the chief inspector of prisons forced to make those comments? He has been put in a ridiculous position. The First Minister should be aware that, compared to many European countries—such as Ireland, Portugal and Spain—Scotland jails few people per crime committed, which is the only valid measure. On Tuesday, his Minister for Justice was running around with her tail between her legs after the shocking figures for reoffending were released. Does the First Minister accept that much of that reoffending is down not only to inadequate rehabilitation in prisons, but to weak sentencing? Will he finally take some tough action on crime, adopt my three-strikes-and-you're-out proposal, expand prison capacity and send the message that crime does not pay in Scotland?

Let me give the First Minister some chilling facts. Since 1999, the figures for rape and attempted rape, handling an offensive weapon, assault, drug crime, fire raising and vandalism are up and those for persons recalled to prison from supervision or licence are up by more than 300 per cent, which is staggering. Is the First Minister seriously trying to tell us that our justice system is working? He should tell that to the family of Marc Lancashire, who is dead because the Scottish justice system failed him. The First Minister may bluster about anything that comes into his head but, to be frank, Scotland's victims and their families do not care. Our justice system is collapsing on his watch. Will he pledge to rebalance our criminal justice system in favour of the victims?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Scottish Executive's Cabinet. (S2F-2492)

I would have thought that, at its next meeting, the Scottish Cabinet might want to discuss hospital cuts, the lack of parenting orders, or perhaps Margaret Curran's trip to New Zealand to see how minority government works. Be that as it may, I turn to the First Minister's lecture in Haddington earlier this week. Does he accept that this Parliament is young, that some mistakes have been made and that there is room for improvement, but that the idea of scrapping devolution after only seven and a half years to go down the road that is advocated by Mr Salmond is fraught with uncertainty and dangerous for the future of Scotland?

Does the First Minister accept that the Parliament would have benefited from an official Opposition that actually offered opposition, such as my party—[ Interruption. ]

Surely an official Opposition should do that instead of continually sniping about affairs that are not in the gift of the Parliament. Is the First Minister aware that, in seven and a half years, the nationalists have opposed only six of his Government's bills? Does he agree that, if we had had an official Opposition that offered sensible, moderate, constructive comment on devolved issues, devolution would have been strengthened?

It is clear that the first seven and a half years of devolution have not met the expectations of the public. That is largely because the Executive has failed to deliver what the public want. The solution is neither to abolish the Scottish Parliament nor to isolate ourselves by leaving the United Kingdom. Does the First Minister agree that Scotland's problems of skills shortages, shocking drugs abuse, hospital cuts and high taxes are caused not by the institution of the Parliament but by his Executive? Does he also agree that it is time for a new form of devolved Government, one that will make the Scottish Parliament work much better to deliver on the real priorities of ordinary people in Scotland?

On behalf of my Conservative colleagues, I, too, pay tribute to Lord Boyd and wish him well for the future. However, the First Minister's motion has presented my party with a genuine dilemma that reflects concerns that I suspect are not confined to the chamber but extend well beyond it. First, I will speak to the amendment in the name of Bill Aitken, the effect of which would be not to recommend the appointment of Mr John Beckett QC as Solicitor General for Scotland. I want to make it clear that my concerns do not relate to his legal competence or professional experience—they relate to the disclosure that he is a current member of the Labour Party. I am not alone in thinking that the role of the Solicitor General should be independent of party politics. On 28 November 2001, when Mrs Angiolini was being appointed to the post of Solicitor General, the First Minister, Jack McConnell, said to the Parliament: "The time is right to have a Solicitor General for Scotland who is not associated with a political party. The time is right to change the perception ... of the job and to focus on modernisation and reform of the prosecution service."— [ Official Report , 28 November 2001; c 4217.]  If that view was right then—and I think that it was—it is right now, and Mr Beckett does not satisfy the First Minister's criterion. I will deal briefly with the proposal to appoint Mrs Angiolini as Lord Advocate. My party recognises the need to fill the position of Lord Advocate without delay and will support that nomination, but that support is heavily qualified for two reasons. Mrs Angiolini has, with justification, been highly respected as a solicitor with a background in the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service, and there is absolutely no question as to her professional competence in that role—I associate my party with the First Minister's comments in that respect. However, the Lord Advocate is essentially the chief legal adviser to the Scottish Executive for both civil matters and criminal matters that fall within the devolved powers of the Scottish Parliament. The question that is being asked is whether Mrs Angiolini possesses the breadth of legal experience to provide such advice. It would be appropriate for the First Minister to comment on that.  Secondly, in a devolved Scotland, there must be real concerns about the chief legal adviser to the Scottish Executive also being the chief prosecutor for Scotland. There is a real and visible conflict of interest, which has become more apparent as issues that are driven by political decision making and which affect reform of the court system or activities within the Crown Office have required a robust and independent response from the Scottish Courts Administration or the Crown Office. I suggest to the First Minister that the appointment of Mrs Angiolini should be concurrent with the setting up of a commission to examine and consider what the proper separation of powers, responsibilities and duties should be in appointing a chief legal adviser to the Scottish Executive and the head of an independent prosecution service. I hope that the First Minister will receive what I am saying as neither personalised nor party-political remarks, but as substantive suggestions to take us forward to a more open and healthy situation. If the amendment in the name of my colleague Bill Aitken is defeated, my party will be confronted with a hybrid motion that does not separate the two nominations. In that event, my party will abstain in the vote. I move amendment S2M-4924.1, in the name of Bill Aitken, to leave out from "and that" to end.

To ask the First Minister when he will next  meet the Prime Minister and what issues they will discuss. (S2F-2477)

Perhaps the next time the First Minister and the Prime Minister have the mutual pleasure of a meeting, they might nestle round the fire for a little chat about something of interest to both of them: retirement. In the past nine years, many older people in Scotland have been fraught with anxiety and uncertainty about that. Frankly, Labour's annual pensions tax raid and the First Minister's council tax hikes have made the lives of the elderly people of Scotland very challenging. With reference to council tax, will the First Minister say how he plans to lighten the load on pensioners, who are barely getting by because of his council tax hikes?

No, that is not good enough. If I understand it correctly, the First Minister's mantra is, "Don't blame me; I've given the councils all the money they need." Councils do blame him, because he is ring fencing that money. Does the First Minister not realise that when the council tax bill drops through the letter box, Scotland's senior citizens do not give a hoot who is to blame—they just want it to be smaller? The Scottish Conservatives have a fully costed proposal to reduce council tax—[ Interruption. ] I can understand the dismay of my opponents, as they have nothing else to offer. My party has a fully costed proposal to reduce council tax for pensioners of 65 and over by 50 per  cent. Scotland's seniors want a 50 per cent cut in their council tax. Is the First Minister with them or against them?

The First Minister is deliberately distorting the funding mechanism for our proposal, which works on an annual basis, involves the mutualisation of Scottish Water and therefore spares the Executive from an annual outgoing of nearly £190 million. Let me get this straight: not only is the First Minister not interested in cutting council tax bills, he is not interested in cutting water bills either. That may be very brave, First Minister, but it is not very clever. I shall do what the First Minister does not want me to do: get back to the question at issue, which, as is his custom, he has failed to answer. I shall have a bit of fun by asking the First Minister a simple question that requires a simple yes or no answer. Will the First Minister cut council tax for pensioners by 50 per cent, yes or no?

The new generation of older people in Scotland is worthy of comment and recognition. My Conservative friends and I are only too familiar with the caricature of the blue-rinsed old dear pottering around the house while her elderly husband in skip bunnet is puttering around the allotment, but that image is way off the mark. The majority of today's pensioners simply do not fit into that category. For a start, many more people survive into their 80s and 90s. In days gone by, a typical 70-year-old might have attempted little more than a walk to the shops and a bedtime story for the grandchildren, but they now fit those pleasures in to a much busier schedule that is sprinkled with surfing the net and cruising the Mediterranean. Indeed, one of them is even standing for President of the United States, and we would not get away with telling him that he is too old to be the leader of the free world. In recent years, there has been a re-emancipation of pensioners, and all power to them. Today, I ask whether our society does all that it can to acknowledge and reassure those men and women—the neo-pensioners—both the active ones whom I described and the ones who need more care and are not so independent. The answer is that we do not, but we should. Too often during the past nine years, our older people have been regarded as yesterday's business. They have been treated with disrespect and robbed of security and dignity by the Governments in Edinburgh and London. However, Scotland's Governments north and south of the border do that at their peril, because it is only a matter of time before the older people of Scotland fight back at the ballot box. We saw a hint of that in 2003 with the election to the Parliament of John Swinburne. Although I seldom agree with John on political issues, I take my hat off to him and say good on him for forcing  pensioners' issues onto the national stage. He took a stand and showed courage, fortitude and good old Scottish grit and determination to get himself elected, and it is right that we pay tribute to that. Although I wish John Swinburne the best of luck in the future, it is up to the four major parties in the Parliament to come up with serious policies to address the needs of Scotland's senior citizens. We need a new agenda for a new generation of pensioners and we need to set a new direction.

Just as I would never have guessed that Mr Harper is a pensioner, I would never have guessed that the Green party has any substantive policies to offer on the matter, but I await declarations with interest. We all know which issues dominate our postbags. One of them is the council tax. At the top of the pile are letters about the anxiety and insecurity that arise from the increases in pensioners' council tax. Since 1997, council tax in Scotland has risen by an astonishing 60 per cent. That might be bearable if the state pension had risen by a similar amount, but it has not. Furthermore, those with private pension provision have looked on in sheer anger as the Chancellor of the Exchequer has skimmed £5 billion per year from their funds, simultaneously destroying any incentive to save for old age.

Everyone would agree that when the Conservatives were in Government they supported our pensioners very effectively in a myriad other ways. Mr Neil would be better directing his concern towards the incumbent Labour Government, which has been languishing for almost 10 years, during which time the plight of our pensioners has worsened. It is little wonder that the number of pensioner households that are spending more than 10 per cent of their income on council tax has gone up by half in the past decade. That situation is simply not sustainable, which is why earlier this week I announced that my party would be going into the next elections to this Parliament advocating an across-the-board cut of 50 per cent in council tax for over-65 pensioner households. That will be administered in addition to the 25 per cent  discount that already applies to single persons. It will result in a cut in the average band D bill of almost £450 for a single pensioner and almost £600 for a pensioner couple. I believe that that is achievable and decent, I know that it is properly costed and I hope that it is something around which the chamber can unite.

I have been generous with interventions and I would like to make further progress, if Mr Muldoon will forgive me.

Even before the charm of Mr Swinney, my generosity has limitations. A crucial test for this policy—and others aimed at senior citizens—is that it does not unfairly penalise any other group in order to achieve its aim. I am not a modern-day Robin Hood, which is why I have ruled out the idea of a local income tax, as proposed by others in the chamber. I do not dispute that many pensioners would benefit from such a proposal, but they would do so at the huge expense of hard-working families on relatively modest incomes, who would face an income tax increase of 4 pence or more in the pound as a result—that is not for me. If I have a choice between helping older people but punishing their sons and daughters, or helping older people without having to pickpocket the younger generation, I will take the latter any day of the week. I know that the Executive's retort will be, "We delivered free personal care," but did it? The free personal care for the elderly policy was supported by all parties, and I am glad that my party supported it, because it was the right thing to do. Nonetheless, the concerns that we raised at the time remain valid, and in many cases have come to fruition. I make no apologies for saying that the free personal care for the elderly policy has been only partially a success. Many people are still being denied access to services to which they are legally entitled, and as my colleague David McLetchie has revealed to our horror, many of his constituents have been paying the City of Edinburgh Council for services that they should have been getting for free. The question for the Executive is this: in how many more areas throughout Scotland is that the case? It is high time that the Executive and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities got their heads together and gave a full refund to everyone who has been wrongly charged. Many of our older people are unable to take on local government bureaucrats to  claim back their own money—frankly, they should not have to. The bottom line is that when the Executive proposed the free personal care policy, it should have ensured that the mechanisms were in place to see it through. Scotland's elderly people who were promised that care by their Government are not in the least bit interested in whether the councils or the Executive are to blame. They simply want access to their legal right, and that they should have.

I have no responsibility for Boris Johnson and, perhaps more important, Boris Johnson has no responsibility for the affairs of a devolved Scotland, so let us proceed with matters relevant to this Parliament. When it comes to caring for one of the most vulnerable groups in society, it is simply not good enough for the Executive to dream about the positive headlines that a bold, new policy generates while taking its eye off the ball in implementing it. Too often, the Executive acts with half a heart—I give it credit for at least having half a heart—and half a head, and that has to stop. That is why I am determined to offer the pensioners of Scotland a positive new agenda. I want them to feel the optimism and hope that they deserve in their advancing years. I want them to feel like an included and valued part of our society. These people have given their all to our society for decades. They have raised families and started businesses. They have paid their taxes and made their contribution. After all that toil and effort, they deserve better than they are getting. For that reason, far from stopping at this council tax announcement, I will soon launch an entire policy platform for Scotland's senior citizens—our grey-sky thinkers, as I like to call them—

Mr Rumbles says dismissively, "I cannot wait," yet judging by the colour of his hair he will soon join the very ranks of people whom we are discussing. His is precisely the kind of pejorative, dismissive and disdainful attitude that so irritates and angers pensioners.

The member has had his intervention, which he made from a sedentary position. He should be man enough to sit down, shut up and listen to the debate.

Not when it is a Liberal Democrat.

I will call on the skill, wisdom and experience of Scotland's senior citizens and reward their years of effort. I will ensure that they get a fair deal from Government and give them a new voice here at the heart of Scottish politics. Our policy platform for senior citizens will sit alongside, and not at the expense of, my party's platform for Scotland's youth—already spearheaded by a rejuvenated and rapidly expanding Conservative future organisation—and our platform of policies for Scotland's families. We in the Conservative party are not interested in pitching ourselves at one section of society to the detriment of others. Good policies are those that work for everyone, not just sectional interests. However, I feel particularly strongly about the case for offering Scotland's senior citizens some of the respect, dignity and security that has been taken from them over the past nine years. That is why I am putting forward a new agenda—an agenda fit for the 21 st century; an agenda that should unite us rather than divide us; an agenda of which I am very proud. I move, That the Parliament believes that our senior citizens represent a valuable and under-acknowledged repository of skill, wisdom and experience and that they should be both respected and, where the need arises, cared for by both society and government to enable them to live in dignity and security in their old age; is therefore greatly concerned that the council tax has risen by 60% since 1997, resulting in many pensioners struggling to pay their bills, and believes that the Scottish Conservatives' proposal for a 50% discount for all pensioner households would greatly alleviate the burden; is further concerned that the policy of free personal care, which was supported by all parties in the Parliament, is still not being universally or timeously implemented throughout Scotland, and therefore calls on the Scottish Executive, local authorities and all other relevant agencies to unite in securing the immediate and complete implementation of this policy in Scotland.

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Scottish Executive's Cabinet. (S2F-2458)

The First Minister's dismissal of Ms Sturgeon's points is understandable as she is the deputy leader of a party that has turned making extravagant spending promises without costing them into an art form. However, as I am the leader of a party with a somewhat more respectable track record in providing value for money—unlike the nationalist party, my party has been in government—I would be obliged if the First Minister answered my question. The Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform has ordered that the independent budget review report should be kept under lock and key and my party has lodged a freedom of information request about that report. Will the First Minister shed light on the issue? He is under an obligation to give an explanation. What is in the report? Why has the information not been disclosed? Is the information too trivial or too embarrassing?

Wriggling, squirming, prevarication—I do not think that the taxpaying public think that the Executive's covert behaviour is trivia. Let us try a simpler question. Last Thursday in the chamber at 10 past 12, when I told the First Minister that he had £76 million of unallocated funds in the health budget, he rubbished his own figures and denied that he had the money. At 1 o'clock, his spin doctors were in a  vortex and were waffling to journalists. They admitted that the money existed, but said that it was in the wrong column, because it has been allocated. Here is the interesting part—no one knows to where it has been allocated. Only the Executive could blow 76 million quid in three quarters of an hour and not know where it has gone. Will the First Minister tell us why money is sloshing around that he does not know about, why he is hiding his budget figures from the country and why the Executive seems to have no grip whatever on Scotland's public finances?

At 12.12 on 28 September, the First Minister managed to sort of answer a question in the Parliament. For a week, the information that he has just given has apparently been known only to him. The people of Scotland will find it pathetic that it takes pressure from Opposition politicians to elicit any information about a specific item in the First Minister's budget document. That is a shambles. I go back to the independent report that is lying around in a locked room. Public confidence and trust in politics and politicians are at an all-time low. That is little wonder, given what we have heard from the First Minister today. The Parliament was supposed to be about honesty, integrity and transparency, so let us see some of that. Will the First Minister save the information commissioner some trouble and time by publishing the report and restoring a little bit of faith to the Scottish people?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister and what issues they will discuss. (S2F-2439)

The First Minister will be aware of the Health Committee's report on free personal care, which was debated in the Parliament yesterday. The committee highlighted major problems and reaffirmed the sad fact that the majority of councils in Scotland still operate waiting lists for free personal care. He promised the Parliament in June that he would sort that out. He referred to "clear procedures". What are they and what has happened?

This is September, and vulnerable older people are stuck on waiting lists for care that they have been promised. They do not give a fig about petty squabbles between the Executive and councils—what matters is what is happening on the ground and, unfortunately, there are fundamental problems with delivering the policy. Does the First Minister accept that if the policy is to be fully delivered, more money will have to be made available? Does he agree that caring for those frail people would be a better use of resources than bailing out Scottish Enterprise or trying to relocate quangos and agencies around the country at enormous expense?

Old people in those areas would far prefer to have that care delivered than a relocation of agencies and quangos because the debacle has continued for too long and is absolutely unacceptable. The irony is that what is happening is avoidable. Is the First Minister aware of table 8.03 in the Executive's draft budget document, a copy of which I have with me? The table highlights the fact that £76 million is lying unallocated in the Health Department's budget for the current year—it is sitting unused in the Executive's coffers. Will he make a commitment to use at least some of that resource to implement free personal care? The money is there—will he use it?

I suggest that if anyone is authorised to comment on the new logo, it is me. I say to Mrs Macmillan that, interestingly, the Scottish tree does not point to the left, nor does it lean excessively to the right. It is also bigger than the other tree and, I suggest, represents a visible verdant robustness, which I think will be enticing to all who see it. I am glad that the logo has attracted such interest and justified such attention.

It is my pleasure to lead the debate. Climate change is one of the biggest challenges facing the world today, although it is often seen as an issue that is far removed from voters. That is understandable, because if someone is on a waiting list for hospital treatment, is intimidated by antisocial behaviour or is worried about how they will pay their council tax, global warming does not tend to be an immediate threat for them. Although most of us care about the environment, it is not always high on our personal agendas because of the many other issues in our lives, which is unfortunate. Global warming is sometimes seen as a middle-class issue or as an issue for people who can afford to buy environmentally friendly products that cost more, or for those who are not affected by the day-to-day health, education and law and order issues that perplex others. However, global warming affects us all, regardless of wealth, religion, education or location. If we do not address the problem, we will all suffer the consequences. It is important that we address the problems in our public services, that we try to make our economy more vibrant and that we try to provide better opportunities for all, but we cannot ignore the impact that we have on the environment.

In my time as leader of the Conservatives in the Parliament, I have felt obliged to raise the plethora of pressing problems that I have just referred to, which thanks to Labour  and the Liberal Democrats currently perplex the lives of many people in Scotland. As I said, those issues are one reason why the environment is not always to the forefront of personal vision. Carbon dioxide and other gases warm the surface of the planet naturally by trapping solar heat in the atmosphere. That is essential, because it keeps our planet habitable but, by burning fuel such as coal, gas and oil and by cutting down trees, we have increased dramatically the amount of carbon dioxide in the earth's atmosphere and, as a result, temperatures are rising.

I would like to make progress, if the member does not mind. The atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide has increased by a mammoth 31 per cent since 1759, which is an unprecedented rate of increase in the past 20,000 years. As a result, according to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the increase in carbon dioxide has contributed to an increase in global surface temperatures of 0.6°C during the 20 th century. The IPCC also estimates that, by 2100, temperatures may be as much as 5.8°C higher than they were in 1990. One of the difficulties is that such information just flows over people's heads without the practical impact being taken in, which is obvious from the casual chitchat that is going on among members of other parties. The figures may not seem much of a difference, but when we consider that European Union scientists agree that a change in temperature of more than 2°C would be catastrophic and would put 3 billion people at risk of flooding, as melting ice caps caused sea levels to rise, we can begin to understand the potential impact. Al Gore has recently attracted a lot of positive attention—rightly, I think—for the film "An Inconvenient Truth", in which he warns of the terrible consequences if global warming continues unabated. The film predicts that deaths from global warming will double in just 25 years, to 300,000 people a year; that global sea levels could rise by more than 20ft as a result of the loss of shelf ice in Greenland and Antarctica, thereby devastating coastal areas worldwide; that heat waves will be more frequent and more intense; that droughts and wildfires will occur more often; and that the Arctic ocean could be ice free in the summer by 2050. Given that the changes would fall within the lifespan of some members, the estimates begin to be an alarming prospect. More than a million species worldwide could be driven to extinction by 2050.

Unlike Mrs Macmillan's party and the Liberal Democrats, my party has always acknowledged that a balance must be struck in the provision of renewable energy. I am sure that I am not the only member whose mailbag is bulging with the legitimate concerns and objections of people who see areas of Scotland being absolutely inundated by forests of wind turbines. My party has made it clear that, where enormous wind turbine developments are proposed, a moratorium should be introduced and the schemes should continue only if there is no local objection to the scale of the proposals. There is no hiding from or ignoring global warming—the evidence that it is already happening is overwhelming and undeniable. Glaciers are melting and the number of category 4 and 5 hurricanes has almost doubled in the past 30 years, from an average of 10 a year in the 1970s, to 18 a year now. At present, we live with the threat of hurricane Gordon. Category 4 and 5 hurricanes made up about 20 per cent of all hurricanes in the 1970s but, in the past decade, they accounted for about 35 per cent of the storms. At least 279 species of plants and animals are responding to global warming by moving closer to the poles.

My party has been clear that, at the end of the day, nuclear power may be part of the balanced provision of energy. Unlike the Scottish National Party, we believe that there is an obligation to ensure that the demand for consumption of energy can be met responsibly. My assertion is that we must investigate urgently all possible forms of alternative generation of energy, particularly renewables, which is the issue on which I am trying to focus in my speech. The thrust of the motion in my name is about going right back to individuals. The Scottish National Party believes that the enormous political panacea of an independent Scotland will be the Celtic utopia that we have all been awaiting, but I am not kidded and I can tell you that hundreds of thousands of voters in Scotland are not kidded either.

No, I have been generous and I would like to make progress. Despite the inescapable and alarming factors that I have mentioned, we do not need to be resigned. Global warming is a huge issue with massive implications for civilisation, but the good news is that, by our efforts, we can contribute to solutions, which is the point that I made in response to Mr Lochhead. Indeed, we have a moral obligation to do so. We can work together and share responsibility between individuals, government and business, to ensure that the next generation enjoys a sustainable planet. For Mrs Brankin, I will be the first to admit that the Scottish Executive has made progress in cutting emissions from Scotland. Under the Kyoto protocol, Britain, led of course by a Conservative Government at Westminster—a fact that our opponents conveniently forget—committed to reducing greenhouse gas emissions to 12.5 per cent below 1990 levels by 2008-12. Creditably, Scotland has already met that commitment. The latest statistics show that emissions from Scotland were 14 per cent below 1990 levels, an achievement of which we should be proud. I acknowledge that the Executive has played a part in that achievement. Businesses saw a drop in their emissions and removals by 41 per cent, which is another encouraging development. We need to be aware of the increases in energy, transport and residential emissions. They highlight the need to change attitudes about the environment and to convince people to do a great deal more individually to help solve the problem of global warming. I never cease to be astonished at the illustrations of what relatively simple changes to a domestic regime can achieve for energy conservation. If every household in the United Kingdom replaced just one 60W bulb with a new energy-saving light bulb used for three hours a day, that would be the equivalent of planting 10 million new trees. If every UK household filled the kettle with only the amount of water actually required, we would save enough electricity to power more than 50,000 homes for a year. That gets right down to matters under personal control. Those examples clearly illustrate the difference that each of us can make on a daily basis to protect the environment and, by saving energy, individuals obviously save money on their energy bills, which is a win-win scenario. I accept that there is a limit to what Governments can to do to change attitudes, but I believe that political leadership does have a role  and that the Executive can help to encourage such changes.

I have already referred to what I think is a very impressive statistic: businesses have managed to drop their emissions and removals by 41 per cent. That is a pretty impressive performance. That is why our motion concentrates on personal responsibility.

I wish to make progress. My party has called on the Executive to expand the Scottish community and householder renewables initiative to encourage households, communities and small businesses to install modern energy creating and saving technologies. That will have the triple benefit of cutting energy bills, reducing CO 2 emissions and giving new small-scale renewable technologies a boost. Examples of technologies that would be eligible for funding under the Conservative eco-bonus scheme include hydroelectric generation, solar panels, roof or micro wind turbines, ground heat systems and wall and roof insulation. Under our proposals, households would be able to apply for a grant of up to 60 per cent of the total cost of their project, up to a limit of £4,000. We propose to double the previous 30 per cent limit, as we believe that those grants should be able to reach more households. We also wish to encourage community schemes. Communities would be able to apply for a maximum grant of £10,000 for a feasibility study and a maximum grant of £100,000 for a capital project.

I am sorry—I really want to make further progress. We would extend the eco-bonus scheme to allow small businesses, too, to apply for a maximum grant of £4,000 for 60 per cent of the total cost of their small renewable project. I hope that that illustrates to Mrs Gillon how we view the eco-bonus scheme working. I applaud the scheme's principle, and it has been a sensible way to start providing political leadership, but we would try to take it further—to households and communities. We would make £12 million per annum available for our eco-bonus scheme, which matches the Executive's total spending to date and triples its current annual spend. I believe that the eco-bonus scheme will help address cultural  attitudes and raise awareness, as well as encouraging the public to assume personal responsibility for contributing to a sustainable Scotland. Returning again to Mrs Gillon's point, we should recognise that many businesses are helping to change the way in which we think about the environment. For example, Sainsbury's is now using biodegradable packaging, and Tesco is encouraging shoppers to reuse polythene bags. Those developments are important, if small, steps towards improving our environment. To help heal the planet fully, we need seriously to consider new ways of developing energy. Wave power, small-scale hydro and decentralised energy all have great potential to offer us, but they require a lot of research and development. That was recently affirmed to me by a businessman who works in that field. Research and development into new ways to reduce carbon emissions is vital. I was sorry to see that the Executive had performed a U-turn on its promise of a business rates cut for companies engaged in research and development. That brings me to my final point: politicians and double standards. [ Laughter. ] I suggest that there is a certain candour in any politician being prepared to accept the perception that many people have of politics and politicians as a whole. The braying laughter from the Labour and Liberal Democrat ranks is a mocking reflection of those parties' hypocrisy, duplicity and manipulation over the past seven years. It would be totally unacceptable for MSPs to call on businesses and homes to help the environment when the Parliament itself is apparently energy inefficient. In March this year, thermal images of this building, which were commissioned by the BBC, showed that the Parliament is losing heat. It is certainly not losing any heat from Mr Tavish Scott and Mr Lyon, whose incessant chattering is adding to the already present hot air in the chamber. It is well known—indeed, it is visible every night—that a great number of lights are left on in the Parliament around the clock. How many televisions, computers and Telewest boxes are regularly left on standby? That is a waste of energy. I am not calling for the appointment of a parliamentary inspector of gadgets, as the Presiding Officer will be relieved to learn, but I point out that each of us has a responsibility to ensure that our offices and the Parliament itself are energy efficient. I wanted to use the debate to outline the threat that we all face from global warming. It is imperative that we encourage everyone to work together to contribute to a sustainable Scotland. If, as we sit here in Edinburgh in September 2006 having what I hope will be a genuinely constructive  and helpful debate, we do not translate what we know now into a personal and collective change in lifestyle, we are contemplating a Firth of Forth where the Isle of May could disappear, a Scotland where shoreline settlements could regularly become the victims of tidal flooding—and where that could become the rule, not the exception—and a Scotland whose familiar physical face, which many of us have taken for granted, could suffer ugly and unwelcome change. My party believes in trusting people. I believe that the Scottish people want to protect their planet for future generations, which is why the Scottish Conservatives are committed to enabling every individual to play their own part in meeting the climate change challenge. I move, That the Parliament notes that, along with global poverty and terrorism, climate change is one of the three great challenges facing mankind; recognises that there needs to be a greater shared responsibility among government, business, individuals and families to meet this challenge; believes that combating the threat of climate change will require fresh ideas and radical thinking and, therefore, that the concept of decentralised energy should be seriously pursued; recognises that if we are going to achieve a sustainable Scotland we need to address culture and attitudes to raise awareness and encourage the public to be proactive and to assume personal responsibility for contributing to a sustainable Scotland, and calls, therefore, on the Scottish Executive to expand the Scottish community and householder renewables initiative to incentivise households, communities and small businesses to install modern energy creating and saving technologies as an important first step.

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Scottish Executive's Cabinet. (S2F-2423)

Yesterday, the Executive released new figures that showed that the proportion of  people who are employed in the public sector has rocketed again, including an 18.4 per cent increase in Scottish Executive staff since 1999. Does the First Minister agree with Richard Lambert, the new director general of the Confederation of British Industry, who, at the annual CBI Scotland dinner last week, spoke of "a public sector which has not been as focused as it should have been on growth-enhancing projects"?

Business leaders and the Scottish Conservatives are not the only people to express concern about the potential impact of our growing public sector. Interestingly, another authoritative comment has been made recently on the problem. In the Edinburgh Evening News , the First Minister said that removing public sector jobs allowed the private sector to flourish. Specifically, he said: "if we can take some of those public sector jobs out of Edinburgh and allow the private sector to grow more, we are doing a good thing for the Edinburgh economy, not a bad thing." Whatever I might think of the literary style of that quotation, following the First Minister's logic, does he agree that reducing the proportion of public sector jobs across Scotland would be "a good thing" for the Scottish economy?

The burgeoning public sector and the Executive's obsession with controlling everything from the centre is threatening Scotland's fragile private sector economy. The public sector is now estimated at well over 50 per cent of gross domestic product. There is virtual unanimity among experts that that level of public sector activity is stifling economic growth, which is a fact that the First Minister now appears to agree with. What is the First Minister going to do about the ever-increasing legions of desk pilots, pen pushers and paper shufflers who spend their time reporting back to Executive ministers rather than delivering front-line services?

To ask the First Minister when he will next  meet the current Prime Minister and what issues they will discuss. (S2F-2408)

Well, that may prove to be auspicious. The First Minister, along with many others, may have asked the Prime Minister about his retirement plans. However, as much as the First Minister might like to blame the Prime Minister for all his woes, he cannot hide behind the Prime Minister's pinny strings for ever. For example, he cannot blame Tony Blair for the violence in Scottish schools. This morning, my colleague Lord James Douglas-Hamilton highlighted figures he received under freedom of information that show that attacks on school staff have gone up a horrific 14 per cent in a single year. Indeed, in the Minister for Education and Young People's home area of Moray, the number of physical assaults on staff rocketed from 34 in 2004-05 to 188 in 2005-06, which is more than a five-fold increase. Does the First Minister agree with the Educational Institute of Scotland that the Scottish Executive should provide as a matter of urgency additional off-site facilities for children and young people who display particularly challenging behaviour?

The First Minister will also be aware of the CBI Scotland manifesto that was issued yesterday, which attacked the education system, claiming that Scottish businesses were having to foot the bill for remedial lessons for school leavers because too many pupils lacked the basic skills needed for the workplace. Does the First Minister accept that while violence is rife in the classroom, the standard of teaching and quality of education will inevitably be affected? Does he accept that unless head teachers have the powers necessary to exclude  permanently the small number of persistently disruptive pupils who are driving valued staff away from the profession and disrupting schools, that unacceptable situation will continue?

I hear what the First Minister is saying, but just as alarming as the growing problem with discipline in our schools is his irresponsible attempt to cover up the truth by refusing to publish the annual statistics. We can address the problem only if we know the full facts. Will he therefore now give a commitment to publish this vital information annually, however bad the figures are?

The topic of today's debate fills me with a great sense of optimism—not for any of the reasons that the First Minister has outlined today, but for the quite different reason that we will, in the not-too-distant future, be facing Scottish Parliament and local government elections in which it is likely that the Labour Party will suffer a bloody nose and be kicked from power not only in the Scottish Parliament but in councils the length and breadth of the country, where Labour has let down the Scottish public. The First Minister may argue to the contrary; indeed, he may point to the document that he published last week in which an alleged 283 results that Labour has delivered in Scotland were cited—if only our football team could achieve equivalent success. One has only to make a quick scan of the document for the cracks appear. I will refer to a couple of beauties. First, result number 12, which is headed, "Labour reduced business rates". Although the Executive has finally conceded the argument and reluctantly begun to reduce business rates, it was the First Minister who put up business rates in the first place. In truth, the alleged result should have read, "Labour has cost Scottish businesses an additional £838 million by increasing business rates above the English level." What an achievement. Secondly, result number 167 is interestingly headed: "Conditions for bail ... tightened up" and "the intention to end automatic early release." Again, that is a glittering demonstration of the Executive's spin machine. The Executive has made bail easier. It did so first in 2000, when the ban on certain categories of alleged offenders receiving bail was removed and bail became easier, and again in 2004, when the Executive allowed individuals who were initially refused bail to be released with tags. The First Minister has a cheek to even mention automatic early release. The Conservative party has given Parliament four opportunities to end that ludicrous practice. On every occasion, Labour, the Lib Dems and the Scottish National Party voted against ending it—small wonder that public confidence in the criminal justice system has been shattered. Although I could comment on many more failings, today's debate is about Scotland's future and not her past. At the end of the day, despite massive increases in spending—there have been massive increases in spending—the Scottish  Government under Labour and the Lib Dems has failed to deliver improvements for Scotland. We are still lagging behind the rest of the United Kingdom in terms of economic growth; crimes and offences are significantly higher than they were in 1999; waiting lists are longer and waiting times are higher; business start-ups are down; households in temporary accommodation are up and attacks on school staff are up. That is not a record of which to be proud. However, an important point must be made: the failures that I have described are the fault not of devolution but of Labour and the Liberal Democrats, who have attempted to control and micromanage everything from the centre, from ring fencing local authority grants to introducing targets on school exclusion. That is the main reason why we are not witnessing improvements in our public services. For example, the recent scrapping of school boards wrested statutory representation from parents and fobbed them off with parental involvement. The Executive has put in place so many targets in the national health service in Scotland that our clinicians have to prioritise treatment of wisdom teeth over treatment of cancer so that they can meet the targets—many people find that to be beyond belief.

I am not privy to the correspondence to which the minister referred, but no doubt he will copy it to me. However, I am relaying to him the picture of the national health service that the people of Scotland see. People are experiencing a health service in which many traditional local services are being wrenched from their grasp. People—including pregnant women—are being told to travel unacceptable distances for essential services that they have a right to access locally. Is it any wonder that the people of Scotland feel indifferent to and take little pride in our Parliament? With seven years of failure behind them, Labour and the Lib Dems have forfeited the right to govern again. I listened with interest to Nicola Sturgeon's speech. She declared proudly that the Scottish National Party will "stand up and be counted when it matters", but the SNP has managed to oppose only six Executive bills in seven years—yet it calls  itself the Opposition and masquerades as an alternative to the Government.

I do not remember being a recipient of that colourful missive, but Mr Crawford might know more than I do. It is understandable that he should want to deflect attention from his party's performance in the Scottish Parliament. The public will find it strange that the party that claims to have been the principal Opposition in this Parliament has been so weak-kneed and limp in opposing the Executive's proposed legislation.

I have already given way and I need to make progress. Most people do not want to be rid of the Scottish Parliament, but they want the problems of the past seven years to be fixed and they want Parliament to work better and to be less extravagant. They want Parliament to deliver better public services for all the people of Scotland, so that they can take pride in it while remaining part of Britain. The Conservatives are committed to delivering those improvements and to building a confident Scottish Parliament within a strong Britain. We want more power to be returned to local people and we want to instigate real public sector reform and provide better value for money. We will take Scottish Water out of the public sector, because that is the only way to provide a manageable service to the public in an effective, efficient and cost-bearable manner. Conservatives will provide more police and we will increase accountability and transparency in the police. We will publish regular local crime statistics and we will put toughness back into sentencing.

The member must forgive me, but I am short of time. We will argue that parents and teachers should be empowered to run schools. We will endeavour to ensure that they have a proper sense of ownership and governance in schools and that head teachers can tackle indiscipline. We will give Scotland a coherent and effective strategy to deal  with drug abuse. We will scrap centrally imposed targets in our health service and instead put clinical decisions in the hands of doctors, not ministers. On Mr Crawford's point, we will continue to argue for a reduction in the number of members of the Scottish Parliament to 108, as the Scotland Act 1998 intended. That is not a recipe for a weakened Parliament; it is a recipe for a more effective and leaner Parliament that focuses on the priorities of people, not those of politicians. The public will find that to be an acceptable way forward for Parliament—after all, they pay for it. If we really are concerned about value for money for the taxpayer, we must start by setting an example with politicians. Labour and the Lib Dems have let us down. They were trusted with the devolution project, but they risk losing it to the Scottish National Party, which wants only to wreck devolution. The Scottish Tories have a more positive and honourable vision. We will deliver a Scottish Parliament with the policies that Scotland needs and which its people deserve, while creating a strong relationship with Westminster. With that recipe, real devolution lies ahead and a meaningful Parliament, of which the people of Scotland can be proud, can be created. I move amendment S2M-4746.1, to leave out from "welcomes" to "four years" and insert: "notes that since devolution the gap between the poor and the rich has widened, waiting lists and times are going up, crime is getting worse, council tax has increased by 60% and economic growth is lagging behind England; recognises that these problems are not the fault of devolution, but are the fault of the Labour and Liberal Democrat Scottish Executive; believes that, to make devolution work, more power and responsibility need to be returned to people and local communities, real public sector reform needs to be instigated and better value for money needs to be provided;".

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Scottish Executive's Cabinet. (S2F-2394)

Does the First Minister agree with Professor Kerr, who said to the Parliament's Health Committee on 20 September: "we have said as often and as rationally as possible that we would prefer to treat patients as close to home as possible."—[ Official Report , Health Committee, 20 September 2005; c 2169.]

That was an unexpected and encouraging answer. Bearing in mind the sentiment that was expressed by Professor Kerr and the importance that the public place on local access to health care, in particular to accident and emergency services, does the First Minister think that Professor Kerr's view is reflected in Lanarkshire NHS Board's decision to close the A and E department at Monklands hospital?

Quite simply, the very direct interests to which the First Minister refers are that the accident and emergency facilities in Mr Kerr's constituency and those in the First Minister's constituency are safe. Those are indeed very direct interests. I remind the First Minister that, regardless of what he said about health boards, ultimately, the buck stops with him and his Labour-Lib Dem Executive, which is responsible for the overall health service. Something just does not add up. Since 1999, annual Health Department spending has increased by a massive £4 billion, which is a  huge cash injection. The spending for this year alone is £9 billion. Will the First Minister therefore explain why, over that same period, we have seen a troubling pattern of numerous hospitals being closed down, downgraded or placed under threat? To name but a few, the hospitals affected have included Stobhill hospital, the Vale of Leven hospital, Perth royal infirmary, St John's hospital, Ayr hospital and the cottage hospitals in Jedburgh and Coldstream. More and more health care is being centralised. The Scottish public have paid the tax and the First Minister claims to have increased spending hugely, so why are many vital local services under threat?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister and what issues they will discuss. (S2F-2374)

I hope that when the First Minister meets the Prime Minister, he will pass on to Mr Blair Scotland's condemnation of the shameful, mindless and brutish acts of thuggery that were committed when two vulnerable individuals were  attacked simply for supporting the England football team. I hope that the First Minister will tell the Prime Minister that the overwhelming majority of Scots are tolerant, kindly and open-minded people who are horrified and nauseated by such appalling incidents. Will the First Minister update us on what is being done to track down the perpetrators of those crimes to ensure that they are properly dealt with through the criminal justice system?

I thank the First Minister for his response and was glad to hear it. The attacks in question bring shame on Scotland, create a negative image and are a sad illustration of the attitude of a minority of the population. The fact that a grown man was able to attack a seven-year-old boy in a park in the middle of the afternoon without fear of apprehension is a sad indictment of our justice system. Does the First Minister accept that that is another indication of the crisis in our justice system, in which only 145 police are on the beat at any one time and three out of four crimes are not even reported to the police? Will he say what action he is taking to increase the police presence on our streets and in our parks and communities?

Not for the first time, I have to bring the First Minister to book, because my party  supported the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill in the Parliament. In fact, the figure of 145 police on the beat to which I referred is extracted from an Executive document, "Narrowing The Gap—Police visibility and public reassurance—Managing public expectation and demand". Although, as the First Minister said, there may be more recruited police officers in Scotland, wherever they are, they are not walking the streets. As the First Minister knows, operational policing matters are decisions for chief constables and politicians should not interfere in them. However, does the he accept that the current policing policies that are favoured by chief constables are in conflict with the public's demand for more police on our streets and on the beat? Does he further accept that it is only by making the police more accountable to the public, regularly publishing community crime statistics and directly electing the conveners of police boards that policing will begin to reflect the needs and demands of the public?

I, too, thank the Glasgow Airport Rail Link Bill Committee for its thorough work. In principle, I support the airport rail link. I am satisfied that the economic-benefits case has been made and I am aware that the project has the support of the Confederation of British Industry Scotland, the Glasgow Chamber of Commerce and BAA. I have, however, concerns about the estimated positive impact in reducing road traffic—I am unconvinced by that argument. Regular M8 travellers west of Glasgow, of whom I am one, know that at peak times, which have stretched in duration in recent years, cars, buses and taxis face immovable congestion. If we add to that a projected residential development of 2,300 houses at Bishopton about five miles from the airport, the M8 is likely to become an historic exhibit of how road travel was once possible in Renfrewshire. A rail link will be the only transport service that can offer certainty in journey times to Glasgow airport. Helpfully, the rail network to the south, east and west of Glasgow Central station suggests that other configurations of rail access to the airport via the proposed link are serious options that may fall short of the crossrail proposals, but which are active possibilities, because track exists already. They are serious goers for active consideration. That said, I have practical concerns about the proposal. I am not sure that the connectivity problem between Glasgow Queen Street station and Glasgow Central station is as significant as has been suggested—I say that as a regular commuter who uses the two stations—although there an express bus shuttle from Glasgow Queen Street station to Glasgow Central station will be needed. That prerequisite assumes greater importance for people who know where the proposed dedicated platform for the rail link at Glasgow Central station is to be located: the notorious platform 11a, which is so far removed from the main concourse that it might enjoy a postal address in Kilmarnock. The express shuttle bus will need to convey passengers from Queen Street station to platform 11a but—good news—the vehicle-access structure of Glasgow Central station makes that possible. I am aware that the rail network out of Glasgow Central that serves Ayrshire, Renfrewshire and Inverclyde is heavily used. The additional imposition of traffic from the proposed link will require increased track capacity, which may offer opportunities for Braehead—I understand that there is already a freight spur. If we are proceeding along the lines of further development  of infrastructure and rolling stock, there are development potentials in that that should not be diminished or underestimated. The stock will also need to be tailored to accommodate the needs of luggage-transporting travellers who are bound for the airport. As a regular commuter, I know that it is not easy to store luggage in the current rolling stock. If the service is specifically for holidaymakers and other airport-bound commuters, that is a very serious problem that will need to be considered. Comments have been made about the cost of the proposed project; there is no doubt that any amount between £170 million and £210 million is significant. That is another issue that requires serious consideration. Some years ago, I raised with the minister's predecessor the viability of a monorail link from a newly constructed station west of Paisley Gilmour Street. The likely capital cost of that would have been very much less than £210 million. At that time, there seemed to be a commercial appetite for providing such a service, so I ask the minister today whether that option is absolutely dead. Although I think that, with one or two exceptions, all of us are very much behind the proposal, there is no doubt that the capital costs will be significant and so require serious investigation. I am interested in projected passenger use of the rail link, as disclosed in the committee report. I am surprised and intrigued by the analysis in the report that suggests that the proportions of the total GARL patronage by trip type in 2009 are estimated to be 33 per cent air passengers, 7 per cent employees and 60 per cent non-airport-related trips. That poses a basic question: If luggage-encumbered people who are bound for the airport are seeking as direct and as simple a service as possible from a point of departure at home, they need the simplest and most congenial form of travel. Why would luggage-transporting airport-bound travellers want to fight for seats with people who are commuting between Glasgow and Paisley? I ask because a train runs between Glasgow and Paisley about every 10 or 15 minutes, so the commuters seem to be well served at the moment. That is another issue that needs to be clarified. In principle, the development offers an exciting prospect for Glasgow and it certainly offers an exciting prospect for the west of Scotland, Renfrewshire and Inverclyde, and potentially for Ayrshire. I therefore support the proposal.

I thank the minister for sending me an advance copy of his statement. I would have thought that now was the time for action, not conversation. Over seven years of devolution, we have seen millions more pounds poured into our public services, but no improvement in outcomes. Waiting times and lists are up on 1999, crimes and offences are up on 1999 and many school pupils do not meet the Government's own standards for reading, writing and maths. I know that Mr McCabe is a man of few words, but his statement, entitled "Public Service Reform", is truly remarkable for the absence of any mention of substantive reform. Will the minister therefore consider, as a first step, removing centrally imposed targets in our public services and freeing them up to set their own priorities—priorities that will better reflect the needs of local people and that really will represent bottom-up politics?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Scottish Executive's Cabinet. (S2F-2358)

A triumph for the Tories. [ Laughter. ] I am sure that the First Minister was as shocked as I was to hear about the sad case of the seven-year-old boy who collapsed at his school in Inverness after taking methadone. In March, following the tragic death of Derek Doran from methadone, I asked the First Minister whether he could tell me how many people are currently prescribed methadone, how long they have been on it and how many of them look after children. Is the First Minister any further forward in answering those questions?

In the recent case in Inverness, the authorities seem to be at a loss to explain how the child got hold of the methadone—if such it is— but we know that such risks can exist in the school environment. I made my previous request for information because it is important that we establish whether the licensed distribution of methadone presents difficulties through accident, negligence or whatever. We need more information so that we can pinpoint where methadone has come from and also identify any children who might be at risk. Does the First Minister agree that methadone is a highly addictive and potentially dangerous drug? Does he agree that, if the essential information that I have requested becomes available, it should be given in confidence to schools so that they are aware of any children who are potentially at risk?

I am partially encouraged by the First Minister's response. In the wider environment in which it is given, methadone is often referred to as part of a harm-reduction strategy. I accept that there may be legitimate doubt about the circumstances of the  young boy in Inverness, but the incident reminds us of the dangers that this drug presents to wider society if it is inadvertently, negligently or improperly distributed beyond prescribed users. Establishing the facts is surely a first step, but we must also move Scotland away from an overreliance on methadone. Therefore, I repeat the call that I have made many times before and ask the First Minister whether, as has happened in England and Wales, he will establish a central directory containing details of every available treatment and rehabilitation facility in Scotland—whether state funded or in the voluntary sector—so that we can at least offer drug addicts the maximum opportunity to end their addiction.

I, too, thank the Solicitor General for the advance copy of her statement. On behalf of the Scottish Conservatives, I welcome the statement, which makes a positive contribution to dealing with an extremely serious issue that has been regarded as complex and perplexing in recent years. The statement represents progress. If we accept that the very nature of what has taken place in a case of alleged rape means that there might be totally conflicting accounts of what happened and that, as the Solicitor General's statement makes clear, a third of all cases that are reported therefore fall when they are examined by the Crown Office, can the Solicitor General confirm that we might need to consider what other charges might be relevant for prosecution in those cases? The statistics on the percentage of convictions arising from cases in which a charge of rape or attempted rape has been brought are perhaps slightly more encouraging, in that they stand at 56 per cent. In the light of her statement, does the Solicitor General believe that the measures to which she referred will lead to an increase in that 56 per cent conviction rate?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister and what issues they will discuss. (S2F-2341)

That must have been some convention of minds. Perhaps in the course of those discussions a succession was made clear. With the passing of its Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002, the Executive promised that personal care would be free to the elderly in Scotland and that food preparation would be included in that right. Four years on, the Executive has breached that commitment. Will the First Minister explain why so many councils in Scotland are finding it almost impossible to meet the Executive's commitment to free personal care  for the elderly and why there should be any doubt about the inclusion of food preparation?

The First Minister seems to have suggested that some councils have received, but have misspent, their allocation. In response to Ms Sturgeon, he said that, where that unhappy circumstance has arisen, there are "clear procedures that will be followed". Elderly people are not interested in squabbles between councillors and the Executive and the problem will not be resolved by blaming someone else. If clear procedures will be followed to deal with this matter, does the First Minister accept that, having created the right to free personal care, the Executive has a legal responsibility to ensure that that care is provided when and where it is needed—not after someone has languished on a waiting list—and that that requires adequate funding?

A few weeks ago, we learned that the Executive was bailing out Scottish Enterprise to the tune of £45 million. In that case, an Executive agency had overspent, just as the First Minister states that certain councils have overspent.

The First Minister made it clear this morning that he considered that some councils had received money but had not allocated it to the intended use. The point is that he is alleging that there is a misallocation of resource by the councils. I am pointing out that, at the end of the day, there is a client group whose members are not getting the services that they were promised because of a breach somewhere along the line. The councils are arguing that absence of resource and lack of money are responsible. If the kernel of the problem is money, as certain councils are alleging, and if one council has totally closed the books, saying, "No resource. No cash. Can't provide the service," will the First Minister explain why he can bail out the enterprise agency but is not willing to step in now with his procedures—whatever they are—to implement the free personal care obligation that the Executive has placed on those councils?

I, too, thank the First Minister for the clarity of his statement, which is extremely helpful. On behalf of my colleagues, I extend best wishes to Lord Hamilton for what we hope is a speedy recovery. We also appreciate the work that Lord Hamilton's colleagues are undertaking to cope with what is clearly a difficult situation. My party is willing to support the proposals that the First Minister outlined. An important influence on that attitude is the clearly indicated desire that the mechanism should be triggered by judicial rather than political impetus. That is an important recognition of the two distinct roles. I look forward to seeing the bill in detail, but I reassure the First Minister that, in principle, the Conservatives will be supportive.

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Scottish Executive's Cabinet. (S2F-2332)

Well, some of us can come to a view on these things, but there you go. Does the First Minister think it appropriate that an individual who, according to a newspaper report today, has been charged with murder and released on bail and tagged is allowed to go on holiday to Bulgaria?

This latest outrage is simply another chapter in the depressing chronicle of the crumbling Scottish criminal justice system. The fact is that more murderers are being freed on bail because Labour was hellbent on making Scotland compliant with the European convention on human rights. More prisoners are also being released early from jail and going on to commit more crime because of Labour's failure to scrap automatic early release. The First Minister may have talked big on those issues for years, but nothing has actually been done. Can he explain why, while this mayhem is reigning, his Executive has prioritised criminalising non-existent fur farms and the docking of working dogs' tails?

Before the First Minister rushes to blame the Conservative party for automatic early release, I remind him that Conservatives put legislation on the statute book nearly 10 years ago to end the policy. Unbelievably, Labour, the Liberal Democrats and the Scottish National Party have opposed scrapping automatic early release on four separate occasions in the Parliament. I hear moans and groans from Labour and Liberal Democrat members, but they should tell that to the victims of crimes that were committed by people who were automatically released early from prison. Will the First Minister give a categorical assurance today that automatic early release for all prisoners—regardless of their crime and whether they are serving short or long sentences—will be abolished?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister and what issues they will discuss. (S2F-2312)

Yesterday's announcement that 341 of the 3,300 abortions that were carried out on teenagers in Scotland last year were carried out on under-16s was described in the press today by Scotland's chief medical officer, Harry Burns, as "disappointing". His response is not surprising, because reducing the number of unintended pregnancies is one of the main objectives of the  national strategy to improve sexual health. Does the First Minister agree that such deeply worrying figures require a rethink of the whole strategy?

Is it not the case that the strategy is failing? The figures speak for themselves. Most people will find the number of teenage abortions shocking and believe that something has gone terribly wrong when girls as young as 11 are becoming pregnant. Given that frightening trend, not to examine the whole way in which we deal with teenage pregnancy and sex education would be totally irresponsible. I accept the need to inform young people about sex, but there must be a balance. Is it not time that we sent out far clearer messages about the dramatic, life-changing consequences that can arise from premature sexual activity?

I listened with care to the First Minister's response. Whatever the revised strategy may be, surely one message is missing. Given the fact that the number of abortions in Scotland that are given to girls who are under the age of consent has risen, in a year, by 32 to 341, will the First Minister at least consider funding pilot studies to examine the effects of a strong message discouraging premature sexual activity?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Scottish Executive's Cabinet. (S2F-2297)

As the First Minister and his Liberal Democrat colleagues in the Scottish Executive are so keen on newspaper advertising, can he tell me how much of the £3.7 million of taxpayers' money that has been spent on advertising in the past 20 months was used to inform patients in Scotland that, under European Union regulations, they are entitled to seek treatment in other European countries, paid for by the national health service?

I hope that the patients in Scotland who are suffering and in pain while they wait for treatment listened closely to the First Minister's answer. The entitlement about which the First Minister knows so little is exercised by applying for something called a form E112. Most people in Scotland have never heard of the facility. I have a constituent who was totally ignorant of the procedure and his general practitioner also seemed unaware of it. My constituent confirmed that it was never brought to his attention by his local hospital. Presumably, the scheme is designed to be in the interests of patients who need treatment that is not available or cannot be provided quickly enough in this country. Why is the First Minister so shy about telling people in Scotland about their right?

I am certainly reassured by the First Minister's commitment to support the EU regulation, but I have to say that it must be one of the best-kept secrets in Scotland. It is an entitlement for all NHS patients in Scotland. For the benefit of those who, as we speak, are in pain and incapacitated because of undue delays in treatment, will the First Minister today stand up for patients' rights and broadcast more publicly the availability of the entitlement?

Does the minister agree that, given the context of the debate, it is impossible to consider the best interests of the children without having an intelligent debate about the plight of their addicted parents?

I welcome today's debate as an opportunity for the Parliament to address another side of drug abuse. In a number of debates in the chamber, we have discussed the damage that drug abuse causes in Scotland and what we can do to help an addict try to achieve a stable and drug-free lifestyle. As members know, however, it is never simply the addict who suffers through drug abuse; some of the more heartbreaking stories that have been reported recently involved children of drug addicts. Fiona Hyslop mentioned Michael McGarrity. We also have Derek Doran and, of course, the tragedy of the 11-year-old girl in Glasgow. Those stories illustrate the impact that drug-abusing parents can have on children. That is why my colleagues and I welcome the Executive's "Hidden Harm" report, which was published on Monday. I whole-heartedly agree with the minister that the protection of children must always be top priority in such cases. However, I have some concerns. The Executive still cannot tell me how many individual rehabilitation places are available across Scotland. As we heard on Monday, there is a shortage of foster carers for children who must be removed from their parents. I am worried that the Executive's glossy document will turn out to be another bitter disappointment. In 2003, the Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs published the original "Hidden Harm" report, in which it was estimated that between 41,000 and 59,000 children in Scotland have a drug-using parent, and between 10,000 and 19,000 children live with a drug-using parent. Vitally, one of the key findings of that report was that the number of children who are affected is likely to decrease only when the number of problem drug users decreases. I agree with that finding and it is why I am disappointed that the Executive's report does not put more emphasis on preventive measures. I cannot understand why drug treatment and testing orders are available only to offenders who have built up a catalogue of offences, whereas individuals who have committed their first offence because of their drug addiction are denied any intervention. My party and I have continually argued that such interventions should be available in district courts and in children's panels so that  individuals can be helped and diverted from the path to crime. It seems absurd that, to get help, someone must become a serial offender. I know that that was not the principle that drove the concept of drugs courts, with which my party is content—we approve of that principle—but consequences are emerging that it would be foolhardy to disregard. I am also worried about what will happen to the parents of any children who are taken into care. If the Executive does not have comprehensive information about what rehabilitation is available, what hope does an addict have? There is a danger that parents could try desperately to seek help to stabilise their lives and get their children back, but be unable to access the help they need. Even for accessing methadone, at the end of the quarter to September 2005, 130 people across Scotland had waited more than a year to get prescribed drug treatment. I concede that none of us has all the answers, but is the Executive looking at practices and treatments elsewhere? Is it investigating what other countries are doing or what may be available within the United Kingdom? What about neuro-electric therapy, which was pioneered by a Scottish doctor? Is it available and could it work? Is the Executive prepared to look at that? I think we all agree that prioritising the very worst parents for help so that they get their children back but giving the parents who are deemed to be not so bad no help at all would be unacceptable. If we intend to use the ultimate sanction of removing children from their parents and expect it to work as an incentive and as a deterrent, we will have to ensure that parents can get help with addressing their addiction. I return to the basic principle that the advisory council highlighted in 2003: if we are to help to protect children of drug abusers, we will need to reduce the occurrence of drug abuse. Indeed, I agree with and applaud the Executive on three of the key priorities in "Hidden Harm": to "increase the number of problematic drug users getting timely and effective treatment; reduce reoffending" by endeavouring to assist and "reduce the availability of drugs". That has to be our goal and I believe that it can be done. More preventive measures need to be taken to stop people getting into the hellish environment of addiction in the first place. That is why I propose the addition of a couple of lines to the motion. I move amendment S2M-4370.1, to insert at end: "but believes that progress will be impeded unless there is an increase in the availability of rehabilitation for those addicted parents, as well as a greater emphasis on  educational and preventative measures to stop people getting involved with drugs in the first place."

I am apprehensive that many eardrums will have been burst and that no one will be able to listen to me. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister and what issues they will discuss. (S2F-2281)

Teachers play a vital role in the development of our children and it would be crude to suggest that they are all undeserving of their current salaries. However, Audit Scotland makes an important point in the report that it has published. It indicates that it is hard to measure what improvement the McCrone deal has made to teaching in Scotland. Does the First Minister accept the general proposition that, rather than universally condemning teachers because of concerns over the standards in our schools, we should place the blame on the education system that ministers have created?

Members of the teaching profession will struggle to reconcile the First Minister's description of our education system with what many of them have to encounter day after day. He must accept responsibility for the huge additional burden that has been centrally imposed on them. I point out that that is not my rhetoric. Last year, in his newsletter to parents, the then head teacher of James Gillespie's primary school, who I presume is an expert, said that the poor value for money and the disappointing levels of achievement that we get from our system are a result of all the shackles, initiatives and bureaucracy that surround the delivery of education in Scotland. However much it might suit the First Minister to make teachers the scapegoats for current difficulties, is not the real culprit the flawed structure of the education system over which he presides?

The escalating levels of antisocial behaviour in our schools; the conduct to which our teachers are subjected every day; and the alarming fact that many universities are using their resources to re-educate undergraduates who have supposedly attained certain educational standards under our examination system suggest that all is certainly not well in the world of education. Audit Scotland's remit was only to review the cost and implementation of the McCrone agreement, not to examine the whole educational structure within which teachers must operate. Will the First Minister agree to devolve more power down to our schools, including power over salaries, to find out whether teachers or politicians are better at running them?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Scottish Executive's Cabinet. (S2F-2265)

In light of the revelations this week that Scottish Enterprise has a total funding gap of £60 million, which is higher than was previously estimated, will the First Minister say whether he was aware that that was the true figure? Will he  also say exactly how much of the shortfall the Executive is prepared to meet?

I think that there are many who would hope that Scottish Enterprise had the same primitive grasp of arithmetic that the First Minister has. The public will be little short of aghast at the level of financial mismanagement in an agency that is charged with improving Scotland's economic performance. Deficits are deficits and continuing deficits are a looming disaster. The public will be equally aghast at the laid-back approach of the Executive. Will the First Minister give a commitment to do what he refused to do the last time that I raised the issue? Will he tell Scottish Enterprise in no uncertain terms that there will be no more blank cheques to bail it out and that it is time for it to put its financial house in order?

My party has never wanted to impair Scottish Enterprise in the fundamental and essential exercise of its core operations. I return to the issue that I have raised with the First Minister on previous occasions. Instead of flinging £60 million at a failing organisation, surely it is better for the First Minister to acknowledge the need for reform of the structure of Scottish Enterprise. If the First Minister will not listen to me, will he listen to the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities? COSLA said: "We believe that local authority led partnerships could take on local economic development, Business Gateway and regeneration and skills". Will the First Minister consider that option?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister and what issues they will discuss. (S2F-2246)

The First Minister will no doubt have been as horrified as I was to learn that Callum Evans, who was convicted yesterday in Glasgow of the most gruesome murder of John Hatfield, had been under a restriction of liberty order for previous serious offences at the time of the attack. We have heard that the First Minister and the Home Office cannot tell us how many foreign criminals who should have been deported are now at large in Scotland, but can he tell us how many other tagged individuals, like Mr Evans, have in the past year gone on to commit offences while under a restriction of liberty order?

As the public sees it, the Executive appears to be guilty of using community sentences such as tagging as a way to empty our prisons and at the same time to place the public at risk. Disturbingly, the "Criminal Proceedings in Scottish Courts" 2004-05 bulletin, which was published this morning, shows that a number of  individuals who had been found guilty of serious crimes were released back on to our streets. For example, in the category of serious assault and attempted murder, 24 people were, as their main penalty, tagged, 213 were given community service orders and 169 were fined. I have to say that it is no wonder public confidence in the criminal justice system is in pieces. While the criminals gloat, the public is aghast. When so many dangerous individuals never go to jail, how can the Executive even begin to protect the law-abiding majority in Scotland?

Prison capacity may be an issue for another day, but I say to the First minister that we already know that a number of foreign criminals are on our streets in Scotland, and we now learn that some of Scotland's most serious offenders are released back on to our streets without ever going to jail. Can the First Minister tell us how many foreign nationals who have been found guilty of serious assault and attempted murder, or of non-sexual crimes of violence, were not sent to jail and were therefore never even considered for deportation?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Scottish Executive's Cabinet. (S2F-2231)

I do not wish the Lord Advocate any ill will at all, but it is perhaps unfortunate that, having got into the House of Lords, he seems to have suffered from political ambivalence and is having to sit as a cross-bencher. Then again, if the Scottish Executive does not know its political colours, what hope is there for the Lord Advocate? Since I last raised the subject of Scottish Enterprise with the First Minister, disturbing headlines in various newspapers have suggested that the organisation is squaring up for a fight with the Executive and is being unco-operative about appearing before the Parliament's Enterprise and Culture Committee. Although I gather that Scottish Enterprise officials will appear before the committee next week, the episode only adds to the growing public perception that a major part of the problem with the organisation is that it is becoming a law unto itself. Will the First Minister remind it that, as a public body funded by taxpayers, it is accountable for its actions properly and timeously to the Parliament and that the Parliament has a duty to hold it to account?

I have never rubbished Scottish Enterprise. Indeed, such language is unhelpful to the political debate. The organisation might well be in grave danger of rubbishing itself with its activities, but that is a matter for it to determine. The other public concern is that an agency charged with improving our economic performance does not seem to be able to balance its own books. Indeed, Karen Gillon has expressed the fear that the problem with Scottish Enterprise is similar to the situation with Scottish Opera "in which an organisation believed that it could spend ad infinitum" and "that, at some point, the Executive would probably have to bail it out."—[ Official Report , Enterprise and Culture Committee , 28 March 2006; c 2863.] To allay those very legitimate fears, will the First Minister make it absolutely clear to Scottish Enterprise that the party is over, that it will not be bailed out again and that, like every other organisation that receives public money, it must learn to live within its means?

The fundamental problem is that Scottish Enterprise is an unwieldy, bloated organisation. I am delighted that the Executive has made a start by acting on my suggestion that Careers Scotland should be removed from its functions. However, what other functions does the First Minister think could be stripped out or cut back to streamline Scottish Enterprise?

I thank Rosemary Byrne for bringing this issue to the chamber, because it cannot be debated too often. Drug abuse has spread and continues to spread misery throughout Scotland. It kills, destroys families, leads to widespread and recurring crime, breaks up communities and corrodes society. It is essential that we use all the resources of the state not just to discourage drug abuse but to do everything possible to eliminate it. Like the SSP, the Conservative party recognises that there is no overall proper strategy for dealing with drug abuse in Scotland. I, too, am critical of the Scottish Executive for being over-reliant on methadone, which simply aggravates the problem. I have made it clear on many occasions that the Conservative party is not opposed to the use of methadone per se. However, unlike those who believe that methadone is some sort of universal panacea, to be taken indefinitely by increasing numbers of people, we believe that it should be available as part of a range of options. I share Rosemary Byrne's reservations about methadone. Conservatives believe that it is imperative that drug addicts are given immediate support and rehabilitation, to help them to end their addiction and to get back to leading a normal life. Reference has already been made in this morning's debate to the drug outcome research in Scotland—DORIS—study by Professor Neil McKeganey of Glasgow University. That research is interesting, because it found that, according to those who took part in it, most drug addicts who seek help do so because they want to become clean and to change their lifestyle. The drug misuse statistics for 2005 showed that the majority of individuals who came  forward seeking help did not want a prescription-based solution. Not only are individuals far too frequently left with methadone as the only option of help, but some individuals have to wait more than a year for that assistance. That cannot go on. In October 2004, the Executive published its review of drug treatment and rehabilitation services. The report highlighted the fact that more needed to be done to help those who wanted to be helped to obtain rapid access to treatment and rehabilitation. I suggest to the Executive that a simple way of providing access to treatment would be to set up a central directory of treatment and rehabilitation in Scotland, akin to that in England and Wales. The Executive has argued that similar information can be received from drug action teams in Scotland. I have tried to abstract that information from the reports of the drug action teams, but it is not easy, because they provide information only for their area. For example, someone in Glasgow might be willing to travel to the Highlands to get help, which would remove that individual from the environment that has led to his or her drug addiction. I ask the Executive what hope an addict or their family has of finding a rehabilitation facility when the Executive does not have that information. Recently I lodged a written question asking how many places were available for drug rehabilitation in Scotland. The answer was that those data are not held centrally. That is not good enough. There is agreement in the chamber that we have a problem in Scotland. I share Stewart Stevenson's view that there is a genuine and healthy consensus about the need to move forward with constructive solutions. However, I believe that addicts and their families and friends should have easy access to as much information about help and rehabilitation as possible. This is a short debate, and I know that many members want to speak in it. I do not have enough time to address all the points that I would like to cover. However, before I close, I want to say that I cannot agree with the SSP's solution of decriminalising cannabis and prescribing heroin. I commend to Rosemary Byrne the studies that have been carried out in Sweden, New Zealand and the Netherlands in relation to cannabis. That research makes troubling reading. Cannabis is a dangerous drug. Not only can it be a gateway drug to other, more dangerous illegal substances, but it has been linked with various mental illnesses and causes harm to the heart, lungs and immune system.

No—I am in the last minute of my speech.  My concern about what the SSP proposes is that it is simply another form of harm reduction. According to the Scottish Parliament information centre, there are no current GP licences in Scotland for prescribing heroin. Mr Henry referred to that fact. Apparently, a few years ago one GP in Scotland had such a licence, but it was never used. Instead of finding another drug for individuals to be parked on in the name of harm reduction, we should examine ways of helping them to lead a drug-free lifestyle. I thank the Scottish socialists for allowing us the opportunity to debate this issue. I move amendment S2M-4252.1, to leave out from "the predominant" to end and insert: "we need a drugs strategy which aims to reduce and ultimately eliminate drugs dependency in Scotland and that such a strategy should place an emphasis on early intervention and include a coherent education programme which prioritises abstinence, and further believes that there needs to be a radical change in the help offered to drug addicts, to provide counselling and rehabilitation rather than an over-reliance on methadone."

If I had been around on 21 April 1926—and I sometimes feel as if I was—I would probably have paid no particular attention to the arrival of a baby daughter to the Duke and Duchess of York. Apart from giving the pleasure that greets any birth, the event might not have seemed especially auspicious. However, such are the unpredictable quirks of times and events that the baby not only was to grow up as Princess Elizabeth, but was to find that her father was required to take on the role of monarch as King George VI when she was only 10; was to experience the second world war; and was to lose her father, whom she loved dearly, when she was 25, which required her to succeed to the throne. For anyone, that would be a challenging series of events to confront at a young age. My first awareness of the Queen was when I was taken at the age of three to a fireworks display to celebrate the coronation. It was not a positive introduction to the monarchy: I did not know what a coronation was, and the bangs and flashes of the fireworks so alarmed me that a screaming three-year-old had to be taken home. I am wiser now. Many years later, I look at a woman who has become an icon for selfless public service and unwavering commitment to her sense of duty as a monarch. Interestingly, in these judgmental and often abrasive times, the Queen defies labelling and being pigeonholed, and that is a remarkable achievement. In what is unarguably the greatest republic of the world, the United States of America, interest in the Queen is, apparently, insatiable, and admiration and respect for her are unbounded. That perception is not born out of some Walt Disney fantasy centring around a diamond-encrusted heroine; it is based firmly on the recognition of someone who, in the face of national and personal challenges, has never faltered in her duty to Britain and the Commonwealth. This is a woman who, in her 54 years as Queen, has held audiences with 10 British Prime Ministers. Her grasp of national and international affairs is astonishing, and her shrewdness is impressive. Our current Prime Minister, Mr Blair, has paid tribute to those qualities. I am aware of the different views in the chamber about the monarchy, but one does not need to be a royalist to admire the capacity of this extraordinary woman to do so well what she does, and the extent to which she does it, at the age of 79. There are those who aspire to make a contribution to public life who are many years her junior but who would whimper at doing a fraction of what she does. She is in a league of her own when it comes to public service.  I salute this remarkable woman and congratulate her on the occasion of her 80 th birthday this coming Friday. With pleasure, I support the motion.

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister and what issues they will discuss. (S2F-2210)

That is one of the few things for which the Prime Minister is not responsible. The fact that nearly half of our councils have put elderly people on waiting lists for free personal care is an appalling indictment of the Executive. Elderly people are not interested in squabbles between the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the Executive and, to be frank, neither are their families. Having adopted the policy of free personal care, the Parliament has not only a moral but a legal responsibility to frail elderly people. The First Minister said in his response to Ms Sturgeon that assessment of need is when care should be provided, but I tell him that that is not happening. In many council areas throughout Scotland, there are elderly people with unmet needs who have been assessed and have been told to join a waiting list. They are not getting the help to which they and their families thought they were entitled. The longer-term problems that are associated with the policy need to be addressed, but there is a current crisis. Does the First Minister accept that the Parliament's reputation is at stake and will he accept his responsibility to find an immediate solution to the current crisis?

Political leadership is all about priorities, and the Executive's actions speak louder than words. The First Minister has already issued two glowing tributes to free personal care today and said in his reply to Ms Sturgeon: "We are proud of the policy of free personal and nursing care". However, the policy is not being delivered. The testament and evidence for that are the frail, vulnerable, elderly people who are being looked after by carers who are unable to cope. The situation is utterly unacceptable, First Minister, and any response short of a solution is not on. If funding is the key, the public is entitled to ask why money can be found for the enterprise agencies. If money can be found for those, surely to heaven there is a clamant demand that money can be found to sort out the current crisis now.

The point is that, as we speak, the Parliament is in public breach of trust with the people of Scotland and with our frail elderly people who were given a legal commitment by a statutory enactment of the Parliament. If the First Minister is reluctant to use the money that has been set aside for Scottish Enterprise, I can suggest a couple of alternatives. The First Minister is due to get £87 million in consequentials from last week's budget. He also has £100 million unallocated in the health budget for 2007-08. Instead of setting aside money for what we expect will be pre-election bribes, why will the First Minister not use at least some of that money right now to help the people who currently need it?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Scottish Executive's Cabinet. (S2F-2192)

That is laudable, but perhaps the more pressing financial crisis in Scottish Enterprise will loom large once again at the next meeting of the Cabinet. I hope that the First Minister will today rule out using any of the £87 million from yesterday's budget to plug that black hole. The more important question is the agency's contribution to our economic performance. The Auditor General for Scotland has said that, because there is no explicit link to the smart, successful Scotland outcomes in Scottish Enterprise's annual report, it is difficult to assess Scottish Enterprise's contribution to the overall strategy. How does the First Minister propose to address that?

The First Minister paints a somewhat inaccurate picture of the Scottish economy. Since 1999, we have lost 57,000 manufacturing jobs. In 1997, when the Conservatives were in government, we had a net gain in new businesses that were registered for VAT—contrast that with a net loss of VAT-registered businesses in 2004. The Enterprise and Culture Committee commissioned a report that compared the performance of the Executive's economic agency with those in other countries, and found that Scottish Enterprise had a far broader remit than comparable bodies in other countries had and that, as a result, those other bodies were more successful. Is not the problem that Scottish Enterprise is trying to be a Jack-of-all-trades and has simply ended up being a master of none?

I return to the starting point: the budget crisis in Scottish Enterprise. As far as the public are concerned, the Executive's economic agency is a bloated organisation whose contribution to the performance of our economy is far from clear. Businesses see a Rolls-Royce operation—the local enterprise companies—which is serviced by the padded comfort zone of the central organisation. Is not it about time that we changed the structure, stripped out functions that could be better provided locally—such as skills, training and careers advice—and took the opportunity to slim down the whole bureaucracy that runs the operation and make it fit for purpose?

I still remember the effervescent political force that burst on the Scottish political scene in 1974, when Margaret Bain won Dunbartonshire East. It is interesting that on the day that Margaret Bain made her debut, she was joined by another promising Scottish political talent: a dashing young blade—he is still pretty well recognisable as such—called James Douglas-Hamilton. James tells me that he remembers Margaret with particular warmth, affection and respect. There was a vibrancy and purpose about Margaret that characterised her political career at Westminster. Despite party-political differences, it is always possible to like and admire politicians across the political boundaries. Margaret Ewing—as she became in 1983—was one such politician. There is much to commend gutsy, straight-talking women in politics and Margaret was the honorary president of that club. When, as a member of the Scottish Parliament, I came to know her personally, two things became obvious to me. First, when she spoke in the Parliament, other members listened. Secondly, her contributions were articulate, coherent, well argued and robustly presented. Her speeches were enriched by that great Scottish attribute: a wry and pawky sense of humour. The Scottish Parliament is a small political family and there is a sense of loss here that is made real by what we will miss and by what the world of Scottish politics has lost by Margaret Ewing's passing. Margaret made an indelible mark on that world, for which she will be remembered in a very positive way. On behalf of my party, I extend my sympathy to her husband, Fergus, and to the wider family.

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister and what issues they will discuss. (S2F-2176)

I suspect that there is mutual relief in all quarters. The Deputy First Minister's responses indicate that the conduct of the Government coalition strikes at the heart of devolved governance. In many ways, it is remarkable that the governing coalition has survived, given the differences over issues such as the single transferable vote system, the Airborne Initiative, reform of the national health service, bridge tolls and the common fisheries policy—and that is a shortened list. Does the Deputy First Minister back his colleague Tom McCabe's handling of the impending local government strike at the end of this month or will he use that as an excuse to finally end the coalition?

Worries about the coalition's stability and its ability to deliver stable devolved government are certainly not confined to my party. Only last week in this chamber, Labour's Elaine Murray said that my party's motivation for leading a debate on energy was "to split the coalition." She wondered why we bothered, "With Nicol Stephen doing such a good job of that".— [ Official Report , 9 March 2006; c 23823.]  If the Deputy First Minister will not cut and run over the local government strike, will he back the First Minister if he gives the go-ahead to build replacement nuclear power stations? If not, can the coalition continue when it is split down the middle on an issue of such fundamental importance to Scotland?

The words "there are issues and events that come up to trouble the coalition" will go down as the all-time best euphemism in the Parliament. Those obvious differences make it  even clearer that the coalition is not a principled agreement that has been made in the country's interests to deliver stable devolved governance, but is instead a shabby marriage of convenience to serve the partners and not the people. Why does not the Deputy First Minister do the decent thing and end the sham now?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Scottish Executive's Cabinet. (S2F-2156)

I hope that drug abuse and, in particular, the use of methadone will be high up the agenda. This is not an issue on which I wish to pick a fight. I have no doubt that the First Minister is as saddened as I am at recent tragic events. My desire has only ever been to shift the debate in a more constructive direction. In that spirit, does the First Minister accept that, to deal with the problems that are associated with methadone, we need to establish the extent of those problems and, therefore, need more information? How many people are on methadone, how long have they been on it and how many of them are looking after children at home?

I thank the First Minister for his response. We have made singular progress today, which I appreciate, and I make it clear that my party has never said that there is no place for methadone. Establishing the extent of the problem is only the first step, because it must be crystal clear that everything that we do is geared towards helping people to end their addiction to drugs, which must mean telling them where they can go for help. That brings me to the First Minister's response on rehabilitation facilities. In England and Wales, there is a central directory of rehabilitation facilities. Will the First Minister give me a commitment to provide such a directory for Scotland?

I am grateful to the First Minister and, once again, I wish to say that I think that progress is being made. The key point about this issue was made by Professor Neil McKeganey. He  said that people with money can afford choice and that having that choice means that they tend not to use methadone to end their addiction. Although I am partially reassured by what the First Minister has said to me in response to my previous question, I point out that, in the absence of clarification on facilities, the capacity within those facilities and unused capacity in Scotland, we have a two-tier system. Is it not about time that we committed ourselves to ending that two-tier system, under which the well-off go to residential rehab while the masses make do with methadone? Is it not time that we began to give everyone the choice of getting effective help to get off drugs?

I understand the diffidence of any Liberal Democrat in contributing to this debate. I make crystal clear that since the Parliament was established the Conservative party has consistently expressed huge concern about the permissive attitude to the use of illegal drugs that exists in Scotland. Zero tolerance simply means a change in culture and attitude. From everything that we have said in ensuing debates, it is obvious exactly what our view is. I have been asking for support to be provided.

I thank the Presiding Officer for his explanation of the technical point about the amendment in the name of Hugh Henry. If amendments are inaccurate, that is slightly confusing for parties that are to contribute to a debate and makes it a little difficult to consider what the amendments mean. Be that as it may, I accept the Presiding Officer's ruling. The decision to debate drug abuse in our business time was taken long before the tragic death of little Derek Doran from methadone was made public. I make no apology for calling a debate on this crucial subject and I am pleased that the First Minister at least seems to have recognised the growing drugs problem in Scotland, which the state has exacerbated by its overreliance on prescribing methadone. I do not have much time—I realise the pressure on time—so I will focus on methadone. I make it clear that my party has never called for that drug to be dropped. Unlike those who believe that methadone is some sort of panacea, we do not believe in a one-size-fits-all attitude to dealing with drug abuse. Unfortunately, the overwhelming response to addiction in Scotland is placement on a methadone programme. When the Parliament debated drug abuse in 2004, many members of other parties hounded me for daring to challenge the use of methadone. The former Liberal Democrat drugs spokesman, Keith Raffan, said that we needed to shout about the benefits of methadone. He said:  "Drug misuse is an addiction—a form of compulsive-obsessive behaviour. What such people want is different from what they can achieve."— [ Official Report , 27 October 2004; c 11192.]  I challenge precisely that dismissive and patronising attitude, which leaves many people parked on methadone. Do we really want to continue a pattern that will lead to the prescription of more than 1 million methadone scripts a year by 2012? It is imperative that those who find themselves addicted to heroin, methadone or any other substance are given immediate support and rehabilitation to help them to end their addiction and to return to leading a normal life. The Government's job is to help such individuals but, instead, they are trapped. The drug outcome research in Scotland study by Professor Neil McKeganey of the University of Glasgow found that most drug addicts who seek help do so because they want to become clean and to change their lifestyle. The drug misuse statistics of 2005 showed that the majority of individuals who sought help did not want a prescription-based solution. However, finding help is far from easy. England and Wales have a central directory of rehabilitation facilities, which includes those provided by the voluntary and private sectors. That gives individuals instant information about a variety of aspects, such as vacancies and locations. I reiterate my call for the Executive to establish such a directory for Scotland. We are a small country and surely that is not beyond the wit of man. Alongside a central directory, a dramatic shift is needed towards offering individuals help and rehabilitation to come off drugs. I will quote a chilling passage from Professor Neil McKeganey's article in The Herald yesterday. He said: "There is a simple truth here but one that is rarely shared, namely that methadone has all too easily become the drug-addiction treatment for the masses. There are no superstar heroin addicts or drug-dependent doctors signing themselves up for long-term methadone programmes. Residential rehabilitation is the gold-standard treatment for those who can afford it". Rehabilitation and leading a drug-free lifestyle should not be an option that is open only to the well-off. Can we as a nation afford to leave so many languishing on methadone? If a person found that someone whom they cared about was addicted to heroin and that the only option open to that person was to be prescribed methadone, would they not worry and fear that the person whom they cared about was being consigned to a prescription prison? That is why I want the Executive to publish an analysis of whether the rehabilitation places that are available are  adequate to meet demands and to say what it is doing to increase the number of places. As I said it would, my speech has focused on the use of methadone. Much needs to be done to help addicts, but if we are to conquer the drugs problem, we must stop people taking drugs in the first place. It is deeply depressing and distressing that 80 per cent of people who sought treatment for the first time last year started to take drugs when they were under 20. As I have said many times, we need to abandon the softly-softly know the score campaign and deliver a simple abstinence message.

Not at all. The core of what Mr Cameron says is that we need to give children sensible information, not doctored information that implies that the problem is non-existent or far less serious than it is. The statistics that I just read out underline the gravity of what we are discussing. We certainly need to use the voluntary sector more to develop clearer and more effective messages to educate people about the dangers of drug abuse. Politicians do not always know best and we need to use the vital charitable and voluntary organisations that work so hard to deal with drugs. They have a wealth of vital expertise and experience. I have not commented on the amendments, because I did not understand one of them and because none of the others, in so far as they related to the motion, went to the core of what I regard the problem to be. I move, That the Parliament notes the increasing drugs problem in Scotland which has seen rises in the number of drug-related deaths and drug-related crimes; recognises that drug abuse destroys lives, tears families apart, leads to widespread and recurring crime and the disintegration of entire communities; believes that there should be a zero tolerance drugs strategy which aims to rid Scotland of drugs; believes that such a strategy should place an emphasis on early intervention and include a coherent education programme which prioritises abstinence, and believes that there needs to be a change in the help offered to drug addicts, away from an over-reliance on methadone and towards a drug-free lifestyle.

Will the member take an intervention?

I thank the deputy leader of the Scottish National Party and her party for using their time this morning to allow Parliament to consider the escalating concern outside it about issues arising from the Shirley McKie case. The matter is—or should be—above party-political divisions. I thank Nicola Sturgeon for her willingness to discuss the terms of the motion, which is not intended to be judgmental but is instead an attempt to bring to Parliament for responsible discussion the genuine alarm that is being sounded outside Parliament. The Shirley McKie case has assumed huge significance for our criminal justice system. It has raised issues of practice, procedure and protocol that go to the heart of that system. It has implied incompetence, corruption and collusion and has raised suspicions of criminal conduct and cover-up, all allegedly within our criminal justice system. It has left question marks over police officers, fingerprint experts, the Scottish Criminal Record Office and, of course, the role of Scottish Executive justice ministers. The report of Deputy Chief Constable James Mackay raised significant  questions. However, as Colin Fox said, there are clearly conflicting opinions from fingerprint experts outwith Scotland, especially Peter Swann. The Scottish Executive and the Lord Advocate have resisted calls for a public judicial inquiry, believing such an inquiry to be unnecessary and inappropriate. The minister reiterated that position this morning. I infer from the Executive's attitude that it believes that the crisis will subside, but it has not subsided and it will not go away. The storm clouds are still gathering around our criminal justice system and the Executive. The minister's comments this morning were interesting. Her amendment concedes "that action needs to be taken to restore public and professional confidence in the Scottish Fingerprint Service". She therefore accepts that such confidence does not currently exist. She also concedes the principle of an inquiry. However, she truly believes that a parliamentary inquiry is the correct approach. If she accepts that there is a loss of confidence in our criminal justice system, how can confidence be restored by a parliamentary inquiry that would be undertaken by a committee with a Scottish Executive majority and which would be prosecuted by people who—however well intentioned they might be—lack the necessary skills and technical expertise to do the job? Today, the minister has failed to address the concerns that are properly expressed in the motion. Specific reference is made to the view of Lord McCluskey. However, as Nicola Sturgeon said, he is not isolated in his concerns. We have heard a host of opinions: from Derek Ogg, a senior criminal practice Queen's counsel; from John Scott, a human rights lawyer; from Maggie Scott, the chair of the Criminal Bar Association; and from Joe Beltrami, a highly experienced criminal solicitor advocate. This morning, Lord Mackay of Clashfern, the former Lord Advocate and Lord Chancellor, said that he thinks that "there should be an inquiry to look into the reliability of fingerprint evidence in Scottish court cases, and the implications for other cases on which such evidence depends." He also said that what troubles him is "the question of whether the fingerprinting system is reliable for ordinary people. It's used in many cases every week. Why are these particular fingerprints open to doubt, if other fingerprints are to be relied upon?" The fact that a person as significant as a former Lord Advocate and Lord Chancellor is expressing concerns and pointing out the necessarily technical nature of the issues goes to the heart of the matter. I think that the minister's response is ill-considered, inappropriate and inadequate.  I am aware that many members want to speak in the debate. Today the minister has made things worse. She acknowledges that there is a fire, but she reaches for a can of paraffin to extinguish it. That is utterly unacceptable. I support the motion in Nicola Sturgeon's name.

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Scottish Executive's Cabinet. (S2F-2122)

That promises to be an extremely interesting discussion; I am sure that many of us would like to be flies on the wall. I want to bring us to more immediate matters. No doubt the First Minister has seen the latest figures on waiting times, published this morning. They show that 10 per cent of out-patients are not receiving appointments within 26 weeks, and that 10 per cent of in-patients are not being admitted within six months. Those are breaches of specific pledges that were set out in the partnership agreement. For the First Minister's benefit, the pledges are on page 21, paragraphs 3 and 5, and were to be delivered by the end of 2005. Why have those pledges to all patients been broken?

The First Minister can bluster all he likes but the fact remains that, on the figures published this morning, the Executive has failed to meet two specific commitments on health that were in its partnership agreement. I want to debate how we can improve our health service. In an article last week in Scotland on   Sunday , the First Minister's colleague, Mr Jim Murphy, argued for greater patient choice to be introduced in Scotland as the key to progressive reform. What does the First Minister say to his colleague, and where is the Executive's much heralded reform agenda in Scotland? For instance, where are the independent treatment centres and the national health service tariff system that we were promised last year by the Minister for Health and Community Care, Mr Andy Kerr?

The First Minister refuses to admit that when targets are not met—two targets have not been met—and the national health service fails to deliver, it is the poorest people who get the roughest end of the stick. Research by the former number 10 adviser, Julian Le Grand, and the Department of Health in England has shown that in an NHS without choice—which is not what Mr Murphy advocates—it is the least well-off who are the most disadvantaged. They use health services less than the better-off, get fewer hip replacements, receive fewer consultations and are given less time with general practitioners. I know that in Scotland some work has been done on health inequalities, but is it not about time that the Executive commissioned a thorough investigation to determine the extent of the problem, not to satisfy Mr Murphy, but because our duty is to people who are in the greatest need?

We have had, arising from the tragic death of Marion Ross, nine years of confusion, allegation and disagreement and of alleged conspiracy, cover-up and criminality that has affected the criminal justice system in Scotland. It has left a huge black cloud hanging over the Scottish Criminal Record Office and our fingerprint service. I must say that the minister's statement has dispelled none of that. How can the minister think that the public or any of the parties who are  involved in this saga can possibly have confidence in anything other than an independent external judicial inquiry, with full powers to compel evidence and to get to the facts of the matter? Does the minister accept that anything less will leave that huge black cloud hanging over our fingerprint service indefinitely and will lay her and the Executive open to charges of bungling ineptitude, gross political irresponsibility and staggering complacency? The Lord Advocate has ruled out a public inquiry. Does he accept that our prosecution service—the independence of which he rightly lauded—is placed in an especially sensitive position when it has to consider alleged criminal conduct in any organ of the criminal justice system, in which transparency and public confidence are paramount? Does he therefore also accept that when an extraordinary situation such as the one that we are considering arises, the independence of our prosecution service is compromised if politicians sit in judgment, and that the only way out of such a mess is to have an independent judicial inquiry, free from political interference, to ascertain the facts of the matter?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister and what issues they will discuss. (S2F-2105)

While hundreds of thousands of households throughout Scotland have anxiously awaited confirmation of their council tax increases, they have watched a public squabble between the Executive and councils. The Executive says to councils that they receive enough money from the Executive and that they should use it better, and the councils argue that the Executive ring fences a significant chunk of what it gives them and that it makes them do more and more with what is left. The real concern for the public is the size of the bill. Does the First Minister accept any responsibility for those increases?

It is precisely this sterile blame game that the public find so infuriating—while the squabble rages, the public pay. Surely we have to move the debate on. Does the First Minister agree that after nearly seven years of devolution, a reappraisal of the role, function and accountability of local government is overdue?

With reference to accountability, about which the First Minister was remarkably taciturn, I suspect that it suits him and wasteful local councils to hide behind the smokescreen of confusion. As a first step towards dispelling that confusion and restoring local accountability, will he offer a radical review of how he applies ring fencing?

Yes, I shall speak as the convener of the committee, adopt an attitude of irreproachable neutrality and be uncharacteristically benign to the minister and her deputy. On behalf of the members of the committee, I thank the minister for her kind comments about  the committee. I also thank my colleagues on the committee, our clerks and all the people who made written and oral submissions. By any standards, the bill is a chunky piece of proposed legislation. It is in disparate parts but is a solid bill and required careful stage 1 scrutiny. The co-operation of all who were involved made that scrutiny easier and fruitful for the committee, and I hope that our stage 1 report has been helpful to the Executive. The Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland described the bill as the most significant proposed legislation to affect policing since the Police (Scotland) Act 1967. As convener, I reassure those who gave evidence to the committee that we treated all submissions with great seriousness and paid close attention to the views that were expressed. Members who are present and the Executive will be aware that concern has been expressed in some quarters about part 1 of the bill, which deals with the police. The question has been asked whether the constitution of a Scottish police services authority and the creation of a Scottish crime and drug enforcement agency are healthy, workable or desirable. I reassure all those who gave evidence on that point that the committee listened to their concerns closely, that it reiterated those concerns to the Executive and that the Executive gave specific assurances. In particular, the Executive assured us that the Scottish police services authority will be a hands-on body that will provide police support services and oversee the Scottish crime and drug enforcement agency but will not affect the existing tripartite arrangement for our police forces. It is important to emphasise that existing unitary police authorities and police boards are not being abolished. There seemed, at one point, to be legitimate confusion over the possibility of that happening. The Justice 2 Committee listened carefully to concerns about those issues but, on balance, we felt that the Executive's reassurances were firm and clear and that the proposed structural changes offered a sensible way forward. The committee was in no doubt that the global challenges that Scotland now faces in relation to both national and international crime require specific structural processes to address them. We felt that the existing Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency has a fine record behind it, and that the proposals in the bill were a sensible recognition of the extremely important strategic role that we now ask the agency to perform and of the support that we think it needs if it is to continue with the very important task that we place on it. As Stewart Maxwell indicated, the Police, Public Order and Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill is a wide-ranging bill, and it is impossible to comment on all its provisions in detail, but there are a few  areas that I wish to draw to the Executive's attention. We were struck by the evidence that we received on public processions, a subject on which emotions run high, as we recognise. I strike one slight note of demur: the committee felt that the guidance that is being prepared by ministers would have been most helpful to us if only it had been available for our consideration during stage 1, in time for the preparation of our report. I accept the practical difficulties of producing such guidance but—if I may recommend this as good practice for the future—we would have found it extremely helpful to have had sight of it prior to the conclusion of our stage 1 consideration. That would have allowed us better to understand the work that will confront local authorities when they receive applications for permission to hold processions. Stewart Stevenson made some important points about the provisions in the bill relating to offensive weapons. The committee noted the ethical dilemmas that might arise regarding the mandatory reporting of non-accidental offensive weapons injuries and considered that the matter required further debate. In other words, there was no lack of sympathy, but there was a genuine feeling that there was a lack of education and information about the topic. It would have been premature for the committee to attempt to come to any view on that. I echo what Stewart Stevenson said—I beg his pardon: I mean Stewart Maxwell—about how the charges are to be proceeded with. We wish more charges to proceed on indictment. The drug testing and assessment procedures are, in principle, to be welcomed. Genuine practical concerns were expressed about timescales, however, and it is right that ministers should be aware of them. This is not just some technical debating point; we are talking about a real issue. It important that anybody who undergoes a test is not left in limbo, that there is an understandable timescale within which the assessment is carried out and that the appropriate intervention or action is then determined. The final area on which I wish to comment is the technical matter of offenders assisting with investigations and the proposals to give certain individuals immunity from prosecution. The Law Society of Scotland has circulated a letter to members in which the society inquires why the committee thought that there might be practical problems with implementation. I am mindful of any suspicion that phraseology may be used as a cop-out to spare us going into the detail, but our concerns were highly technical. Basically, having listened to the evidence and noted the concerns expressed—I direct members who have inquired about the matter to pages 54 to 58 of the committee's stage 1 report—the committee's view was that there was some merit to those concerns.  We felt it necessary to point out that subsequent criminal proceedings might well be prejudiced by the operation of natural justice in instances when an accused might be debarred from a fair trial or when issues might arise under the European convention on human rights. Given the technical nature of the relevant sections, the committee felt it necessary to signal the potential practical difficulty in implementing those proposals. The Justice 2 Committee agreed by majority to the general principles of the Police, Public Order and Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill. Putting on my party hat, I can confirm that my party also agrees to the general principles of the bill.

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Scottish Executive's Cabinet. (S2F-2086)

If an 11-year-old girl asked the First Minister about taking heroin, would he give her information that was designed to help her to know the score so that she could decide for herself or would he tell her how dangerous drug abuse is and say that under no circumstances should she experiment with heroin?

This appalling case highlights two simple points: the need for a clear message on drug abuse and the need for that message to be presented effectively. We have neither. Is it not time to ditch the discredited know the score campaign, which is a mocking echo of confusion and failure, and adopt a commonsense message that is designed to prevent our young people from even contemplating taking drugs? Does the First Minister accept that a straightforward, sensible message must be presented in an innovative fashion, not by people such as me and the First Minister but by former addicts and others with first-hand experience of the problem?

The trouble is that young people are not saying no. The number of under-15s who have been treated for drug abuse has more than doubled since the introduction of the know the score campaign, so the recent case is not an isolated incident. We need a strong anti-drugs message now. It must be straightforward,  unequivocal, clear and commonsense. If the First Minister will not listen to me, will he listen to his Labour colleague on Glasgow City Council, Gaille McCann, who believes that this desperate incident should "act as a wake-up call to us all, particularly the policymakers in their ivory towers"?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister and what issues they will discuss. (S2F-2073)

No doubt, that is sound advice. I hope that, when the First Minister next meets the Prime Minister, he will ask the Prime Minister to tell his colleagues at Westminster to keep their noses out of devolved party business. When it comes to apportioning blame for the signalled £4 toll on the Forth bridge, should not we start with the Labour, Liberal Democrat and SNP members of the Parliament, who voted for the charging schemes and the establishment of the Forth Estuary Transport Authority under the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001 that have resulted in the current position? The First Minister described that as "due process". Is not it the very granting of those powers that has led directly to the proposal for a £4 toll?

Something with which the First Minister is not familiar and with which the Scottish Executive is a stranger is a position that my party enjoys, called clarity of position. Unlike the First Minister and his Executive colleagues—not to mention his so-called friends at Westminster—my party has made it clear that, in so far as the existing bridge is concerned, we consider that the existing toll should not be raised at this time. [ Interruption. ] We have also made it clear that we are prepared to face up to what is now the clamant need of the communities of Fife for a new Forth crossing.

I think that, despite the hubbub, I am entitled to try to respond to the point that the First Minister made. Our clear position is that we will not apologise for a possible model that includes tolling if that provides—

There is no secret about that. We will not apologise for that model if it provides an answer—[ Interruption. ]

The First Minister may try to shirk his direct responsibility and that of his Labour and Liberal Democrat colleagues for the proposal. However, having set up the grouping that allowed three Labour and two Liberal Democrat councillors to push for a £4 toll, does he accept that that would be a congestion charge? Does he support  the application of a congestion charge or is he in the dead-in-the-water camp, which is led by Gordon Brown and Alistair Darling?

The First Minister's response, frankly, is cop-out and delay. His dilemma is that he is hoist with the petard of what his colleagues and back benchers want. His colleague Christine May implied that he is in the dead-in-the-water camp. He has colleagues from Westminster telling him what to do. My final question to him is this. In the midst of the bruising that he is getting from all quarters, does he agree that this degrading public spat must stop and that he must state the official Scottish Executive position on the £4 toll? People in Fife want to know the Executive's position now.

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Scottish Executive's Cabinet. (S2F-2057)

Perhaps that is confirmation of the toll increase after all. The First Minister will be aware that £19 billion has been invested in education since devolution. According to official statistics that were released today, spending per pupil has increased by 60 per cent since 1999. However, despite all that additional money, the gap in examination results between the most deprived schools and schools in more affluent areas has grown. The gap remains constant for the lowest 20 per cent. Why is that?

The pace of acceleration in examination attainment in the lowest sector has not just been slowing; it has been constant. That requires clarification, because it gives rise to universal concern. The situation is depressing and worrying. However, the experience of Inverclyde Council offers some hope. The council covers some of the most deprived areas of Scotland, but exam attainment is on a par with that in more affluent areas such as Perth and Kinross. Would the First Minister agree with Mrs Martin—[ Interruption. ]

Would the First Minister agree with Mrs Martin, head teacher at Clune Park Primary School in Port Glasgow, and Dr Nigel Lawrie, the head of education services at Inverclyde Council, who attribute the success of the council's schools to leadership from head teachers and to parental and community involvement in schools?

Unlike the First Minister, who seems to be told what to do by the Chancellor of the Exchequer, I am not told what to do by any of my colleagues south of the border. I am pleased that the First Minister acknowledges that leadership from head teachers and parental and community involvement in schools are important building blocks. Therefore, why has the Executive for six years followed a programme that is designed to undermine the freedom of head teachers, by interfering with their right to exclude disruptive pupils, and parental involvement in schools, by proposing to abolish school boards, thereby ending parents' ability to have a say in the selection of a head teacher? The Scottish Executive is damaging the very things that can help to make schools successful. Will the First Minister accept that his strategy was and is wrong, and will he give head teachers and parents greater freedom and responsibility in the running of our schools?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister and what issues they will discuss. (S2F-2039)

I am sure that that will comfort him greatly. I am certain that the public in Scotland will be as mystified and, indeed, horrified as the rest of us about yesterday's collapse of a trial for attempted murder in the High Court in Edinburgh because of bureaucratic error. Does the First Minister accept that we urgently need a speedy inquiry into that fiasco to establish exactly what went wrong?

I am comforted to some extent by that response, but there is another issue lurking. What is alarming is the suspicion that the case is a symptom of a wider problem in the system and a demonstration of judicial frustration that an accused who was being held in a Scottish prison could not be located by the Crown Office. If that individual had been in Castle Huntly prison, he could have been anywhere but, as it happens, he was in Barlinnie. When the First Minister asks the Lord Advocate to investigate the case, will he ask him to consider how we might improve communications between the different parts of the justice system to ensure that any person who is locked up in jail can be transported to the appropriate court on the due date to face trial?

I do not know whether it is reassuring or discomfiting to see the Lord Advocate scurrying round the Parliament to brief the First Minister. To put the public mind at ease and to disabuse it of any perception of complacency on the part of the First Minister, will he confirm to me—I understand that he may want to do so in writing—on how many occasions since 1999 court proceedings have been disrupted or abandoned because an accused person who was being held in custody was not brought to the right court on the right day at the right time?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Scottish Executive's Cabinet. (S2F-2020)

I hope that that discussion will be fruitful. As the First Minister and I know, meetings can be very fruitful. I turn to more serious matters. I am sure that the First Minister was as horrified as everyone else by the story that appeared in yesterday's press about two 13-year-old girls who were found unconscious in the snow in Aberdeen suffering from acute alcohol intoxication and hypothermia. The police observed that they were lucky not to die. Does he accept that what happened is a shocking symptom of a much wider problem associated with alcohol misuse in Scotland? In Scotland, alcohol-related deaths have risen by 29 per cent since 1999 to more than 2,000 last year and drinking by 13-year-olds has increased by 100 per cent in the past decade. Does he accept, at this time of year in particular, that we all need to promote responsible drinking and to do everything that we can to help to address such a serious social issue?

I certainly welcome any measures that are introduced to make it harder for teenagers to get hold of alcohol. However, I am concerned about how teenagers such as the two girls in Aberdeen are dealt with. Apart from the desperately worrying nature of the case itself, the apparent response to the potentially tragic incident was deeply troubling. I understand that a letter was sent to the parents of the girls telling them that, if something similar happened again, the girls would be referred for counselling. Accepting that it could happen again implies that there is a clear risk that the two girls could die, as the situation in which they found themselves was critical. Will the First Minister acknowledge that the type of binge drinking that the girls indulged in—and, according to the statistics, many other 13-year-olds throughout Scotland indulge in—places them at risk? Does he not feel that those girls are exactly the sort of children who should be referred to the children's panel, which would ensure that they were on someone's radar screen and could receive all the help that they need?

There is no disparity between what the First Minister and I believe on the issue: there is a clear desire to make progress. The sad fact is that abuse of alcohol plays a major role in social disorder in Scotland. If we do not nip the problems of alcohol misuse in the bud, we will store up trouble. It would be wrong to comment specifically on the desperate case of the two 13-year-old girls, but my concern is that that case may be the tip of the iceberg. There is a level of invisibility whereby such young people do not feature on anyone's radar screen, which is why I ask the First Minister whether he agrees that children's panels should have a much more prominent role in dealing with the problem of drinking among that age group.

I, too, endorse the First Minister's comments about the city of Glasgow's bid for the Commonwealth games. My party certainly extends its very best wishes to the city in its endeavours. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister and what issues they will discuss. (S2F-2000)

I am sure that that message will be received with far more accord than any discussion of education policy. Perhaps when the First Minister next meets the Prime Minister he might raise with him the Scottish Executive's homicide statistics, which were published yesterday. They disclose that the figure for 2004-05 was an appalling 10-year high, and show that the single biggest category of killings involved the use of a sharp instrument—in other words, knife crimes. Another very disturbing statistic is that 29 per cent of all those killings happened in Glasgow. How have things in Scotland got so bad after six and a half years of Labour-Liberal Democrat Government?

Nothing can obscure the fact that this unhappy and tragic situation has unfolded over six and a half years of Government from Labour and the Liberal Democrats. Yesterday's figures show that knife crimes account for more than 50 per cent of all killings. The First Minister referred to provisions to increase sentences in the Police, Public Order and Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill, which is currently before Parliament. However, the tragic thing is that certain convicted criminals who are already out of prison under automatic early release have contributed to the very figures that I have just highlighted. The same discredited practice will apply to any increased sentences that are introduced as a result of the bill. In other words, two years will mean one year and four years will mean two. As a result, does the First Minister accept that, as long as automatic early release prevails for long-term and short-term prisoners, there is no sentencing deterrent?

I will not flinch from criticism where it is merited. The Tories in Government repealed that legislation, recognising its deficiencies, eight years ago, but the incoming Labour Government refused to implement that repeal. That is why we are where we are today. Even worse, this Executive shower has compounded the problems by refusing on four occasions in this Parliament to end that discredited practice. How many more murders have to be committed and how many more families have to be decimated before this  blockheaded Administration faces the inevitable? Six and a half years of blunder, bluster and inertia have brought us to where we are, and if the First Minister is still going to drag his feet on ending automatic early release, will he and the Lord Advocate review the whole basis on which knife crime is charged to ensure that far more of those crimes are prosecuted on indictment in our higher courts, where our judges have much stiffer sentencing powers available to them?

Presiding Officer, I apologise to you, the minister and Parliament for my late arrival. I am afraid that I had thought that the debate started at 3 o'clock. With a projected financial deficit of £100 million by 2007-08, the previous administration of NHS Argyll and Clyde faced significant financial and managerial problems and the urban and rural mix of the area contributed to the board's struggle. There is no dispute about that, but I have to say that we do not think that the any of the options that were presented in the consultation would necessarily solve the problems. I say at once that my party wishes to commend the staff and the clinicians of Argyll and Clyde for their hard work and their efforts to carry on providing services for the area against the backdrop of uncertainty for residents and the workforce. The current state of morale makes it all the more frustrating that the Executive has allowed a period of consultation without clarifying the specific structural, financial and management issues that lie at the heart of Argyll and Clyde's problems, and without explaining in detail not only how the proposed changes would address those problems but what the future service plans of the successor boards will be. On the consultation, we are primarily troubled about the absence of sufficiently robust information on the funding implications of each consultation option that was presented by the Executive. Given the fundamental importance of preserving confidence in the administration of health care in Argyll and Clyde, the Executive  should have extended the consultation until far more detailed information could be made available to the public to enable people to make a more informed choice from the options that were presented to them. Provision of information on the specific areas of failure and financial loss in Argyll and Clyde would have allowed the public to understand the extent to which better management in any option would contribute to financial and operational recovery. There is no analysis or proposition in the Executive's consultation to clarify how changing the budgets will eliminate the deficit. The consultation paper suggests that part of the deficit arises from the mixture of urban and rural areas, but it does not really strip away the role that such incompatibility plays as opposed to poor management. If the problem is caused by geography, then changing the boundaries will only solve it if the funding mechanisms change. In fact, today's announcement is a geographical compromise; that is not a solution. I understood the First Minister earlier to say—I might be paraphrasing him—that public services are not necessarily guaranteed improvement by changing boundaries. Perversely, that seems to be exactly what the Minister for Health and Community Care has put before us. It would have been appreciated if the consultation document had addressed the additional financial burdens that are projected for the short or long term for the prospective successor boards, and information concerning the specific sectors of Argyll and Clyde's accounting that made a loss. Those concerns have been made all the more relevant with today's publication of the Audit Scotland report, "Overview of the performance of the NHS in Scotland 2004/05", which highlights some of the great challenges that the national health service will face in the future. We have seen those challenges for ourselves at first hand—long waiting lists, unpopular moves to centralise services and problems in rolling out NHS 24 and with finding dentists. It is interesting that the Audit Scotland report recommends a review and improved financial management and workforce planning, which needs to improve if NHS bodies are to manage their finances properly, respond effectively to cost pressures and provide a health service differently in the future. The report even goes on to say: "The NHS in Scotland faces a significant challenge in meeting savings as part of the Efficient Government Initiative." In the face of all that, lack of analysis of problems in the consultation document is all the more significant. That is why my party is adamant that the consultation should be extended to ensure that that vital extra financial information is made  available to the public so as to better inform people's choices. Having indicated our position, I will move on to highlight other concerns that the proposals have raised in the interim. At many of the consultation sessions, the recurring message was that some residents of Argyll and Bute felt that they were on the edge of the health systems of which they have been a part, and they perceive that their needs and priorities have not always taken centre stage for the NHS board. On another front, community health partnerships are central to delivery of joined-up health and social care services. It is understandable that proposals for CHPs in Argyll and Clyde depend on the final consultation on dissolution of the board, but that might affect the development of CHPs in NHS Greater Glasgow and NHS Highland. It will be a close-run thing if all those community health partnerships are to be established by April 2006. I would be grateful for further information from the minister on progress on that. Given that centralisation and reconfiguration of acute services within an expanded NHS Greater Glasgow would be decided at board level, cuts in the current vulnerable acute services in Argyll and Clyde might take place in the interests of a cost-cutting agenda for the Greater Glasgow NHS Board. There is a fear that any change in administration would present an opportunity to further centralise and downgrade acute services—it is vital that that does not happen. Mr Tosh rightly alluded to that threat in his question to the minister. No one doubts the sincerity of the intention of the chairman of the Greater Glasgow NHS Board; it is what the board might be compelled to do that is troubling.

I concede that that level of intent provides a modicum of reassurance to that particular area. However, what about Inverclyde on the other side of the Clyde, where—I must say to the minister—very real concerns have been expressed about the continuation of acute care services? What guarantees can be given that the public in Argyll and Clyde will not suffer further losses of service as a result of the agenda of managers who are driven by costs? I certainly want to know what specific changes will be made under each option to ensure that there is a stable environment for acute services in the Argyll and Clyde area.  No one underestimates the perplexing complexity or the gravity of the current situation. However, people in Argyll and Clyde strongly suspect that the heavy hand of Government and bureaucracy has been sterile in assisting better provision of health services in the area. Indeed, they want that hand to be lifted and they want far greater restoration of control to patients and their local clinicians. I move amendment S2M-3684.4, to leave out from first "supports" to end and insert: "applauds the efforts of all clinicians and staff in NHS Argyll and Clyde, at this unsettling time, to maintain the delivery of services; expresses profound concern about the inadequate nature of the consultation process concerning the future of NHS Argyll and Clyde; believes that the consultation paper lacked both a clear analysis of the structural and financial problems facing the existing NHS board and any robust information about the implications of revised NHS board areas for acute hospital services, which the public needs to make informed choices about the options presented, and therefore calls for the necessary analysis and information to be provided for the public as a matter of urgency and for the consultation to be reopened, in order that informed decisions can be made."

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Scottish Executive's Cabinet. (S2F-1980)

I wonder whether the First Minister will discuss consensus with his colleagues. So far in my new role, I have found precious little on which the First Minister and I agree. However, I have no intrinsic desire to play Judy to his Punch. Does the First Minister's Cabinet have any concerns about the provision of education in our state schools?

The First Minister might affect some of the characteristics of Mr Punch, but he will not want his nasal proboscis to be confused with Pinocchio's. Let us look at the facts: a million days were lost to truancy last year; 59 per cent of our teachers consider discipline to be a serious problem; 50 per cent of 14-year-olds do not meet  the Government's standard for writing; 40 per cent of them do not meet the Government's standard for maths; and 2,730 young people left school last year with no qualifications. I hope that in the mood of consensus the First Minister will agree that those figures are depressing. Let us try to find common ground to improve matters. Will the First Minister, like Mr Blair and me, accept the principle of greater autonomy in our schools and reflect that by allowing schools to own their buildings and land, employ their staff, set their pay and develop their culture and ethos?

There was a certain ambivalence about that response. I listed what is happening in Scottish education. It takes two for Punch and Judy to tango and here am I with my arms outstretched. Mr McConnell seems to concede that all is not well in our state education sector—his response illuminates that. So let me make a final offer to Mr McConnell. If he concedes the principle that all is not well and so accepts the conclusion that something fairly radical must be done, and if his party in the Executive accepts the need for reform to take place, will he accept my assurance that he need no longer rely on the duplicitous whimsy of his Lib Dem colleagues? If he is earnest in his  endeavour to improve the quality of state education provision, I can tell him that my party will support him in much-needed reform. Will he be gracious enough to accept that assurance?

I was lulled into leisurely retrospection this morning and almost convinced myself that I was in a time machine and had found myself back in 2000. That was until I listened to Mr MacAskill and wondered where on earth a debate on the criminal justice plan of this devolved Parliament was straying. It turned out that I was not in a time machine; the Executive was simply spinning things in that way. The minister wants to talk about what has happened in criminal justice in Scotland over the past year, but Labour and the Liberal Democrats have been in charge of the Scottish justice system for the past six years, not just one year. No matter how much they might like to obscure their abysmal record over those six years, I am not going to let them. The minister has talked about the progress that has been made on the criminal justice plan, but I wish to remind her of the real consequences of the Executive's policies on law and order over the past six years. Since 1999, crime and offences are up 15 per cent to an all-time high. Serious assault is up by 6 per cent; rape and attempted rape are up by 47 per cent; fire-raising and vandalism are up by 58 per cent; and drug crime is up by 38 per cent. A chilling statistic from the Scottish crime survey is that three out of four crimes are never  reported to the police. If anything is indicative of a significant dent in public confidence in our criminal justice system, it is surely that statistic. I could continue to cite statistics, but I have limited time. With all those problems and so many challenges, what has the Executive done? The minister said—I support her in this and hope that I quote her correctly—that a justice system that does not meet the needs of the public must be reformed. I pose the question: how has the Executive reflected that? It has voted four times against ending the automatic early release of prisoners and has passed legislation to make it easier for prisoners to get out of jail even earlier.

Intentions, intentions, intentions. The minister does not need me or the Scottish public to tell her that the road to hell is paved with good intentions. The public look for political leadership, not intentions. How has the Executive reflected its admittedly laudable approach? It abandoned the just say no drugs campaign, which was replaced with one that gives mixed messages. It has no idea how many drug rehabilitation places are available in Scotland for dealing with the growing number of addicts. It has presided over a burgeoning growth industry in methadone scripts and it abolished Scotland Against Drugs without any debate or explanation and without giving any notice to the Parliament. In the meantime, drugs-related crime has soared and our prisons are awash with drugs. Our overstretched police officers have been given so many new responsibilities that, according to the Executive's research, only about 145 of them are on our streets at any one time. If I were Minister for Justice, I too would want to hide from such a record. By contrast, my party believes that crime can be cut and we have policies that will achieve that. Due to time constraints, I cannot mention all the issues on which I would like to offer the minister some advice—although I will keep her in mind in future debates—so let me focus on three simple steps that would dramatically improve the Scottish criminal justice system. First, we must end the automatic release of prisoners now. The minister disputes that such a move is possible or practical, but sometimes in public life Governments need to show political leadership by responding to public dismay at a system that is discredited. If the  minister is as committed to such a policy as she suggested this morning, she ought to introduce legislative proposals to address the issue.

I have been generous in accepting one intervention from the minister already. Each week, our newspapers contain further sad stories of people who have been attacked and killed by individuals who, but for the practice of automatic early release, would still have been in prison. Surely the minister accepts that there is a public appetite for a change in that practice. Such a change must apply to all offenders, not just sex offenders as the criminal justice plan hinted. Just last week, Derek Ferguson was found guilty of the tragic murder of 16-year-old Steven Pettigrew. The stabbing took place in April this year, when Ferguson should still have been in prison for his brutal attack on a father and son in 1999. Surely the practice of automatic early release cannot continue to be acceptable. Secondly, the Executive must learn from elsewhere by accepting the merit and wisdom of a zero-tolerance policing strategy and introducing genuine local accountability. I am aware that the public throughout Scotland are frustrated by a feeling of impotence about their ability to influence how general strategic policing is conceived and provided. The members of the public who pay taxes to fund our police forces do not know where they fit in. My party believes that some level of accountability could be achieved through the direct election of police board conveners and the publication of localised crime statistics. If the minister will not listen to me, perhaps she will listen to Chief Constable John Vine, who said: "We still run our police forces in Scotland like social clubs. About 80% of our time goes on making life comfortable and the public out there are almost a bloody nuisance who get in the way. We need to change that culture. They are paying our wages and we need to be far more responsive to what they want. I think we need a new deal with them." Well said, John Vine. Thirdly, as I told the First Minister last week, we need to introduce a politically led strategy to deal with the scourge of drugs abuse in Scotland. After six years of devolution, the deficiencies and omissions in information to which I have referred can no longer be acceptable. The Executive needs to find out more information about what is happening in Scotland so that it can work out a strategy for those who need to find help, which they must be able to find easily. The Executive must also rapidly deploy strategies to provide vastly improved facilities for rehabilitation of drug-addicted people.  I have been able to make only those few suggestions in the time that is available to me this morning, but I urge the minister to listen to public opinion and common sense and to reverse the tide of rising crime in Scotland. It can be done, but it needs courage, conviction and political leadership.

To clarify, DTTOs are not available in district courts, are they?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister and what issues he intends to discuss. (S2F-1957)

I ask the First Minister how many drug rehabilitation places there are in Scotland.

That response was McConnellspeak for, "I haven't a clue." That is not surprising; I have not got a clue either and, as previous parliamentary answers have disclosed, no one knows how many rehabilitation places there are in Scotland because the information is not held centrally. To help the First Minister, I will move to an area in which we have some facts. According to a parliamentary answer that was given to me on 15 November, 411,399 methadone scripts were issued in Scotland during the year to March 2005. We know, from previous parliamentary answers, that the figure is increasing rapidly. The projection is that in 2012—only seven years away—we will be issuing more than a million such scripts a year. How can the First Minister possibly be content with that situation? Is he aware that, if we continue down that road, we will have to provide not only care for the elderly, but old people's homes for methadone addicts, such as exist in Holland? Does the First Minister agree with Professor Neil McKeganey, of the University of Glasgow, that that is something "that we should seek to avoid at all costs in Scotland"?

If the First Minister had given that answer during the first six months of devolution, it might not have been acceptable, but it would have been understandable. Six years down the line, that answer is utterly intolerable. The fact is that we need a sea change in our attitude to drug abuse so that instead of managing drug addiction, we help addicts to become drug-free. Surely that must start with a new attitude towards the resources that are deployed for drugs rehabilitation places. Will the First Minister give a very simple commitment? Will he find out what facilities exist in Scotland and, as has been done in England, set up a central directory so that addicts and their families can find out where the facilities are?

To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Scottish Executive's Cabinet. (S2F-1940)

I hope that that will include a discussion about the difference between agreements, protocols, wishful thinking and pie in the sky. The spectacle to which Ms Sturgeon referred depicts a dented First Minister and a badly damaged Executive that are both clearly given scant regard at Westminster. That does not augur well for my getting any sense out of the First Minister on issues that are important to the people of Scotland, but I shall try. Given the news today that, according to the National Grid, the country is not awash with gas and faces a tight winter, does the First Minister accept that existing energy sources will not meet future demand in Scotland?

Frankly, the First Minister can waffle all he wants, but a real and immediate problem faces Scotland. The lights may be going out on the Scottish Executive, but, as the House of Commons Select Committee on Scottish Affairs has warned, we cannot afford to have the lights go out over Scotland. The First Minister's Westminster colleagues may ignore him, but the First Minister cannot ignore them or their support for continued nuclear energy generation. Therefore, will he confirm that he will not block any planning process to recommission nuclear energy in Scotland?

If only Scotland's energy needs could be satisfied by the First Minister's hot air. It is perfectly clear that we need specific answers now. For the First Minister to imagine that the two processes must be consecutive is blockheaded and nonsensical. They can be concurrent; only a finite timescale is available. What is the timescale? Given the Prime Minister's apparent recognition of the need to replace nuclear with nuclear, what discussions is the First Minister having or intending to have with his Westminster colleagues to ensure that Scotland has an adequate energy supply for the future?

To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister and what issues he intends to discuss. (S2F-1921)

The First Minister should arrange a meeting as soon as possible. Mr Blair is a veteran of quelling rebellions. Judging by yesterday's pantomime here, the First Minister is in need of some desperate advice. I wish to raise with the First Minister the latest figures from the Department of Trade and Industry for the number of VAT-registered businesses in Scotland. Those figures are regarded as a useful barometer for the health of our economy. In contrast with a healthy net gain of 1,825 businesses eight years ago, there was a depressing net loss of 135 businesses last year. The business barometer is dropping. How does that fit with the First Minister's "smart, successful Scotland" soundbite?

I have heard much from the First Minister in this chamber that is depressing, but to say that some businesses will go to the wall when we are looking at the worst recorded net fall of VAT-registered businesses for eight years and not to show a greater degree of concern is truly astonishing. I accept that the First Minister is not, for the moment, on the easiest terms with his Liberal Democrat coalition partners, but I presume that he is still talking to Mr Stephen, his deputy. Mr Stephen said at his United Kingdom Liberal Democrat conference that he wanted to go further than the recent decision to restore parity with England on business rates and "to make Scotland even more competitive with rates lower than England." I well understand Mr Stephen's sensitivity, because he is the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, and in his own backyard of Aberdeen there has been a net loss of 100 businesses registering for VAT in the most recent year. Will the First Minister accept the concerns of his deputy that we need to do more to help our businesses? Will the First Minister pledge to cut the rate now to achieve parity with England, or is his coalition really in tatters?

I am tempted to restrict my question to three words: is that it? That was a most extraordinary display of rhetoric from someone who clearly has never run a business in his life. The figures are there. Business success in Scotland is going down. Can the First Minister do something about that now, or has he absolutely no relationship with his Deputy First Minister?

I thank members for that reaction, which was distinctively different from one that I have received in recent times. It is welcome; may it set a precedent. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Scottish Executive's Cabinet. (S2F-1908)

What happened yesterday in another place was instructive for the First Minister—it was a salutary lesson from the Prime Minister on what happens when a leader pushes his back benchers down a road that they do not want to go down. I hope that the First Minister will regard the recent experiences and defeat of his colleague Tony Blair as instructive in that regard, because, this week in this Parliament of ours, at the instigation of my Conservative colleague Margaret Mitchell, the Justice 1 Committee decided to lengthen the proposed time limits in relation to quickie divorces. Will the First Minister heed the lesson of Tony Blair's experience and accept the proposals that the amendments to the Family Law (Scotland) Bill have created?

I thank the First Minister for what I accept as a serious response but, when a  committee of the Parliament that is part of a structure that was created to be a virtue of the institution expresses a clear view about an issue that is important to many communities in Scotland, we are all entitled to greater clarity than that which the First Minister has just provided. If the Executive is not willing to accept the sensible amendments that have been made to the bill, will the First Minister at least grant a free vote on the matter at stage 3?

I am anxious to establish a balance of evidence. Does Mr Purvis take the view that the Association of Directors of Social Work  was overwhelmingly enthusiastic about the proposed new structure?

In the chamber at stage 1, I outlined the Conservative party's two principled objections to the bill. We are concerned by the introduction of the eight criminal justice authorities. In my view, we have achieved useful co-ordination of activity and co-operation between agencies since 2002, through the 14 funding and planning units that were constructed on the basis of local agreement and consensus. I should have thought that there was merit in allowing those partnerships to continue, because they meet the aspirations of and provide the necessary flexibility for different areas of Scotland. Mr Wallace's amendments highlighted that important dimension. It is also the case that our social work departments are bearing an intensifying workload and that we expect them to discharge an exacting level of responsibility. Much of that is attributable to legislation that the Parliament has passed. Do we really need to impose further statutory bureaucracy on those hard-pressed departments? From the evidence that was submitted, it did not seem to me that the case had been made. As has been signalled, our second objection is the introduction of home detention curfews, while automatic early release continues. That will simply allow prisoners out of jail even earlier. I do not accept that the people of Scotland regard that as desirable or sensible. During the debate on amendments, I was struck by the lively and robust contributions that weighed in from every sector of the chamber. Normally that means one thing—that a raw nerve has been struck. I express my profound disappointment that after trails in the media, hints from the Sentencing Commission and big words from our First Minister, at the end of the day we will be no further forward in ending the scandal that is automatic early release of prisoners in Scotland. Quite simply, it is a disgrace that a prisoner serving less than four years is released halfway through that sentence, regardless of their behaviour, and that someone serving more than four years is released after only two thirds of it. That sends out a message about our justice system, and I do not think that it is a good one. I  certainly do not think that it is a deterrent message. The Executive can come up with all the excuses that it wants. The fact remains that amendment 1 in my name would have allowed it to end early release on a day of its choosing. Mr Henry criticised that provision and seemed to regard it as a deficiency, but I was trying to address the specific concern that he articulated at stage 2. For the moment, the Executive is the devolved Government of Scotland, so for the moment it has the power to end early release. That is why I tried to give it the flexibility that it seems to think would be helpful. Actions speak louder than words. Clearly, the Executive has no intention of ending early release for short-term and long-term prisoners. Through the bill, it will allow some prisoners out of jail even earlier. That is not justice. With regret, because there are subsidiary measures in the bill that have merit and that I do not want to diminish, I say that on the two principled grounds that I have outlined the Conservatives are unable to support the bill and will therefore vote against it.

I commence on a gracious note and thank those members who made them for their kind remarks. This has been an interesting debate, because it has laid bare a dichotomy at the heart of the Executive. The First Minister is unambiguous in his condemnation of automatic early release. He is on record condemning it on at least three occasions, and he reaffirmed his sense of opprobrium about the continuance of the system earlier today. However, it is a different picture when his colleagues in government contribute to the debate and offer their own explanations as to why they are unable to support amendment 1. Mr Purvis's contribution was particularly quaint. He said, "Why pick a sixth of a sentence for remission? It might be that two sixths is appropriate, or whatever." Clearly, Mr Purvis takes the view that a prison sentence is to have no meaning attached to it whatever. That is precisely the lack of clarity that the public are so frustrated with, and it is precisely the inconclusive approach to the issue by the executory—I mean Executive; "executory" is an unfortunate slip—with which the public are becoming impatient.

I want to deal with points raised by Bill Butler. As reaffirmed by the minister, Mr Butler homed in on prison capacity. The contributions by the minister and Mr Butler indicated that they are fending off in every possible way they can think of any suggestion that at this stage we should bring an end to automatic early release, notwithstanding the completely unambiguous commitment of the First Minister to do that. Prison capacity, cost and the possible consequences of changing the law in the way I proposed are material considerations that must be taken into account, but the real material consideration is whether the Executive wants to uphold and implement what it says is a fundamental political principle—it either does or it does not. It is clear to me from this afternoon's speeches that the Executive says one thing about the principle and quite another about its implement.  On capacity, at stage 2 the minister mentioned an estimated figure of 4,000 places, but that assumes that the prison population is a static entity that is unaffected by events. My colleagues and I argue that if we get rid of automatic early release, not only will we respond to the understandable cry of the public that they do not feel safe while the system operates, but we will introduce a deterrent effect by having a system in which the sentence imposed is the sentence served. We could expect to see a reduction in prison population because of that. We have statistical evidence from Spain and Ireland that having a large prison population leads to lower rates of crime. The other issue that is definitely relevant is that I am certain that the judiciary's attitude to sentencing would alter because, clearly, when they impose a sentence, judges have to take into account for how long they think the person's liberty should be removed. In the debate, I have witnessed a lot of distraction, a lot of evidence used as a smokescreen and many comments that were intended to fob off my party's attempts, through amendment 1, to do what the public want. I do not intend to withdraw the amendment; I intend to push it to the vote.

No, but it assists me in once again showing the difference between the Executive, the Scottish National Party and my party. We are considering the concerns of the people of Scotland, which are dramatically depicted in the appalling chronicle of crime that is committed when persons are let out of prison early—during the period of early release. That is why the issue hangs on whether the Executive has the political  will to take a decision to end the practice.

No, thank you. If the political will is there, it attracts resource, so the Executive has to be clear that the matter is a fundamental priority and a political imperative. That is the difficulty.

No. As amendment 1 ensures, the provision would not be retrospective in effect. It would come into effect only when the Scottish Executive so determined. If the Executive is craven in not being prepared to accept the amendments, that is a stark illustration of what the First Minister was advocating earlier today but does not do. The Executive does not practise what it preaches. Nothing could be clearer if it refuses to back my amendments. I move amendment 1.

Amendment 1 brings us back to the issues with automatic early release that I raised in the committee at stage 2. As members will be aware, prisoners who are currently imprisoned in our Scottish jails can automatically get out early after serving half their sentence if they are short-term prisoners, or two thirds of their sentence if they are long-term prisoners. That is a consequence of Westminster legislation that was introduced by a Conservative Government. The Conservative Government recognised that the system was not working and brought forward legislation to end it, but the incoming Labour Government of 1997 did not bring the legislation into effect, which is why we still have automatic early release. The purpose of amendment 1 is to reintroduce a topic that I raised at stage 2. When I lodged an amendment on the issue at stage 2, the minister raised some perfectly proper concerns, which I was prepared to address. He expressed concern that it would be unclear whether the change would be retrospective and concern about the effect of the amendment on prison capacity. From all that has been said—in particular by the First Minister earlier today—it seems to me that it is universally recognised, including by the Executive, that the system of automatically letting prisoners out early is discredited. The difference between us seems to be whether we should do something now to end the system or whether, as the Executive seems minded to do, we simply go on talking about the issue and expressing concern but do not take any specific measure to bring the system to an end. Amendment 1 would achieve two things. It would end automatic early release and it would reinstate a requirement for prisoners—short-term or long-term—to earn an element of early release, which would be a sixth of the sentence that had been imposed. It is important to emphasise that I have also endeavoured in the amendment to retain home detention curfews. I expressed concern in the committee about the application of home detention curfews under the current regime because if, as the Executive proposes, we do not get rid of automatic early release, the practical consequence of the provision on home detention curfews is that prisoners will get out even earlier. That is a matter of profound concern to the public of Scotland. My amendment is drafted so that it  would end automatic early release, insert a provision to allow a prisoner to earn remission of up to a sixth of their sentence and allow home detention curfews to be retained. To try to answer the concerns that the minister expressed at stage 2, I seek to provide that the change would be in the control of the Executive. Amendment 2 would allow the provision in amendment 1 to be brought into effect by affirmative subordinate legislation. In other words, a Scottish statutory instrument would have to be brought forward before the provision could have effect. That is an attempt to address what I considered were proper concerns expressed by the minister.

It is easy to bandy numbers about, but we must make a serious point about the principle. The point is that the system as it currently operates does not enjoy the confidence of the people of Scotland and no wonder: prisoners are getting out early and very serious crimes are being committed during the period of early release. Mr Butler's point raises an important issue about what is the political priority. I detect that there is a clamour for change, and I do not think that the Executive dissents from that. If that is the case, the Executive must put in place the necessary resources that are consequent on any change to the procedure, and there must be political leadership if the Executive is to change the procedure.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. My question follows on neatly from Ms Sturgeon's line of inquiry and relates to what happens to prisoners when sentences are imposed. Is the First Minister committed, in principle, to ending the now totally discredited system of automatic early release of prisoners from our jails?

That is an unexpectedly encouraging response. During this afternoon's consideration of the Management of Offenders etc (Scotland) Bill, my party will give the Executive the opportunity to end the scandalous system of automatic early release not retrospectively, but in a timescale that would be totally under the control of the Executive, because the change can be implemented only by an Executive statutory instrument. Will the First Minister let us all rejoice by confirming that he will agree to our amendment?

That response is deeply depressing because, by failing to agree to our amendment, the First Minister will be enforcing a system that will let convicted prisoners out of jail even earlier than they are getting out now. I suspect that that will represent the major difference between my attitude to the concerns of Scotland and the First Minister's. I am listening to those concerns and I will try to address them this afternoon, whereas the First Minister is content to sit here and prate parrot-wise a meaningless mantra of false hope. If the current approach does not end this afternoon, when will it end?

As the consultation has proceeded in the way that has been indicated, the minister will be aware that legitimate concerns are being expressed about the absence of sufficiently robust information on the funding implications for the adjoining health boards that may have to assume patient quotas from the current NHS Argyll and  Clyde area and on the strategies for dealing with the extended patient obligation and geography of those adjoining areas. Given the fundamental importance of preserving confidence in the administration of health care in the current NHS Argyll and Clyde area, will the minister once again look to the possibility of the Executive maintaining interim administration of the area until far more detailed information has been made available? Will he consider doing that before people are asked to try to make informed choices about options?

On numerous occasions, the First Minister has asserted his Executive's commitment to business in Scotland. Indeed, I believe that it is still the priority priority of the Cabinet under the much-chanted mantra of a smart, successful Scotland. Does he think that yesterday's figures for manufactured export sales were a hiccup, an aberration or a direct consequence of the Executive's muddle-headed policies, such as abolishing the uniform business rate?

The problem for the First Minister is one of trust. The business community is being asked to believe in an Executive that removed the uniform business rate, has presided over a slump in manufacturing and is led by a First Minister who reportedly disparaged two leading business people who criticised Executive policy by calling them idiots. How can business take the Executive seriously when, apart from uttering insults, all that it has done for business is to introduce its promised business rate reduction—so we are told—by instalments? Does he not realise that Scottish businesses have already paid £838 million more than their counterparts in England? That figure could be £1 billion by the time that parity is restored. Is that not more weak-kneed and spineless than smart and successful?

I apologise to you, Presiding Officer, and to the Parliament, for my late arrival, the reasons for which are reasonably well known. I was certainly not the only person to be affected. If being in a bus that took two hours to get from Glasgow to Edinburgh was a somewhat depressing prospect, it could have been worse: I might have been sitting next to Stewart Stevenson, in which case I should  have given up on the will to get here at all. I very much hope that, when I get a ministerial car, I will travel with the same impunity as Mr Henry, and that such difficulties will diminish. I pay thanks in particular to Bill Butler. I do not know whether he is still in the chamber, but I heard that, at very short notice, he picked up the ball running. I am indebted to him for doing so. I am sorry that he got landed in that position. I am also slightly sorry that I have been landed in this position: winding up without having heard all the speeches is slightly challenging. However, I have never lacked powers of invention, so I will do what I can. I thank members for their kind remarks about both the Justice 2 Committee and our report. I know that I speak for the whole committee when I say that we are pleased if the report has contributed to useful debate. The report might seem modest to some. It did not require committee members to travel to far-flung parts or exotic climes. Glasgow, Hamilton, Dundee, Falkirk and Edinburgh were as far as we got, but the report is none the worse for that. It is a solid piece of work, which I hope will inform debate. I record my thanks to our clerks for their equally solid administrative support and immense patience. I thank our adviser, Fergus McNeill, and the many individuals and organisations who submitted evidence and facilitated visits. Of course, I also thank my fellow committee members.

Yes. I have been dogged by the same difficulties, so I sympathise. I will emphasise a theme that has emerged during the debate: although youth justice is a subject that has not left the headlines since the advent of devolution, we know that, just as not all adults are criminals, certainly not all young people are hooligans. Young people will push barriers, because that is part of learning, but it is worth considering that the relatively small proportion of 2 per cent of children under 16 find their way to a children's hearing on offence grounds and almost 3 per cent of adults find their way to court. Perhaps we have a problem with youth crime, but we should view it in perspective; it is important that we do not lose sight of that. The committee was slightly frenzied as it tried to find a remit for the inquiry. Members might have mentioned the scoping seminar that we held in Glasgow, which was immensely useful in focusing  our minds. It was attended by a high calibre of participant and it was good to find that those participants were generally supportive of the existing youth justice framework, although they noted a range of gaps in service provision. That is how we decided the remit. The remit was chosen carefully and, although I did not hear Mr MacAskill's speech, I gather that it had a slightly sour note to it.

Sweetness and light? I am not in a position to comment, because I was not here, but another member indicated that they thought that Mr MacAskill thought the report was pretty tedious and boring. The report might not sound sexy, but I thought that it was spot on in that it considered what matters. It is not setting off rockets, ringing bells or blowing whistles, but it is shining a bright light over the canvas of youth justice. I will not regurgitate the report, but it is important to recognise how broad and intricate that canvas is; it is a very close weave and it is extremely difficult to come up with dazzling proposals for any one aspect of it. The report does not try to do that; it tries carefully to tease out difficulties and make what I hope are sensible observations about them. I hope that Christine Grahame was reassured to see that one of the first things we did in the report was commend the children's hearings system and express our support for its principles. As far as multi-agency working is concerned, one of the most telling descriptions came from Perth and Kinross Council, which said that interagency service planning and delivery was like a three-dimensional game of chess—I really do not think it could be described better. That begins to indicate the complicated backdrop against which we were operating as a committee. What has struck me about the speeches that I have been privileged to listen to is that they have touched on many of the themes that the committee picked up, such as concerns about stability of funding and the need for an holistic and coherent multi-agency approach. That was picked up by Mike Pringle, Susan Deacon and Donald Gorrie. Maureen Macmillan made a positive contribution and explained the value of a networking approach in the real sense, which has certainly been achieved in Moray. A number of contributors rightly highlighted literacy and the need for education to form part of the general backdrop for our young people if we want to try to provide them with a stable platform for life ahead. Maureen Macmillan mentioned Orkney, but other contributors such as Jackie Baillie, Kenneth Macintosh and Robert Brown made good points about the significance of that area of activity. The committee thought that early intervention  was important. A number of members touched on that, but I thought that Susan Deacon made a telling contribution. Stewart Maxwell said that early intervention should happen almost before birth, but the point is that from the moment a young life in this country starts we have to be alert to how it will proceed. Scott Barrie said helpfully that if we are really going to try to achieve a corporate approach at local authority level, training will be required—it will not just happen. During the debate, I was most struck by three issues: the role of the voluntary sector; drugs, alcohol and mental health facilities and services; and accountability, to which Stewart Stevenson alluded. I say to the minister that I was struck by the fact that there is a very real need for drugs, alcohol abuse and mental health facilities. My impression is that we cannot quite quantify what the supply needs for services will be to meet demand. The debate has highlighted that issue and provided a timely reminder to us all. The committee was mindful of the role of voluntary organisations and specifically referred to that role in its report. Donald Gorrie pungently referred to that matter; he described the perceived hostility to the voluntary sector and talked about too much centralisation. The debate has been useful. It has gone a long way towards further colouring what the committee has said. I hope that the report has helped to stimulate debate and I thank all members and ministers for their contributions.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has any plans to review the regime governing contaminated land. (S2O-7606)

I thank the minister for her response, although it affords only partial comfort. The minister will be aware that redevelopment of farming and industrial sites in Scotland is becoming widespread, and that the current regime places no obligation on the Scottish Executive, the Scottish Environment Protection Agency or local authorities to investigate suspected contamination. I ask her whether that is desirable. For example, at the Royal Ordnance factory site in Bishopton all parties, including the site owners, are genuinely ignorant as to whether contamination is present. Is it acceptable that I have had to submit a requisition under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 to the Ministry of Defence in London to find out?

It is with much pleasure that I speak to the motion in my name. As a first assurance, I give the chamber my undertaking that I will not break into song—either as a solo or in a duet—because I have no wish to prejudice the cause of Voices in Paisley. It is often the case in life that some of our most enjoyable journeys have improbable starting points. In March last year, when I got an invitation to attend a choral evening on a Friday night in the Wynd Centre in Paisley, my interest was not immediately aroused. However, no one who underwent their primary and secondary schooling in the Renfrewshire and Inverclyde areas is unfamiliar with or immune to the pleasure of music. Both those areas have a very strong musical tradition, so I decided that I would go along to the concert; I was not disappointed, because musical talent from Paisley and the surrounding area was abundant. If that talent was exciting, no less refreshing was the enthusiasm of the participants. At the end of the concert, I was approached by the organisers to see what I had thought of the evening. They also wanted to seek my views on a plan to have a choral festival in the following October, with a view to making that festival a cultural highlight for Paisley and putting Paisley on the cultural map of Scotland. I paused, but only momentarily, because it seemed to me that the talent and the focus and enthusiasm that I had just witnessed demonstrated that that idea was not only brilliant but sustainable. Indeed, that first foot in the festival water in October last year made a very big splash. One of  my pleasures was to attend the schools concert part of the programme that had received great support from Renfrewshire Council. Some members might remember that the Renfrewshire children's choir under Christine Badger was a star turn at an Edinburgh carol service in which MSPs participated a couple of years ago. The same indefatigable Mrs Badger was to be found at that schools concert in Paisley. The display of young musical talent was breathtaking. Voices in Paisley had organised other impressive events for that week and, building on that strength, the group decided to try to take things forward on a more structured basis. In January this year, it was my pleasure to chair a conference on proposals for the formation of a Paisley festival company. All of us who were there were startled at just how many people attended, and the obvious feature of that attendance was the breadth of appeal that the festival seems to hold and the breadth of interest in taking it forward. That has brought us to where we are now, with the prospect of an exciting and expanded choral festival being held between 30 September and 15 October, offering a wide diversity of rich musical entertainment. Perhaps equally important, the festival offers an opportunity to people of all ages and backgrounds to participate, either musically or as audience members. My reason for bringing this evening's motion before the Parliament was threefold. First, I wanted to pay tribute to the spirit and determination of the musicians who created an exciting addition to the cultural calendar not just of Renfrewshire but of Scotland. It may be invidious to single out people, but the chairman of the organising committee, Tom Wright, and his lieutenant, Fred Hay, have been two doughty ambassadors. Secondly, I wanted to acknowledge the vital support and encouragement that has been given by local organisations, led by Renfrewshire Council. The foreword in last year's programme, by Provost Ronnie Burns, said it all. It is right that we pay tribute to what local organisations have offered in support. Thirdly, I wanted the Parliament to recognise that the festival, which had its origins in the celebration of music, has become a flagship for Paisley. We all know that Paisley has been buffeted by many challenges, and some would argue that it has had an unfair share of adversity, but the festival is providing a renaissance—a new banner of hope—and relaying a message that is positive and exciting. The festival has become bigger than a musical convention; it is putting Paisley back on the map. My message to the Parliament and those beyond is, "Let's hear it for Paisley and wish the choral festival organisers  huge success in October." I thank those MSPs who have supported the motion and those who are taking part in the debate. There is a great deal that we can do as ambassadors for the festival. I also thank the Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport for attending and I ask her to note that, although I have not come with begging bowl in hand, I ask the Scottish Executive to acknowledge the tremendous amount of work that has been done by volunteers to make the festival happen. If there is any small gesture that the Executive might feel able to make to encourage a fantastic local effort, I urge her to consider that. If the minister's diary permits, I am sure that she would be very welcome at one of the festival events. I thank members for their attention and I look forward to hearing the other speeches.

Given the minute attention that the First Minister devoted last week to grabbing headlines about his bold resolve to examine deficiencies in our criminal justice system, and to be equally resolute in addressing those deficiencies, I imagine that a considerable number of people—perhaps even those in his Cabinet—would have been anticipating this morning's legislative statement with keen interest.  Initially, the statement was encouraging. It was "a programme for justice and respect ... a vision to build safer, stronger communities". The First Minister's stated objectives included a pledge to "support the victim". Those brave proclamations were timely and encouraging, as well as much needed, for reasons that might be uncomfortable for the First Minister and his Scottish Executive. In the six years of devolution, the number of recorded crimes and offences has increased. Mr Purvis does not like statistics. No giddy wonder; if I was part of the Executive, I would not like the statistics. The recorded crime in Scotland bulletin of June 2004 shows that fire raising and vandalism have increased; rape and attempted rape have increased; offences involving the handling of offensive weapons have increased; and drug-related crimes are up. Recently, indeed, there was a tragic disclosure that drugs deaths in Scotland are now running at about one per day. That reflects a lot of misery in many of our communities. What about the Scottish Executive's attempts in the past six years to ensure that our criminal justice system deals robustly with persons who are charged with committing a crime and with persons who are convicted of committing a crime? Currently, as we have heard, those who are sentenced to imprisonment get out early automatically and there is disturbing evidence that serious crimes have been committed by certain individuals who got out early and were therefore free to commit those crimes. Furthermore, there is the turbulence—there is no other way to describe it—of the operation of the bail system. In 1999, the system saw fit to allow only three persons who were charged with murder out on bail, but by last year that figure had increased to 55. I agree with Kenny MacAskill that that is unacceptable, because if someone is charged with murder there is a victim, there is a victim's family and friends and there are prosecution witnesses who might all live in the same community. That represents a situation to which most right-thinking members in the chamber would be deeply opposed. I suspect that, in the chamber, there is already universal disquiet at what has been happening. The Lord Advocate may want to investigate how many bail applications are opposed by the Crown. As we know, the judge is powerless if, on application, the Crown offers no opposition. The judge cannot intervene of his own volition. I suspect that there are many cases in which, privately, the judge is deeply unhappy that no opposition was offered. The Sentencing Commission estimates that the  bail system allows 9,000 people per year to reoffend, of whom 4,000 offend more than once, and the bail system in Scotland has resulted in 30,000 outstanding warrants for arrest for people who failed to return to court. According to the Sentencing Commission—as we have already heard—those failures are "endemic" I suspect that many MSPs' constituents have come to them to voice the very concerns that are the human face of what the statistics mean. They might include victims' relatives who are appalled that the accused is free in the community and is living a few doors away, in the case of a murder charge. There are witnesses who are frightened to go out in their own communities for fear of being intimidated and threatened. Those concerns arise in cases in which people have been through the system and allowed out on bail, but what about people who have been convicted and given an alternative disposal rather than being detained in custody? Robin Harper was vociferous in his support for such solutions, but the facts are again troubling. In 2003-04, 18 per cent of community service orders, 33 per cent of supervised attendance orders and 34 per cent of probation orders were breached. If we add to that troubled picture the fact that three crimes in four are no longer reported because people have lost confidence in the criminal justice system—I tell Mr Purvis that that figure comes from the Scottish crime survey—it becomes clear to me that a programme for justice and respect is overdue and that a pledge to support the victim has never been more necessary. There are positive areas in the legislative programme that the First Minister announced this morning, but unfortunately they are at the margins of the problem that I have just described. The Scottish Executive is allowing our once-revered criminal justice system to sink in quicksand. Without more police officers back in our communities and without their being visible regularly, the depressing increases in criminal activity will not be reversed. Without a pledge to stop automatic early release from prison, our criminal justice system will not enjoy respect, our victims will not be supported and our communities will not be safer and stronger. Without a radical review of the operation of bail, the same will apply. If the First Minister really wants to convince people that when he talks tough he means business, he needs to take action now to end automatic early release. His Minister for Justice says that that is a priority; he can show that by supporting the Conservative amendment on that to the Management of Offenders etc (Scotland) Bill. We shall make our own judgment according to the response to that amendment.  If the First Minister really wants to stop the abuse of bail, he can enlist the co-operation of his colleagues at Westminster to review the operation of the European convention on human rights with reference to our criminal justice system. If the First Minister is not prepared to take that robust action, he and his ministerial regime will be seen as nothing more than passive patsies who are hard-wired to the soundbite and totally weak-kneed on solutions. The people of Scotland know what is wrong; it is the First Minister who is not getting that message.

Even allowing for the elasticity that accompanies the minister's interpretation of the term "priority", can she say whether the pledge, if such it be, to review automatic early release will extend to all terms of imprisonment and not just short-term imprisonment?

I declare an interest in that I live in the village of Bishopton. The minister will be aware that for over 60 years the site was a production site involving noxious substances and that, by its very nature, much of the activity was covert. Therefore, there is a widespread lack of knowledge as to the contaminate situation of the site. Does the minister think that leaving the situation to informal dialogue and discussion between SEPA and local community representatives is sufficient? Would it not be more sensible for there to be some ministerial guidance or directive to require SEPA to take a more formal locus in the matter?

Will Mr Stevenson give way?

I hope that Mr Purvis is not implying that the legal profession in Scotland as a whole does not provide a soundly based and professionally discharged service. He may be doing so inadvertently.

I apologise to the Minister for Justice for arriving after the commencement of her speech, but I was at a meeting with my Justice 2 Committee clerk. I should also declare an interest as an enrolled solicitor in Scotland. Public funding of legal services is not, I admit, a subject that is likely to have people on the edges of their seats, but it is vital for three reasons. First, it is right that people who need advice to ensure that justice is done are able to get that advice. Secondly, it is necessary to ensure that a reasonable scheme operates to assist in funding procurement of that advice for individuals who have little or no means with which to pay for it. Thirdly, without such a scheme, the main providers of that advice—lawyers—will wither on the vine and the quality of the service is likely to deteriorate, which would lead to the shrinking of Scotland's legal profession. The losers would be the very people who need the advice and assisted funding in the first place. I will deal first with that last point. I am aware that emerging evidence suggests that the number of solicitors who are willing to undertake criminal and civil legal aid work is declining; already, there are indications that people are unable to access justice and advice when they need to do so. Alarmingly, clear evidence suggests that law graduates are increasingly opting not to do that type of work. Indeed, that view was declared to me during a recent visit to a university. I welcome the Executive's motion. My party will support the motion even though it is perhaps a little bit premature, given that the consultation was launched only on 17 June. I believe that the issue requires broad discussion and debate, so it will be instructive to read the responses to the consultation. I am aware that a report on legal aid was published by the Justice 1 Committee in 2001 and that the then Minister for Justice announced a strategic review of the matter on 24 October 2003. The Justice 1 Committee report floated some useful ideas that merit attention. I shall return to those in more detail in a moment. Legal aid and legal advice and assistance cost a lot of money—approximately £150 million per annum. Some people will find it tempting to approach the debate from the simple standpoint that lawyers get far too much money, whereas others—not surprisingly, they will predominantly be lawyers—will say that lawyers find that legal aid work is not worth doing. Such simplistic approaches lead to the equally simplistic and misguided conclusions that we should either cut the money or provide more money on the basis of  current structures. I disagree with both of those conclusions. I was interested to hear the minister's comments on that issue in her speech. We need to analyse radically not only how we provide advice and assistance and representation in court, but whom we ask to provide them. Mr MacAskill made a similar point, but I do not support his idea to establish a commission, because that would result in unnecessary delay and possible expense. I actually believe that effective change can be made on the back of the consultation and that such change could be made quickly. Most lawyers would agree that the initial guidance and advice that many people seek in respect of everyday problems can probably be conveniently and competently provided by a range of organisations, such as citizens advice bureaux, law centres, certain local government advisory facilities and, indeed, organisations such as Shelter. It may be more sensible to use such sources of advice than to expect individuals to seek out solicitors, fill up legal advice and assistance forms and enter into the now necessary protocols for someone to become a client of a solicitor. Mr MacAskill is correct to say that such sources need to be resourced. It must be recognised that those advisory sources, although they are in many respects excellent, have limitations. If it is clear that the individual has a problem that might have significant personal or financial implications, legal advice may be necessary, and the sooner it is obtained the better. It seems to me that, if we can clear our minds about what may be appropriate for that stratum of general provision of advice, which is sought and required throughout Scotland, we may be able to leave solicitors to concentrate on clients for whom specific legal advice is required. It is certainly worth examining the current structures that govern funding of such advice. As I said at the beginning of my speech, it is not in the interests of the public or of justice as a whole if solicitors are walking away from legal aid practice. It is also not in the interests of the legal profession if good court lawyers have no interest in staying in that area of practice. I know that it is popular to disparage and denigrate lawyers, but the great majority of lawyers do a good job and bring much comfort to clients. In my opinion, the Justice 1 Committee's report was on the right lines in suggesting that payments under the legal aid and legal advice and assistance schemes should be linked to introduction of a quality assurance scheme. I support that, as I support peer review. Lawyers are no different from any other group of workers. When they are young, they are inexperienced, and they need to acquire experience. When they have acquired that  experience, they are a valuable source of advice to clients and of education to the legal profession. The best example that a young lawyer can have in the profession is an older, more experienced and wiser colleague. It seems to me—these are my personal suggestions for consideration—that we need to move on to a system in which the level of payment depends on the seniority and accredited expertise of practitioners. To give a purely illustrative example, the first level might be for solicitors with five years' experience or less, the next for five to 10 years' experience and the next for perhaps 10 to 20 years' experience. That could be conjoined with higher payment for accredited expertise in specific areas of practice, such as medical negligence cases.

I am saying that, with their general level of workload and experience, most young lawyers will spend five years getting a grasp of general practice and experience and that, after that, they will become more useful practitioners. I was careful to say that that facility could be conjoined with accredited expertise. If a practitioner specialises and qualifies in a certain area of work, I think that that practitioner would want accreditation, which could be acknowledged in any consideration of a legal aid formula. My suggestion would mean that, from the earliest stage, a client had the option of seeking general or more specialised advice. I would have thought that that could only be helpful to the process of a case and to the Scottish Legal Aid Board's having confidence in the suitability of the practitioner to handle the case. That approach may be particularly relevant at the legal advice and assistance stage. We tend to get hung up on legal aid and funding of cases in court, but if an expert experienced solicitor advises a client early, the advice may be that there is no case, so the matter will never proceed to court. The advice might also be, "There is a case, and with my expertise I can negotiate a settlement." Such a settlement could be successfully effected without a case going to court, which would mean that the legal aid fund was not required or accessed to fund litigation. I see no reason why that general approach could not work equally well for civil and criminal cases. What is becoming unsustainable is a set payment for work, regardless of whether a solicitor is 23 or 43 and regardless of whether a solicitor  has no specific expertise or professionally acknowledged and accredited expertise. That system is no longer serving the public interest or the public purse, and it is no longer serving a soundly based, roundly qualified legal profession. Change can be made, and I think that it can be made without another national body being set up. In that connection, I sound a cautionary note. I am a little apprehensive about any proposal to introduce bureaucracies. All the components exist to effect and deliver change, provided that we are able to give political leadership on what form that change should take. I urge the Executive to be ambitious and to have a vision for a soundly structured and well-qualified legal profession in Scotland; if it does not, it will be the public rather than lawyers who are failed.

To ask the Scottish Executive what research has been commissioned in Scotland into the causes of mental health disorders and, in particular, any links with cannabis use. (S2O-7142)

I thank the minister for her frank response but express a little disappointment in it. Is she aware that a respected academic in Scotland, Professor Neil McKegany, was recently invited to the United States of America by the Unites States director of national drug control policy to discuss the health dangers of cannabis? That threat is taken very seriously in the United States. Given that Scotland does not want to seem to be behind the United States, does the minister think that it would be appropriate for us to consider invoking the skills of Professor McKegany, so that he can advise us on the illegal use of cannabis in Scotland?

The minister has said expressly that the Executive does not wish to link ID cards to the provision of devolved services. Will the much more restricted use of ID cards in Scotland mean that the cards will cost less in Scotland?

I know that the minister does not intend to be patronising, as that is not his nature, but surely he accepts that, if the Parliament exists for any purpose, it is for the articulation of views that might be different from those of the Executive and for the advancement of arguments that might be opposed by the Executive and other parties. Surely the proposition that, in this Parliament, it is flawed for a party to articulate a differing view, on the basis of representations that have been made to it by the public, and, in doing so, to create the very debate without which that view would not be heard, is nonsensical. Is the minister seriously condemning that as an unacceptable mode of parliamentary behaviour?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I must question whether it is acceptable conduct for a member to include a specific reference to a member who is not present in the chamber and so cannot rise and explain his position if required.

Will the member give way?

I make it clear at the outset that I speak in this debate on political issues as the Conservative spokesman on justice, not as the convener of the Justice 2 Committee. However, as convener of that committee I express my appreciation to my colleagues on the committee, our clerks and the various witnesses, including the minister, who came before the committee, for their collective and respective efforts in producing information, collating it and being prepared to debate it so that we could reach a majority committee view. I thank the minister for her kind acknowledgement of the work that was undertaken.

Not at the moment. For political reasons, on which I shall expand in the course of the debate, I was unable to support the majority committee view and dissented from supporting the bill at stage 1 in the committee. I accept that the spirit of the bill is well intended and my party acknowledges that the management of offenders is a vital aspect of our justice system that must be given more time and consideration. If we really want to rehabilitate criminals and deter people from committing crime, they have to know that they will serve a sentence that both reflects the gravity of the crime and gives them the chance to be rehabilitated. I think that Mr Stevenson  acknowledges that the question how we achieve those objectives in practice raises serious questions about the proposals in the bill. In the limited time that is available to me, I propose to concentrate on the two major aspects of the bill that present problems to me. The first is that the bill is to be enacted within the existing regime of automatic early release from prison of convicted criminals. We know that the public at large are bewildered by automatic early release. They regard it as confusing. Given recent high-profile cases in which persons who were at liberty through automatic early release have committed serious crimes, both the public and victims have good cause to question why the regime continues. In my party's view it is irresponsible of the Scottish Executive, and unacceptable from the standpoint of public safety, to introduce a bill that contains provisions that will allow persons who have been convicted of serious crimes, but who will already get out of prison early under automatic early release, to get out even earlier.

I give way to the minister.

Yes. I accept what the minister says, but I draw to her attention a comment that the Home Secretary, Mr Jack Straw, made in 1999 about home detention curfews. He said: "We have no plans or intention whatever to provide for electronic tagging to facilitate the early release of serious or sexual offenders. Let me make that clear, with a full stop—none whatever."—[ Official Report , House of Commons , 29 November 1999; Vol 340, c 27.] Yet, as we already know from the experiment in England, matters have not proceeded in a positive way.

No—I am sorry. The Scottish Executive might be able to explain away that strategy. It is, no doubt, driven by a desire to reduce the prison population by seeking to improve the lot of prisoners. However, the Scottish Conservatives consider that the priorities must be the safety of the public and the best interests of victims. It seems to me that neither of  those paramount considerations will be protected by the bill. In short, if the Scottish Executive will not stand up for public safety and victims, the Scottish Conservatives will. I make it crystal clear that we cannot support the bill for as long as automatic early release applies to prison sentences. We are prepared to lodge an amendment at stage 2 to end automatic early release and if the Executive is prepared to support it, we will support the bill. The other area of serious concern that I had when listening to the evidence that was presented to the Justice 2 Committee by the Association of Directors of Social Work and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities is the proposed statutory creation of community justice authorities. A useful co-ordination of activity and co-operation between agencies has been achieved since 2002 by the 14 funding and planning units that were constructed on the basis of local agreement and consensus.

I am sorry, but I really am pushed for time. I apologise.

In that case, I will take the intervention.

I think that that is a question that Mr Stevenson should pose to the public and to victims and their families. My clear impression is that there is huge concern in Scotland about public safety and, equally important, about confidence in our criminal justice system. To me, the political priority of the Scottish Executive has to be to have regard to that fundamental public concern, which is what I am addressing. If the way of addressing that concern is to increase prison capacity, then it is the political imperative of Government to achieve it. On the existing structures, I would have thought that there was significant merit in allowing the current partnerships to continue because they meet the aspirations of, and provide the necessary flexibility for, different areas in Scotland. In evidence, COSLA stated: "structures of themselves will not deliver either improvement outcomes or worse outcomes. It is the ...  activity that goes on that is important."—[ Official Report , Justice 2 Committee , 12 April 2005; c1493.] That is a sensible observation. We ask our social work departments to bear an intensifying workload and to discharge an exacting level of responsibility. Much of that is attributable to legislation that has been passed by Parliament. I would have thought that a period of consolidation and assessment would be preferable to imposing further statutory bureaucracy on those hard-pressed departments.

There is a considerable advantage in listening to the views of the people who are working in the sector, which I consider to be authoritative. It seems to me that when the partnerships to which I referred have been in operation only since 2002 and we have a devolved Parliament, a Scottish Executive and a Justice Department, there is ample opportunity to implement the process of consolidation and assessment to which I referred. There is a clear ability, particularly through Audit Scotland, to test what is happening and then to make any necessary adjustments through administrative change. However, I find the proposed imposition of a statutory framework to be alarming because I think that it will exacerbate problems. In relation to what Mr Stevenson said, the inescapable conclusion that I have reached is that the Executive's original suggestion—it was subsequently dropped—for a single correctional agency was unpopular and provocative. The suggestion has now been revived, by another name, in little local bits. I have a great deal of sympathy with the view that the estimated running costs of each community justice authority, of about £200,000 a year, could be better used to fund front-line services and to enhance programmes that are already being delivered. For those reasons, I do not find that a convincing case has been made for the creation of those authorities; I dissented in committee from supporting their creation. Unfortunately, the strictures of today's debate constrain the opportunity for extended  discussion, but for the reasons that have I stated, my party will not support the bill at stage 1.

Does the Scottish National Party have any concerns about the practical effect of the bill, in that it will let certain convicted criminals out of prison even earlier than is the case now?

The minister alludes to an important issue. I understand from a Press Association press release that was issued overnight that the Sentencing Commission's chairman, Lord Macfadyen, wrote to the minister saying that, if the Executive was taking that step on the basis that sex offenders posed a greater threat to public safety than other types of offender, the commission was unhappy because it felt that there had to be a consistent approach. I welcome the steps that the Executive is taking—they do not go far enough for me, but they travel in the correct direction—but if that is the Sentencing Commission's view, is there not a strong argument that the Executive should question the whole concept of automatic early release?

As the motion in the name of my colleague David McLetchie makes clear, this morning's debate provides a welcome and necessary opportunity to debate the structure of the national health service in Scotland post the Kerr report. It  would have been helpful and timely if the Executive had offered such an opportunity sooner. As someone who lives in the middle of the beleaguered Argyll and Clyde NHS Board area, I am no stranger to the challenges and difficulties that confront the NHS in Scotland and I am certainly no stranger to the frustration, bewilderment and anger that constituents who live in that area have expressed about an administration that, over the past four to five years, has been characterised by crisis and dogged by lack of confidence. Let me outline the damning chronicle of events. In 2001, the Minister for Health and Community Care had to send in a management task force to investigate the scale of mismanagement. That team found a culture of managerial and financial incompetence and a deficit that was projected to rise to £100 million in 2007-08. In 2002, four senior managers resigned. As Audit Scotland's report and the recent report by the Audit Committee disclosed, matters deteriorated further. The ensuing crisis induced the recent ministerial statement. The human face of all that is represented by the patients who have grappled with threats to maternity services at Inverclyde royal hospital and Vale of Leven hospital, the closure of A and E services at Vale of Leven, the removal of consultancy-led maternity services from both hospitals and an ever-increasing reliance on the already overstretched resources at the Royal Alexandra hospital in Paisley. That outcome presented tensions and anxieties for patients, not to mention the sheer practical challenges of transportation. A deep-seated and corrosive lack of confidence in governance at both Scottish Executive and local levels has developed among patients and professional workers in the NHS. I commend the professionalism and dedication of health service workers in Argyll and Clyde during what have been very trying times. The malaise to which I have referred is accompanied by a palpable cynicism that no one is listening and no one cares. Six years down the road of devolution, who would have thought that such an impasse could have been reached in the delivery of such an essential public service? The recent declaration that the days of NHS Argyll and Clyde are numbered has simply exacerbated the low morale and cynicism. I repeat the call that I made on the day of Mr Kerr's statement for the Executive to assume interim responsibility for the administration of the board's affairs—that is the only acceptable way forward. Quite simply, we are in a state of flux. There is no doubt that the Kerr report has implications for  the Argyll and Clyde NHS Board area. The former regime drew up proposals for the closure of the Victoria infirmary in Helensburgh, the Dumbarton joint hospital, Ravenscraig hospital in Greenock and the mental health hospital at Lochgilphead. Are those proposals to be withdrawn or are they to be put on ice and, if so, for how long? How can the Kerr report be considered for the Argyll and Clyde area, who is to do that and what strategy is to be deployed? For all those reasons, the only sensible way forward is for the Executive to run an interim administration. We are talking about the most crisis-fraught health board in Scotland. The people in the area and the professional workers who work in the service need leadership, guidance and reassurance. Heaven knows, the people of Port Glasgow, Greenock and Gourock are due that minimum reassurance after all they have been through, as are the people of the Vale of Leven, Helensburgh, Dunbartonshire and the surrounding area. I turn to the broader platform of the debate. There must be a genuine debate on whether the present system of governance of the NHS and the mechanisms for the delivery of health care in Scotland are working. The patients of Argyll and Clyde would say resoundingly that they are not. They want more control over and a greater say in how and from where their health care services are procured. At the moment, they feel uninvolved in, disengaged from and powerless to influence such matters. That situation is unacceptable and, in a devolved Scotland, unsustainable.

As Mr Purvis will be aware, the proposal for foundation hospitals is not analogous with that structure. From speaking to staff in one of those hospitals, I can tell him of their clamant desire to have more control over and say in how their hospital is run. We have to contemplate reforms that put the patient in the driving seat, offer them choice and increase capacity. If the Parliament really cares about patients, those proposals cannot be consigned to some no-go ideological cul-de-sac. It is a matter of regret that there has been little response to those proposals except from the Conservatives, who have tried to introduce new thinking and to instil, instigate and encourage debate.

I cannot; I am in my last few seconds.  The independent sector can support the efficient provision of a public national health service without impugning or threatening in any way the valued ethos of the NHS. Sadly, the abolition of NHS trusts, which was supported by the Executive parties and the Scottish National Party, has led to the loss of meaningful local control and has directly contributed to the centralisation of services that we are now seeing throughout Scotland. That process has made the patient remote from what is happening and from the decision making that causes it to happen. That is not acceptable and it is not sustainable. I support the motion in David McLetchie's name.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

That is a rather startling, paradoxical statement. The power has been used only once, so we do not know how it is operating. The fact is that it is not being used.

All political parties agree that antisocial behaviour blights too many of our communities. To that end, I record once again that the Conservatives supported the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004. We supported it in committee and at stages 1 and 3, yet Mr McConnell harbours the illusion that we did not support it at all. We were extremely uneasy with aspects of the 2004 act and particularly with the proposals for the dispersal of groups. We opposed that power emphatically because it does not provide a solution. It simply moves the problem from area B to area C. It would be better to deal with the difficulty in area B by using existing law than to put the problem on a conveyor belt to end up somewhere else in the community. If I understood the minister's reply to my intervention, the dispersal power has been used once, so it is clear that not much appetite is felt for it. My experience is that not much appetite is felt for ASBOs for people who are under 16, which is something of a frustration to many of our children's panels. Unfortunately, many of the difficulties about which we warned are coming to pass. There is no doubt that the Executive saw the 2004 act as its big solution, but without an adequate enforcement regime, the act is as helpful as a chocolate teapot. All the laws that the Executive can dream up are useless without a proper enforcement regime, which—unfortunately—is missing. It is disturbing that three in every four crimes are not reported to the police. I suggest that many such crimes involve antisocial behaviour. How can the Executive claim to be making progress on the issue when members of the public have so little  confidence that they do not even bother to report crimes?

I have no intention whatsoever of expressing a lack of confidence in the police—indeed, we have a policy that would produce another 1,500 police officers. We also desire improved accountability. Our policies show that we do not lack confidence in the police—we are simply articulating the universal concern that communities throughout Scotland have expressed. The minister referred to having more police. I would be interested to hear how many more police there should be, as it seems that we are not succeeding in establishing acceptable visible policing in our communities. However, zero-tolerance policing has a proven track record, as I have illustrated many times previously.

No. We have made it clear that that would not be the impact of our proposal for an elected police convener. By contrast, we have said that we would be happy for police boards to continue to have councillors on them, but the time has come for the public in a police board locality to have an opportunity to elect a convener who will say that they will drive forward a strategic plan for the area while operational decisions will be left to serving police officers. Zero-tolerance policing works. I have referred to the experience in New York, but there has also been success in Broomhouse in Edinburgh. Police officers may deter and detect crime, but it is equally important that an increased police presence will re-engage with communities and the law-abiding majority. It is time that someone spoke up for the law-abiding majority, whose confidence has been dented. With that confidence at such a low ebb, we must surely be mindful of what we should do to restore it and put our justice system back in the premier position in which it ought to be. Increasing the visibility of the police in our communities is necessary, but that will only treat the symptoms of antisocial behaviour. Mr MacAskill borrowed Mr Blair's phrase, "tough on crime, tough on the causes of crime", and it is  undoubtedly true that the increasing problem of family breakdowns must be addressed. From a Civitas study, we know about the disturbing pattern of a major contributor towards antisocial behaviour being children living without their father. The research data that was produced apparently shows—sadly—that such children are more likely to do less well at school and are more likely to smoke, take drugs and engage in criminal activity.

I merely repeat what the study disclosed. The minister may not care for the disclosure, but he can check the research himself. At his first press conference following re-election, Mr Blair said that he could bring in new laws, but that he could not "raise someone's children for them." I applaud the Prime Minister for having the courage to recognise the Government's limits in that field. I realise that it is not only young people who engage in antisocial behaviour, but if we are to make headway in solving the problem, we need to consider our children and help them to regain self-esteem, self-respect and respect for others. That task cannot fall to the state—it is the responsibility of parents. In many cases, the problem will—sadly—start with the parents. Their difficulties, anxieties and emotional turbulence will affect their children as sure as night follows day. There can be earlier intervention to identify parents who may be struggling to cope and whose children are therefore most at risk of becoming involved in crime.

I hope that the minister will forgive me for not doing so, as I am in my final minute. It seems to me that the approach that has been adopted in the United States has been successful. Of course, it has been largely undertaken by the voluntary sector, whose innovation and flexibility is valuable. I suggest that we must work more with the voluntary sector in Scotland. There is no magic legislative sticking plaster that can whisk away the problems of antisocial behaviour in our communities, but a greatly improved and more accountable enforcement regime—and more police on our streets—would make headway. The Executive's motion slightly misses the point at this juncture. I move amendment S2M-2893.1, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: "notes with regret that the Scottish Crime Survey indicated that three out of every four crimes are never reported to the police, indicating a lack of confidence from the public; notes the commencement of the Antisocial  Behaviour etc. (Scotland) Act 2004 but, in doing so, recognises that, without an adequate enforcement regime, measures included within the Act cannot work; ultimately believes that only when there is a greatly increased police presence on our streets, following zero-tolerance policing methods and re-engaging with communities, will we see a reduction in crime and antisocial behaviour, and therefore calls on the Scottish Executive to increase resources available to the police along with an improving accountability to ensure an improvement in the deterrence and detection of crime."

Will the minister give way?

In commenting on the progress of the act, is the minister disappointed at the apparent lack of interest in issuing antisocial behaviour orders and the apparent inertia in using the much-vaunted dispersal powers?

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures it has taken to ensure that all horse owners are aware of the procedures and timescales involved in obtaining a horse passport. (S2O-6730)

The Environment and Rural Development Committee yesterday approved the regulations covering horse passports and related matters. Does the minister accept that the way in which the issue has been managed has placed many horse owners in Scotland under considerable anxiety and constraint regarding what their obligations are and has, frankly, given them a completely inadequate timetable within which to understand and comply with those obligations? Would it not have been better to have deferred the commencement of that Scottish statutory instrument?

Will the minister take an intervention?

There is a lot in what the minister has outlined today that is commendable; Conservatives welcome the efforts to seize the ill-gotten gains of criminals and plough them back into the communities that have been damaged. Similarly, we welcome the Executive's efforts to work with European and international criminal justice agencies to catch more big-time criminals. We have no difficulty in supporting those aspects of the Executive's motion. I am also pleased that the minister is talking about strengthening the SDEA. A good first step would be to rename that organisation more accurately. I wonder how many members of the public have any idea that the Scottish Drugs Enforcement Agency deals with much more than drugs; indeed, it deals with some of the most serious crime in Scotland. Perhaps its previous name—the Scottish Crime Squad—was more fitting. That technicality aside, I remain worried about the impact on the SDEA of the new serious and organised crime agency; I think that Kenny MacAskill alluded to that. I have one or two questions for the minister that I hope will be addressed later on in the debate. I am still not clear how the SDEA is expected to interact with the new body, because the new body will also be present in Scotland. I am also interested to ascertain whether the minister anticipates having  regular meetings with the Home Office to ensure that she and her colleagues are not left out in the cold. Another way in which we should clamp down on criminals and on drugs entering the country is by improving policing at our borders. I notice that under Labour only 11 of Britain's 35 main ports are manned 24 hours a day. My party would establish 24-hour security at Britain's major ports of entry and we would establish a British border control police force whose sole job would be to secure Britain's borders. There is anxiety about security of entry at the moment, and there are issues that impinge on the sort of serious crime to which the minister referred.

No—I said the major ports of entry. I also said that there would be a British border control police force to enforce security at our borders. Serious and organised crime cannot be considered in isolation from the everyday criminal activity that occurs in too many of our Scottish communities. The final clause of the Executive's motion states that it "will continue to support the sustained efforts of all those involved in disrupting and destroying the criminal networks". Surely one of the best ways of doing that is to increase police presence in our streets. Visible policing does not just deter and detect crime; putting police back in our communities would restore trust between the police and the people whom they serve, which would encourage individuals to come forward when they have useful information. The minister mentioned Crimestoppers. Prior to 2003, I remember supporting that pilot scheme in my area because it was highly effective. It also demonstrated that there is public good will out there to help with nailing criminals. As New York has demonstrated—I have mentioned this many times—concentration or emphasis on community policing is not unique. A similar success story occurred in Massachusetts—a highly industrialised area that suffered heavily from economic deprivation, drug crime and gangland activity. The city of Lowell was perceived to be dangerous and unwelcoming, so Superintendent Edward Davis decided to follow the New York example. The result was a reduction in crime. In 2001, Superintendent Davis made a speech to the Institute of Economic Affairs during  which he explained the reasons for his success as follows: "We don't solve crime because we are smart or scientifically astute. We solve most crimes because someone tells us who did it." Those are wise words and the Executive could do with learning from them.

I do not think that there is an issue between the minister and me. I emphasise that the key seems to be the presence of police in communities where they can engage with the public. How we thereafter incorporate a raft of sanctions or solutions is consequential. An increased police presence in our communities would do a lot to reconsolidate the public's confidence and willingness to assist in solving crime. If it remains easy for serious offenders—the Mr Bigs—to get bail, many witnesses will be too scared to come forward. That is the sad reality. I suggest that the Executive's attitude to fighting crime is a top-down approach: solve the big crimes, catch Mr Big, get the headlines and the little crimes might not be noticed. I disagree with that approach. We need a bottom-up approach, which I suppose is the justice equivalent of "look after the pennies and the pounds will look after themselves". Only if we follow that path will we be able to cut crime. That is why my party believes in more accountable local policing. When we proposed our idea that the convener of the police should be locally elected, Mr Henry was very dismissive. His colleague, Mr McNeil in Inverclyde, was not quite so dismissive for reasons that I fully understand. There is a feeling of disengagement between communities and the overall policing strategy. It is little comfort to the individual who is trapped in a crime-ravaged community that big-time dealers and persistent criminals are the guys who are clamped down on. As Superintendent Davis suggested, the best way to catch the big guys is for someone to pass to the police the information that is needed. In the current climate of fear of criminals and distrust of the justice system, that will not happen. I move amendment S2M-2824.2, to leave out from "the Scottish Executive's" to end and insert:  "actions which will create an efficient court process; backs the Scottish Executive's efforts to ensure greater co-operation with European and international criminal justice agencies; believes that the status of the Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency should be strengthened and therefore hopes that it will not be undermined by the creation of the Serious Organised Crime Agency; commends the success of the Crown Office in recovering £5.4 million since the introduction of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002, continues to support the sustained efforts of all those involved in disrupting and destroying the criminal networks which profit from inflicting violence and misery on communities in Scotland, but believes that crime will continue to blight too many Scottish communities until there is an increased police presence on our streets coupled with a zero-tolerant attitude to crime."

I realise that today is not the minister's happiest day in the chamber and it is certainly a pretty desperate day for the patients and staff of Argyll and Clyde NHS Board. I ask the minister about the immediate issues of confidence on the part of patients and staff in that area because it seems to me, from listening to his statement, that sticking one bit of that area on to NHS Greater Glasgow and the other on to NHS Highland is a meaningless solution that is fraught with problems. Would it not be better for the Executive to assume immediate responsibility for the interim administration of the NHS Argyll and Clyde area pending the consultation and—perhaps even more pertinently—the publication of Professor David Kerr's report, which I understood was commissioned to instruct and inform a debate on the future of the whole health service in Scotland?

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive is satisfied with progress being made with regard to the electronic tagging of persons released on bail. (S2F-1629)

The First Minister's remarks will come as something of a surprise to the sheriff court areas of Kilmarnock, Stirling and Glasgow, because although no one is denying that tagging might have merit in cases in which the accused does not present a threat if released on bail, the pilot schemes are in chaos. I am sure that he will be aware that that situation has induced the Scottish Police Federation to use expressions such as "meltdown" and to express concerns for public safety. Is that not yet another example of the Scottish Executive betraying victims and witnesses and allowing fear and intimidation to pervade our communities?

I might surprise the minister by saying that I think that the pilot project in Hamilton has been encouraging. However, we know that persistent young offenders command a great deal of resource in the children's hearings system. If they really require special attention, would there not be merit in allowing a pilot in the youth court to consider 14 and 15-year-olds who are persistent offenders? That might greatly assist our children's hearings system.

Does the First Minister accept that the sad reality of the situation is that the Executive's failure to have sufficient capacity of secure places in Scotland for people under 16, which has been caused partly by its decisions to close facilities and partly by its tardiness in providing new ones, has created a quite unacceptable situation? Does he know of the frustrations that confront many children's panels when they want to place a drug-dependent or alcohol-dependent youngster in a place of security for their own safety but no facility can be found at short notice? Is that not shameful, after six years?

Does the member agree that it is worrying that three out of four incidents of criminal activity are not reported? Does she accept that that reflects a huge number of victims throughout Scotland?

The member is patently misrepresenting the situation, although I accept that he is doing so inadvertently. My party has pledged that in Government at Westminster it will  honour the current Barnett allocation to Scotland, which will honour the current spending pledges to Scottish departments.

I support the rubric to the motion, "Supporting safer, stronger communities". There is  not a scintilla of difference between the minister and me in relation to seeking those objectives for Scotland. Unfortunately, there is a yawning gap between what my party regards as being the fundamental components of a criminal justice system that will achieve those objectives and the strategy of the Executive. In a nutshell, the difference is about whether we should put in place simple priorities before approaching specifics or do what the Executive does and sidestep the priorities and deal only with the specifics. Before expanding that theme further, I will deal with process. The justice plan that we are discussing was published on 6 December 2004 and I think that the minister used the adjective, "radical" in connection with it. It is indicative of the level of priority that it has been given that only now has the Scottish Executive got around to debating it. As I said earlier to Mr MacAskill, the matter was considered in the chamber in December 2004 only because my party secured a debate on it. I make no apology for repeating the arguments that we advanced then on the creation of safer, stronger communities, which are reflected in our amendment.

We are not going to agree on the mechanics of the process, but if the proposal is as radical as the Executive suggests, it would have been timely for the Executive to have debated it long before now. The reality is that the overall number of crimes and offences has increased from 907,525 in 1997 to 993,126 in 2005. Just as alarmingly, there is a huge amount of unreported crime: according to the Scottish crime survey, three out of four incidents are not reported, which confirms what my party has been maintaining. Sadly, those statistics produce a picture that reflects what many of our constituents tell us is going on in our communities. Regrettably, it is a picture with which the public is familiar and it highlights the difficulty that the Executive faces in presenting the criminal justice plan as a solution. Individual bits of it are worthy and merit support in their own right, but the plan as a whole is not coherent and lacks an underpinning strategy. That is why my amendment offers three simple components that, once in place, could be supported by elements of the criminal justice plan. Unless those three fundamental components are in place, the plan will have only a patchwork effect.  There is no point in trying to replace roof tiles, put new rendering on the chimney and paint the windows if the structural cracks and the sinking foundations mean that the whole house is at risk. That is why my party would start to address the basic problems by dramatically increasing the police presence in our communities, with 1,500 new officers.

That might be clear to the member but it is certainly not clear to the public. Those additional officers are not appearing in the communities where members of the public live. The Executive has visited many new bureaucratic obligations on our police officers, which keep them in offices and not in our communities. That is why my party is committed to providing 1,500 new officers. Increasing police presence would make a radical difference. It has worked in New York and, much nearer to home, it has worked in Broomhouse in Edinburgh. It has worked for the residents of the Reidvale Housing Association in Dennistoun in Glasgow. A report shows that the improved night-time policing in that area has reduced crime. That must be our first approach to reducing the overall incidence of crime.

No. I have been generous. When a prison sentence is appropriate, the term that is imposed should be the term that is served. The Executive does not agree with that, but the public know what they want and what they expect. Ending automatic early release is what the law-abiding majority want. If that had been done, James Campbell would not have been at liberty to perpetuate an appalling crime. Ending automatic early release is also important if we are serious about trying to provide rehabilitation in our prisons. I do not agree with Mr MacAskill; many of the people in our prisons are serious offenders who need to be in custody for the sake of society, but they also need rehabilitation. It is quite wrong to say that prison does not work. We know that from the experiences of Spain and Ireland, where there is a high prison population in relation to recorded crime and a low crime rate. In Scotland, we have a lower prison population in relation to recorded crime and a higher crime rate. Prison will not work if there is automatic early release and if rehabilitation  provision in prison is not sustained and effective. I deplore the decision to stop mandatory random drug testing in our prisons. I know that the Executive is concerned about the high rate of reoffending by discharged prisoners, but if they emerge without the education and training that they need to re-enter the community, reoffending will be a risk. If a drug addictive prisoner who is still dependent on drugs re-enters the community, reoffending is an even higher risk. Unless such issues are addressed, discharged prisoners will continue to reoffend and it will be tempting for people to say—although it would be misjudged—that prison per se does not work. I conclude by urging the Executive to prioritise the fundamentals of all criminal justice systems: improving policing levels; reducing the crime that is committed; and identifying what makes certain individuals repeat their criminal activity. That might be dealt with outside prison, but if prison is the court disposal, the Executive should prioritise ending automatic early release and create a regime in the prison that will reduce opportunities for reoffending and improve meaningful rehabilitation by steering convicted criminals away from crime. I move amendment S2M-2736.1, to leave out from first "believes" to end and insert: "notes the unacceptable rate of reoffending occurring in Scotland today; accepts that there is a place in our criminal justice system for a range of different sentencing options to address this problem but recognises that, when a prison sentence is the appropriate disposal, then prison is not simply a punishment but is intended to rehabilitate, deter and protect the public; believes that the way to reduce reoffending and subsequently the prison population is to reduce the overall incidence of crime in Scotland, and therefore calls on the Scottish Executive to increase the police presence in our communities to deter and detect crime and to end automatic early release from our prisons to ensure honesty in sentencing."

Mr MacAskill might have noted that the amendment is verbatim a motion on which my party led a debate in December, when no election was in sight.

I am comforted to hear that the minister has confidence in drug treatment and testing  orders. Does she accept that, if we introduce those orders at district court level, we will effectively provide early intervention and prevent a lot of criminals from going on to the sheriff court to face higher-tariff charges?

To ask the Scottish Executive what the current position is with regard to a horse strategy for Scotland. (S2O-6499)

I accept that what is happening supports the industry, which makes a significant contribution to Scotland's economy. South of the border, a draft strategy for the equine industry is being consulted on. Given where that industry might be in 10 years' time, is the danger that the equine industry south of the border may be able to make more coherent and steady progress than the industry in Scotland? Is the minister apprehensive about that? Could more be done to provide leadership in Scotland?

Does the First Minister accept that the patients in Argyll and Clyde do not have the remotest idea what he is talking about? The patients in that health board area are overdue a specific ministerial assurance from the Parliament as to precisely what the Scottish Executive intends to do in relation to that health board.

I, too, welcome the debate, which provides a helpful opportunity to consider the specific position of female offenders in prison. Perhaps unusually, much of what I say will echo many of the observations and points that the minister made. Before I proceed to the specific topic of women in prison, it is important to clarify two general points. First, if the safety of society demands it, prison will always be the only option for a particular category of offender, male or female, and I was comforted by the minister's comments in that regard. Secondly, if it is the view of a presiding judge that, given all the circumstances of a case, prison is the appropriate disposal, that judicial discretion must be respected. It is the obligation of Government to ensure that the necessary capacity exists to meet that requirement. It goes without saying that if the public is to have confidence in the criminal justice system, the public must be reassured that the interests of society as a whole and the integrity of judicial disposals are respected by the political process. It would be quite wrong if Governments sought to undermine the interests of society and the proper discharge of judicial responsibility by circumventing the imposition of a prison sentence simply to save money or to reduce prison capacity. On the issue of public confidence, the Executive is already aware of public concern, which is shared by my party, about automatic early release and about measures that appear to be more concerned with keeping certain categories of criminal out of jail than with ensuring that regard is had to the role of the courts and to the rights of victims. Having pointed out those general premises, I will consider specific aspects of women in prison. As the minister said, it is a matter of profound concern that many women prisoners suffer from mental health problems, addiction problems and/or a history of being abused. That is deeply troubling. The motion rightly acknowledges the need to address that distressing general background.  Although the number of female receptions to prison due to fine default decreased by 1 per cent in 2003, the total still stood at 570. It seems to me unacceptable that prison needs to be an option for fine defaulters. Many other routes can be followed before that unhappy destination is reached. As on previous occasions, I urge the minister to consider a more rigorous collection system for outstanding fines. The ratio for successful recovery of fines in the world of commercial debt recovery would make an interesting comparison. It could provide lessons to be learned.

I am reassured to hear of that intention. Providing that my party is satisfied with their robustness, we will support the proposed measures.

Forgive me, Mr Purvis, but I must make progress. Given that the largest group of female prisoners in 2003 comprised those who were detained for drugs offences, with the next largest group being those who had been convicted specifically of other theft, the figures surely begin to provide signposts towards what lies at the heart of that offending and reoffending. In February last year, the inspector of prisons identified that, of women who were admitted to Cornton Vale, 90 per cent had addiction problems, 80 per cent had a history of mental illness and more than 60 per cent had a history of being abused. Those statistics build a helpful, albeit depressing, picture of why certain women are drawn into a pattern of petty crime followed by more serious crime that results in a prison sentence. As the Executive can see, my party is not at variance with the terms of the motion, which identify existing deficiencies in the handling of women offenders, in the facilities that are currently available to such offenders and in the sensitive balance that is involved in preparing women offenders for re-entry into the community. Just as it would be wrong not to recognise the praiseworthy dedication of prison governors and officers in dealing with the female prison population, it would be wrong not to comment on the positive improvements and innovations that have taken place in the way in which Cornton Vale deals with women in prison. However, there is no doubt that there still exist barriers and challenges to women when they  leave prison and seek to re-enter society. In my view, there must be a far better linkage between the tackling of drug addiction, mental health problems and the personal frailties of women when they are in prison and the environment that the women will encounter on leaving prison. From a position of support, I say that it is not just necessary but absolutely essential that we improve those linkages. I want to pay tribute to, and promote the cause of, prison chaplains. They do a tremendous and largely unsung job that brings a unique dimension to the prison environment. By offering a point of contact to prisoners and prison staff that is not compromised with the taint of authority, regime or institution, prison chaplains can give comfort and support in situations in which anyone else would be intrusive. I turn to the amendment in my name. Although the motion is principally concerned with the position of women in prison, many important additional elements must be considered in relation to female offending. There will be situations in which a judge seeks to find an alternative disposal to prison that will offer a woman a real chance to address the issues that are contributing to her criminality. The minister referred to the 218 time-out centre, which operates in Glasgow. It is an interesting innovation that is already benefiting many women. However, it will be important to track the progress of women going through the centre. In particular, we must determine whether the support and help that they receive at the centre has a long-term benefit once it has concluded. Clearly, however, that facility can deal with only a small proportion of women offenders suffering from drug, alcohol or drug and alcohol problems. That is why my amendment attempts to expand the worthy intentions of the Executive motion with a view to recognising that, with early intervention, support and advice, there is a great deal that can be done to steer women away from a path of criminality. Anyone who has appeared in Glasgow district court on a Monday morning—and seen me in my role as a solicitor, or my colleague Bill Aitken sitting on the bench—cannot help but be distressed by the spectacle of women who have found themselves in an extremely distressing situation. It is a dreary and deeply upsetting prospect. Better by far that young women who are developing chaotic lifestyles are identified and supported rather than left to exist in chaos until the necessary and inevitable intervention of the criminal justice system. I urge the Executive to consider again how we approach the issue of drug and alcohol abuse in Scotland.  We have to be able to provide, on a universal basis, swifter referral from social workers, general practitioners or the police to advice, counselling and supportive rehabilitation. Further, we must respect the wishes of people with addictions who do not want to be put on methadone or, if they are on methadone, want to be taken off it. We would all agree that Professor McKeganey's research, which was published last October, disclosed a situation that, at best, commands further discussion and debate and, at worst, is deeply troubling. I urge the Executive to consider a sensible response to that research and also to consider ensuring that there is a far greater involvement of the voluntary and charitable sector in trying to frame that response. I said at the start that I welcome this debate. I hope that all parties will feel able to support my amendment. I noted what the minister said in her speech and I wonder whether Stewart Stevenson, with the gallantry with which he is associated, might feel minded to withdraw his amendment. I move amendment S2M-2689.2, to insert at end: "and acknowledges that the best outcome of all is to advance and promote measures which provide early intervention thereby ensuring that significantly fewer women enter the criminal justice system."

The measures to which the First Minister refers will effectively air-brush criminals out of the criminal justice system—no record, no conviction. Victims in Scotland will no doubt be open mouthed at that. The proposal is to increase greatly the burden of the imposition of fines, but the existing system for the collection of fines is failing lamentably, so how on earth does he expect collection to improve?

It is inevitable that, in a debate of this nature, attention is focused on the recent tragedy of the death of two-year-old Andrew Morton. Our heartfelt condolences go out to his family. Any loss of life is a terrible waste, but it is particularly poignant when the victim is so young, as that little boy was. Unlike the Scottish nationalists, I firmly believe that it is important that firearms legislation remains  the responsibility of Westminster, and the minister has eloquently articulated the reasons why there is much to commend in that approach. Gun control is a serious issue and I believe that it is best served by there being a uniform approach throughout the United Kingdom, although I concede that there are practical differences to be found between Scotland and England. Thankfully, we have not seen the surge in gun crime and gang warfare that has been witnessed in England. In the past week alone, we have seen four men convicted of the shootings of Letisha Shakespeare and Charlene Ellis, which occurred last new year, as well as the conviction of Peter Williams for the murder of the jeweller Marian Bates. Gun crime, involving both banned and legal guns, has doubled in England since 1997. I am pleased to note that that trend has not been replicated in Scotland, and I think that we should be prepared to speak about that, as it highlights the fact that firearms legislation, which applies equally north and south of the border, cannot guarantee a consistent response. Although Scotland has not seen the surge in gun crime that has taken place south of the border, that is not to say that there is room for complacency. On the contrary, despite the introduction of the handgun legislation at Westminster, there continues to be handgun-related crime in Scotland. I draw members' attention to the fact that, tragically, since 1998 there have been 259 murders, attempted murders and robberies involving pistols and revolvers, the vast majority of that category of weaponry being banned. Sadly, banning those guns did not prevent those crimes from occurring. Indeed, there have been more crimes of that type involving pistols and revolvers, which are largely banned, than crimes of that type involving air-guns. What it is vital to remember, and what those statistics demonstrate, is that bans and legislation do not on their own prevent tragedies and crimes from occurring. In Scotland today, drink-driving is banned, but in 2003 more than 11,000 drink-driving offences were recorded. Drugs are outlawed, yet we have a growing drugs problem. Last year, almost 1 million crimes and offences were committed in Scotland—all incidents in which the perpetrator broke the law. Legislation alone will not prevent individuals who are intent on breaking the law from breaking the law. In tandem with the law, we also need a robust enforcement regime. That means that we must have police out and about in our communities deterring and detecting crime. I know that the minister is now persuaded of the wisdom of what has been happening in New York, where crime fell dramatically when a zero-tolerance approach to crime was adopted, along with an increase in the police presence on the streets. Low-level crime  and antisocial behaviour cannot be tolerated. Whether they involve broken windows or attacks on firemen carrying out their lawful duty, such offences are simply not acceptable. However, if they go unchecked, they create a breeding ground for more serious crime. What we need at the moment is not so much more law as more police officers on our streets. I know that the Executive disputes the statistics, but how can the 140 police officers who are on our streets at any one time possibly achieve the required community coverage? Mr Henry disputed those statistics, but I refer ministers to their own document, "Narrowing the Gap".

I am very short of time. Do I have enough time, Presiding Officer?

I think that I would rather expand on my point than take an intervention from Mr McFee. It is important that we also have a wider justice system to back up our police and communities. I have taken issue with the Executive on the recent announcement about potential criminals being allowed to pay fiscal penalties. I think that that is wiping the slate clean, so that the offenders have no record and no conviction, and even if they are prosecuted and sent to jail they may be released after as little as a quarter of their sentence. Such policies do not assist in deterring crime; they merely reinforce the fear of crime among the law abiding and they strike at the credibility of the criminal justice system. That is why my party is pledged to ending automatic early release and to ensuring that we have the necessary prison capacity to protect our communities from continual law breakers. However, Presiding Officer, I have listened to the minister's speech and have had the opportunity to study the text of her amendment, which, in the circumstances, I am prepared to support. Therefore, I will not move the amendment in my name.

I, too, welcome the opportunity to contribute to the debate. In line with the other maritime pedigrees that have been offered, and not to be outdone, I inform members that I have a family connection with shipbuilding on the Clyde as well. One of my forebears built the tea clippers at Greenock. All of us in the chamber, with our different party backgrounds, share a desire to do everything that we can to support the compelling case of Ferguson's in Port Glasgow. I, too, will concentrate my attention on that yard. As a lawyer, I was often asked to plead cases that, on frank inspection, were perhaps less than robust, but it would have been a joy to be asked to plead the case for a company such as Ferguson Shipbuilders. As has been said, the company has a proven reputation of skill and experience in building quality craft. As Bruce McFee said, the company has not lacked customers elsewhere. We know that Western Ferries, which is not a public sector company, procures ferries from Ferguson's, so pricing seems to be acceptable. Ferguson's has a highly trained and experienced workforce that has a good contract performance record. We also know of Ferguson's significance  to the local economy. Its wages bill is estimated at some £7 million per annum, but that excludes local suppliers, who probably account for the employment of another 100 people in the local economy. The two local colleges—James Watt College of Further and Higher Education in Greenock and Reid Kerr College in Paisley—are used to provide training and skills for the apprentice workers who start off in Ferguson's. The case for Ferguson's is not difficult to prove; the difficulty lies with the people to whom we need to prove it. I will try to observe the tradition that members' business debates should not be hostile or contentious, but in the speeches that have been made I detect the most concerted and obvious desire to ask the Executive to show political leadership. There are unexplained questions about why countries in other parts of Europe manage to place their contracts with their own yards. Concerns have been expressed by Ferguson's about how other yards have managed to secure contracts when, on a price-comparison basis, there is apparently no contest. If people such as Robert Breckenridge, Crawford McKechnie, Alex Logan, Sean Finke and William Small—who are all workers at Ferguson's and members of the GMB union—can fight for their yard alongside the company's chief executive, Alan Dunnet, and managing director, Richard Deane, questions must be posed about the role of the Scottish Executive. I ask the minister to give us evidence that the Executive is prepared to fight for the precious, precious shipbuilding industry on the lower Clyde. Let me quote something that I read in today's Evening Times : "We need, in Edinburgh and Westminster, the clear demonstration that there is the political will to ensure the yards on the Upper and Lower Clyde, are given a fair deal - the kind of treatment our neighbours in the EU give to their shipyards." That quote comes not from one of the Executive's political opponents but from Trish Godman, who is a member of one of the Executive parties. I also refer members to Jack McConnell's response to my question at First Minister's question time on 3 February, when I raised the issue of Ferguson's. He said: "Of course Ferguson's, like other Scottish shipbuilders and yards, is treated fairly by Scottish ministers. The objective has to be not just to treat them fairly, but to ensure that they are well placed to win orders and contracts."— [ Official Report , 3 February 2005; c 14255.]  Ferguson's could not be better placed to win orders and contracts; what we ask for now is evidence of the Executive's political will to deliver for Ferguson's.

Pauline McNeill's fright was nothing compared to mine. It has been said that the Conservative party welcomes the general principles of the bill. In an increasingly complex technological age, the law must develop to meet new challenges. I read the bill before I read the Justice 1 Committee's report, which is a very good piece of work. My first realisation was that section 1 of the bill does not deal with what I would describe as questionable communications; rather, it defines an offence that is constituted by a series of events. Therefore, I was comforted by the committee's sensible observations in paragraphs 81 and 82 of its report, which recognise that gap. A political decision is needed about striking at communications to a young person that would, if they were known about, cause concern to the young person's parent or guardian. The question is whether we should strike at any communications between an individual and a young person or only at communications that contain sexual allusions that are likely to corrupt and deprave. The first option is impractical, but the second is not. Most parents and guardians would be deeply concerned if a young person was receiving such material. Stewart Stevenson graphically described how quickly such communications can materialise through the internet. In such situations, a parent or guardian would—not unreasonably—think that criminal law would intervene before completion of the series of events that is required to satisfy section 1. We know that communication on at least two occasions, a meeting with the child with criminal intent and unreasonable belief that the child was over 16 would be required. There is an argument that the existing criminal law covers such communications; indeed, lewd and libidinous conduct has been invoked as a charge that has led to conviction and the committee's report refers to such an incidence. However, the legitimate question that the Executive must answer is whether the common law is sufficiently robust. If it is not, statutory support would seem to be necessary. The committee proposed that one option would be to include breach of the peace in the list of sexual offences in part 1 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 where the nature or circumstances of the offence are clearly sexual. A number of members have referred to that. I agree that the option is worth considering, but my concern is that there may be difficulty in that the basic common-law crime of breach of the peace was not intended to cover such situations. It could be more difficult to prove the charge in the context of a sexual  communication and to secure a conviction. Members are interested in creating law that allows the Crown a reasonable prospect of conviction when prosecuting cases. I have a suggestion to make, which is that it may be possible to draft a simple statutory offence that is constituted by a person's sending to a young person a communication that contains material that is likely to corrupt or deprave. That would allow objective assessment of the circumstances by the courts and it would present simpler cases for prosecutions to prove. The obvious attraction is that, whether by common law or statute, such communications would constitute criminal activity, which would mean that on conviction the offender could be placed on the sexual offenders register and the offence would be constituted without there having been a meeting or series of events. I turn briefly to the serious offence that section 1 of the bill will create. My reaction is that it will be difficult for the Crown to cover all the steps that are envisaged by section 1, which is all the more reason why we should consider the communication stage of contact. On risk of sexual harm orders, much attention has already been focused on the onus of proof and the balance of evidence and on whether it is to be criminal or civil evidence; the clear intention is that civil procedure be used. The committee has signalled concerns about the appropriateness of civil procedure; I echo those concerns. I will pose some questions about the procedure for an RSHO and the evidence requirement. If I read the section correctly, there is no provision for serving the application on the respondent and it creates no right of response to, or justifies appearance by, the respondent. Is the application to be in the form of an initial writ, for example? Will that mean that it will then follow standard sheriff court procedure? It seems to me that if there are parties with malign intent who are anxious to discredit an individual, they could present fictitious information that the respondent would be powerless to question. Under the bill as it stands, the respondent's rights are restricted to appeal of the order. If section 2 does not require appearance by the defenders, will cases proceed as undefended civil processes and could the chief constable produce his evidence by affidavit? Those are important questions because the chief constable has to produce evidence that on at least two occasions the individual has—to quote section 2(1)(a)—"done an act". Does the chief constable simply say by affidavit that he is satisfied that on two occasions the individual has "done an act"? Is that to be the evidence? If it is, it is very frail. I have genuine concerns about what section 2 of the bill means in terms of the technicalities of production of evidence and the rights of  respondents to question legitimately what evidence might amount to.

Will the minister explain why our universities increasingly have to deploy precious resource to provide remedial instruction to supposedly qualified and educated undergraduate students?

I should declare certain charitable activities. I am a member of the Salvation Army west Scotland advisory board, I am involved with the Prince's Trust in Scotland and I am a trustee of a charitable trust. Also, given the reference to the church in the committee's report, I should declare that I am also a member of and an elder in the Church of Scotland. I realise that such extramural activity is regarded as positively provocative in certain quarters, but I am unyielding. I welcome the opportunity to modernise and reform charity law in Scotland. However, it is quite wrong to assume that no previous law existed—I shall come to that later—or that the previous law contains no important components that might continue to be relevant. Given the purpose of charitable endeavour—particularly with regard to the people whom it seeks to assist—it is important that we do not in legislation make that task more difficult, more burdensome and more expensive than at present. If we do, the losers will be the very people who are in need of help. The extreme prospect—if the bill were to create confusion, duplicate obligations for charities operating in other parts of the United Kingdom and confront charities in Scotland with unsustainable costs—is that some charities would cease and, equally alarmingly, that others would not start. It is from that perspective that I wish to make the following points, which, in essence, are technical. The first question that will confront any charity in Scotland, either existing or proposed, is what it is required to do if the bill becomes law. I am not clear about the answer to that. Although the bill will set up a charity regulator, a Scottish charity register and an application framework and give guidance on how applications are to be dealt with,  I see no obligation requiring every charitable organisation to register. The sanction for an organisation that does not register may be that it will lose its status as a charity for Inland Revenue purposes, but that is not stated in the bill. Indeed, the evidence taken by the Communities Committee confirms, as far as I can understand, that a charity might satisfy the Inland Revenue test but not the test under the bill. If so, that raises two questions. First, why would a charity bother registering under the bill as long as it has Inland Revenue approval? Secondly, is it not our desire, within reason, to bring all charitable organisations within a framework of light-touch regulation and accountability? The Executive needs to put those points beyond doubt on the face of the bill. In evidence to the committee, the chief executive of OSCR said in response to questions from my colleague Mary Scanlon about the Inland Revenue and OSCR: "It is like three-dimensional chess. I can say only that we are doing our best in discussions to ensure that there is alignment of definition and practice."—[ Official Report , Communities Committee , 26 January 2005; c 1688.] The purpose of the Parliament is to produce not games of three-dimensional chess, but lucid legislation that meets the objectives that it is intended to meet. The Executive must clarify those issues. I have a specific concern about section 7, which sets out the criteria for the charity test. The danger of resorting to subject-specific definition is the high risk of omission, to which Donald Gorrie rightly alluded. Given the criteria, it seems that certain organisations will be excluded. The question has already arisen in relation to the Royal National Lifeboat Institution, but what about Hearing Dogs for Deaf People and Guide Dogs for the Blind? I assume that the fact that those charities do not specifically address the health issues of hearing and sight impairment excludes them from the charitable purpose of advancement of health, although they provide essential services to people who are affected by those conditions. What about the animal welfare criterion? Does that relate to domesticated animals or wild animals and does it cover wild animals in captivity? I do not know, but I have serious concerns, particularly given the evidence to the Communities Committee that the bill repeals all existing charity law, in contrast to the Westminster Charities Bill, which will retain existing common law and the charitable status of existing charities. That evidence is extremely important because it also relates to the public benefit and charitable status issues. Ann Swarbrick, a solicitor with Anderson Strathern, said: "The common law that has decided what is charitable is rather far-reaching and complex. Part of the common law  defines public benefit. There are two strands. The first is public benefit tests, some of which are in section 8. The second defines types of charities, such as those for promoting the charitable sector and the relief of unemployment. If we swept away the common law, as the Scottish bill proposes to do, we could jettison such types of charities, unless they are specifically covered by the 13 purposes in the first part of the Scottish charity test. I am afraid that the answer to whether such charities are covered is that that is, at best, uncertain. In many cases, the problem is not that they definitely would not be covered by the Scottish charity test, but that the whole thing is uncertain, which potentially leaves many charities in Scotland uncertain as to whether they are covered. That is not good enough."— [ Official Report , Communities Committee , 15 December 2004; c 1504.]  I strongly urge the Executive not to jettison the common law, which has a helpful and important role. As the Law Society of Scotland said, "pre-existing charity law and charities recognised under that law should be acknowledged and specified in the Bill." That is not just sound legal advice; it is overwhelming common sense. We should take a closer look at what is happening at Westminster and ensure greater alignment with the Westminster proposals and total alignment with the Inland Revenue. That may mean that, if an organisation has charitable status under United Kingdom revenue law, that would justify its inclusion on the Scottish register. There must be far greater cohesion between what we seek to achieve through the bill and its current text.

Will the member take an intervention?

In the interests of accuracy, I confess with some shame that I have never been a Bishopton guide, or any other kind of guide.

I, too, welcome the opportunity to contribute to the debate and add my voice to the support for voluntary organisations in Scotland. I hope that our visitors in the public gallery this evening will take some succour from the record of the Parliament in being prepared to speak up for the voluntary sector and, in fairness to the Executive, doing so with some positive responses. It is only right that we acknowledge that. I declare a note of interest with reference to scouting and guiding in Scotland—I am an ambassador for the guides and I had the pleasure of receiving the hospitality of the Scout Association at its Burns supper this year when I replied to a toast to the lassies. I too defer to and am aware of the sensitivity of the minister's position. It is only right to acknowledge that: it would be inappropriate to expect the minister to make any specific commitment this evening. However, I hope that the debate will provide an opportunity for those of us who, like Bruce McFee, are aware of what our  scouting movement achieves in the Renfrewshire area, and particularly what the Lapwing Lodge facility provides in the pursuit of that endeavour, to tease out some issues that the minister will find informative. Bruce McFee referred to the exemplary definition of voluntary activity given by the First Minister on 7 June 2002. It is against that encouraging backdrop that I make the following observations. Where we have such a reservoir of good will, commitment and community public-spiritedness as we find among those who work with our scouts, the Scottish Executive's providing some help would be a gilt-edged investment: the Scottish Executive would be adding to a proven investment of worth and achievement. I am also aware, from meetings with representatives of the Scout Association in the Renfrew and Inverclyde area and from a voluminous exchange of correspondence with Mr McCallum, who is a veritable latter-day Pepys when it comes to communicating with members of the Scottish Parliament and keeping them aware of the details, that there is genuine frustration about how resource can be accessed for such worthy projects as Lapwing Lodge in Renfrewshire. I met officials from the national lottery community fund in Glasgow. It appears that there is a certain rigidity in how lottery funding is to be made available, which has the very undesirable consequence that excellent projects such as the modernisation and expansion of the facilities at Lapwing Lodge might not have a clear application path to follow. The Scottish rural partnership fund, which is responsible for the local capital grants scheme, is a desirable and necessary source of provision, but whether it offers the best way of dealing with funding for a volunteer community project is perhaps another matter. However, it seems to be the only game in town. I know from parliamentary questions and correspondence with the minister and his predecessor that ministers are confronted with genuine technical difficulties. In June, I received a letter from Mr Allan Wilson in which he said, in reference to an unsuccessful application for help: "Projects which are solely or predominantly for the benefit of one organisation or group within a community, e.g. young people or older people, are not eligible for LCGS funding." I reiterate the point that Bruce McFee made about the organisations other than the Scout Association that use Lapwing Lodge. According to the information that I have, 22 uniformed organisations, 56 community organisations and seven international organisations use the facility. I hope that those figures give the Executive a  measure of comfort that the facility is not supported just by a unilateral, self-interested, small group of people who seek money to pursue a particular pet scheme. Nothing could be further from the truth. I urge the Executive to demonstrate what I know to be its high regard for an organisation such as the Scout Association and to give a fair wind to assisting with capital funding for the project. In doing so, the Executive would not only take forward a very important community facility but send out the strongest possible message of support and encouragement to the dedicated people who make scouting the tremendous advertisement that it is for the development and guidance of young people. Such an approach would also give substance to the First Minister's proclamation of 7 June 2002. I support Mr McFee's motion.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. At First Minister's question time, the First Minister repeatedly asserted that the Conservative party voted against the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill. I have no doubt that he sincerely believes that assertion, but I wish in the interests of accuracy to point out that the Conservative party voted in favour of the bill at stage 1 and voted in favour of passing the bill at stage 3. I simply want the Presiding Officer to affirm that, even in the heat of political debate, accuracy is important.

We did.

Will the member give way?

My goodness; democracy can occasionally be found in the Labour party. I have disposed of my speech notes to the official report, but I will repeat what I said earlier. The Conservatives, in principle, support ID cards. I cannot make that any clearer. I then articulated—

I went on to articulate the significant list of reasons why this incoherent, ill-founded, incomplete, uncosted, unscrutinised and untested proposal deserves legitimate questioning and criticism.

I think that we have all noted the irony in Mr Purvis's concluding remarks. The subject of ID cards is one that tends to polarise opinions. This debate has already reflected that. On one side, people argue about the defence of civil liberties; on the other, people argue for the maximum protection of the state. However, it is fair to say that we would not be debating this issue were it not for the events of 11 September 2001. Conservatives would not have countenanced compulsory ID cards before 9/11, but since 9/11 it has been incumbent on all of us to examine carefully any measures that might enhance the nation's security. Identity cards, if introduced properly and effectively, might indeed help to do that. However, it should be remembered that, even if the Identity Cards Bill is passed at Westminster, the introduction of ID cards will take years. It is vital that any legislative proposal be subjected to searching scrutiny and thorough debate. We have to accept that a modern world, with the increasing use of new and emerging technologies, requires new safeguards and frameworks to govern how information is used. We have to listen to the views of people such as the police, who tell us that the cards will help them to wage a war on crime, and the security services, who tell us that the cards will be a useful weapon against terrorism. However, we must be sensitive to the legitimate privacy of the law-abiding individual and ensure that fundamental issues of liberty are adequately addressed. Although Conservatives support the principle of ID cards, we have a great deal of sympathy with the Green party motion. The Government has failed to give enough time for proper scrutiny of this important bill. During the committee stage of the bill, six and half of the clauses were not even debated and much of the remainder was rushed through. Furthermore, a number of key questions have not been answered. First, we must be clear about the purpose of ID cards. As Patrick Harvie said,  one of the main objections to the wartime identity card was mission creep. The card began with three distinct purposes and ended up with 39. In the debate on the current bill, the Government has claimed that a national identity card is needed for everything—from benefits and services to dealing with people trafficking. It is important to understand precisely what the Government's priority is. The Government must make clear the specific purposes for which an ID card is required. Secondly, we must be clear about the capabilities of the technology—a point that Stewart Stevenson raised. Biometrics technology is not infallible. The system must be robust—from the card and biometric reader, through to the communications system and right into the central computer, database and software. I have to say, Presiding Officer, that if electronic data in this Parliament can confuse me with Robin Harper, such frightening technical frailties would be completely unacceptable in any system for ID cards—I see the members of the Green party applauding; I did not expect my point to be so warmly received. Stewart Stevenson made a very good point when he suggested that the bill, once enacted, could give legal effect to technical error. That is a troubling thought. Thirdly, we know that what the Government is proposing is one of the most ambitious technology projects that this country has ever seen. The Government therefore has to have in place the organisation capable of introducing the scheme. There is no evidence that that is yet the case. The scheme will have to be cost effective, but we know that costs have already soared. They have almost doubled overnight, from £3 billion to £5.5 billion. Finally, we have to examine the very real concerns over civil liberties that are at the heart of the anxieties that many members have expressed—especially as this scheme comes from a Government that seems to have no concerns for civil liberties whatsoever and that displays an increasingly sinister obsession with political control, with a consequent disregard of individual freedom. In an ideal world, we would not need identity cards. Sadly, our world is not ideal but increasingly dangerous. It may be necessary to legislate for the possible introduction of ID cards. However, because the Government has failed to answer material questions on the issue, the Scottish Conservatives will support the Green party motion.

Today we are dealing with an important piece of legislation. As I did at the stage 1 debate, I pay tribute to our fire service in Scotland for the work that it does. At stage 1, I said that I have been the beneficiary of the service's skill and expertise. We should be under no illusions about how vital the service is to Scotland. In consideration of any legislation, it is important that we are clear that attempts to modernise services are proceeding in a reasonably transparent and readily understood fashion. I thank the minister for his comments in respect of the Justice 2 Committee and repeat my thanks to members of the committee, of which I am the convener. The committee found the bill an interesting piece of legislation to scrutinise and we had good debates. At stage 2, the Executive made considerable progress in allaying legitimate concerns that existed at stage 1. The Conservative party was sufficiently unclear about the Executive's intentions in the text on the face of the bill to feel unable to support the bill at stage 1. We lodged an amendment that was not agreed to, which left us unable to support the bill at that stage, because of genuine concern about lack of clarity. However, I am grateful to the minister for emphasising at stage 2 his desire to achieve a degree of transparency and for giving members of the Justice 2 Committee certain welcome reassurances that we accepted in the spirit in which they were given. As our doubts have been reasonably dispelled, Conservative members intend to support the bill this afternoon.  As has been mentioned in the debate and during consideration of amendments, there are some residual concerns about the bill. I refer to the briefing from the Fire Brigades Union. The FBU may be surprised to hear this from someone such as me, but I thought that its briefing, as a model of lucidity, took some beating. It was a very clear piece of work. I might not have agreed with everything in the document, but I certainly felt that it was very well prepared. Shona Robison has referred to control rooms, and so shall I. The minister said in his response that the consultation is still to happen, but he said specifically that the matter would come back to Parliament via the committee. Although that is reassuring in a general sense, we would all welcome a slightly more specific indication of what form that return of information will take. Perhaps the minister will expand on that when he winds up. The other relevant issue that the FBU raised concerns the national framework document. I expressed concern during the stage 1 debate that the content of that important and significant strategic document was still pretty vague at the time of the bill's drafting and that it would be subject to consultation and final clarification before the Parliament. I accept that that parliamentary scrutiny will be a safeguard, but the FBU makes some legitimate points about the need to ensure that the document reflects slightly greater diversity in policies and procedures. I was sympathetic to some of the points that the FBU raised in that regard and I draw to the minister's attention the need to be sure that the document takes a truly comprehensive and holistic approach. If we want the legislation to provide the most modernised service that we can achieve, the content of that document will be pivotal in trying to attain that objective. Some of the Executive's amendments at stage 3 did a lot to dispel residual concerns. I am pleased to see that there will be a reliance on affirmative rather than negative procedure in the Parliament for certain provisions. That is a conciliatory sign from the Executive and I receive it as such. In short, my party welcomes the bill—it is a solid piece of work for the future. I hope that it will create the type of modern conditions that we all want for our fire service personnel. My party will support the bill.

Will Jeremy Purvis give way? I seek to assist.

The Executive has chosen to have a subject debate on the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service; I say the Executive, because of course the Executive has the majority will on the Parliamentary Bureau. The use of the term "debate" is questionable, because there is no motion, there are no amendments, there will be no vote and, in essence, there is no point. Mr MacAskill has alluded to the issue in more sensitive terms than I am prepared to adopt. If I  look up to the public gallery, I can see that five brave members of the public have struggled into the chamber. They must wonder what they have stumbled in upon. I contrast today's deployment of time in the chamber with last week's. On a subject of hugely topical interest—the Westminster Serious Organised Crime and Police Bill—which proved controversial for various reasons, the Executive not only denied the Justice 2 Committee adequate time to produce a proper report, but deigned to afford only 50 minutes' debating time in the chamber to the discussion of what were substantive issues. This morning shows the perversity of parliamentary programming and the Executive's completely haphazard and illogical approach to priorities. I do not impugn the sincerity with which the Lord Advocate made his remarks and I pay tribute to his efforts to modernise and make more efficient the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service.

I will finish this observation first, as it is a tribute to the Lord Advocate. I acknowledge that this morning is—although I was previously unaware of it—the quinquennial celebration of Colin Boyd's arrival in the office of Lord Advocate. I am sure that all parties in the Parliament commend him and pay tribute to what he has endeavoured to do, but the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service—about which we are having a conversational exchange this morning—has been the subject of internal reorganisation, has been in receipt of significant capital expenditure in systems and equipment and was affected by the significant changes that were introduced by the Criminal Procedure (Amendment) (Scotland) Act 2004 and the Vulnerable Witnesses (Scotland) Act 2004. As recently as 29 December 2004, the Executive announced the establishment of an independent inspectorate for the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service—that new body's first task will be to produce a thematic review on the service's approach to race issues. Those are all important developments within the service, but it is utterly premature to make any judgment on how those changes are working and what strengths and weaknesses they have disclosed. Not only is it premature on 10 February, but it will still be premature on 10 March, 10 April, 10 May or even 10 June, because it is difficult to see how any sensible appraisal can be made without letting at least a year elapse from the passing of the Criminal Procedure (Amendment) (Scotland) Act 2004. I welcome the Lord Advocate's announcement that the Crown will give victims an explanation for a case not proceeding or proceeding in a certain way and I welcome his confirmation that £22.5  million-worth of assets have been restrained, but is that enough grist for a debate?

Even by Mr Stevenson's standards, that is a remarkably obscure and unintelligible intervention.

That would be a first. It is perfectly obvious to anybody who cares to examine the Conservatives' contribution to the Parliament that we have made a singular contribution to promoting issues that concern our criminal justice system. Even the ministers would have the good grace to acknowledge that contribution over the past five years. I am trying to address what I think are the priorities of the people of Scotland, because the Executive is adrift from that reality. What is happening in crime in our Scottish communities right now? What we are chatting about this morning is worthy, but it is only part of the whole. Only last week, we discovered that the number of young offenders has increased; in the same report, we read that the number of vulnerable children has increased. In England and Wales, a study is being carried out into the connection between cannabis use and schizophrenia. Fears about that link were expressed in Scotland when cannabis was reclassified, but has the Executive any proposals on that? In December, the Executive's Scottish crime survey told us that only one crime in four was being reported to the police. However disturbing that information may be to the public, it might at least point to something of a lacuna for the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service. In January, the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland published a report recommending that the police not attend minor incidents.

The seniority of the officer who commended the suggestion leaves us in no doubt as to current thinking at senior police level. The justice system in Scotland is nearing breaking point, but the Scottish Executive is ducking and diving, weaving and turning and dodging debate on the serious issues that have to be discussed. To be frank, it is allowing the  Parliament to be used as an expensive and impotent social salon. We should be discussing subjects such as drug abuse, to which Stewart Stevenson has referred. Nobody is in any doubt about the seriousness of drug abuse in Scotland. Although there has been an increase in the number of drugs-related crimes that are recorded, there has been a drop in the number of such crimes that are prosecuted. Perhaps the minister, or whoever closes the debate for the Executive, might wish to comment on that. In 1997, 8,219 people were proceeded against in Scottish courts for drugs crime; by 2002, the figure had fallen by 16 per cent. Does the Lord Advocate wish to comment on drugs-related deaths? I merely articulate those issues, because I do not expect the Executive to agree with my views on them and it would not expect me to agree with it, but at least we could have a debate on a number of them, all of which are hugely relevant to Scotland today. We could consider various other issues, such as policing. Proposals on policing are on the table, but there is no agreement on them in the Parliament. My party's proposal for elected conveners for police boards is attracting interest in communities that are plagued by disorder and, although the Executive does not agree with that proposal, the subject could still be debated. We could also debate sentencing. The public have lost confidence in sentencing policy. It is all very well for the Lord Advocate and his colleagues to do their best to deliver an efficient, modernised prosecution system in Scotland, but if confidence in the whole criminal justice system dissipates because of an inability to understand how sentencing works and why prisoners get out early automatically, we are not assisting the public to understand the totality of our criminal justice system—all they know is that sickening crimes have been perpetrated by people who were free to commit them because they were released automatically. Is that not worthy of debate? The sad reality is that, under the Executive—with its lack of clarity of vision on what needs to be done, its lack of resolve in trying to do it and its lack of leadership in identifying any priorities—the criminal justice system in Scotland is in turmoil, but that is not the Lord Advocate's fault. Courageous leadership, clarity of purpose and firmness in providing solutions that work are not the hallmark of the Executive and this expensive MSP chit-chat session is a sorry testament to that failure.

To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Executive is taking to support the shipbuilding industry on the lower Clyde. (S2F-1410)

The First Minister will be aware that Ferguson Shipbuilders of Port Glasgow faces a critical situation in the immediate future. He will also be aware of concerns expressed by the yard that in the past six months £80 million-worth of Government contracts has been lost directly or indirectly to Poland. How do the Governments of France, Germany, Holland, Italy and Spain manage to place their shipbuilding contracts with indigenous yards? Is he satisfied that Ferguson's is being asked to tender for Scottish Executive work against fair competition? Why cannot a Scottish fishery protection vessel—a little navy boat to the rest of us—be classed as a grey hull, with the consequent tender benefits to our own shipbuilding industry?

The Scottish Executive's handling of the Westminster Serious Organised Crime and Police Bill is a model of devolution in disarray. Not only does it call into question the ability of the Labour Party and the Liberal Democrats to understand what devolution is about, but it exposes serious fault lines in any coherent or sensible approach by the Scottish Executive to the principle of Seweling. The mechanism and principle of Sewel motions are sound and are supported by my party. Sewel motions represent a workable arrangement by which Westminster can legislate on issues that are predominantly UK-wide in application. The additional safeguard at the Scottish Parliament end is that relevant committees can consider a Sewel motion by taking evidence, questioning ministers and reporting to the Parliament. However, the Executive's behaviour makes a mockery of that aspect of the process, which I presume was conceived to provide the best  information to the Parliament before we make a decision on a Sewel motion. Such was the time limit that the Executive insisted on in this case—despite opposition last week to the business motion—that the Justice 2 Committee, of which I am convener, took evidence on the matter last week, considered six items of written evidence and was required yesterday to conclude a report for the purpose of today's debate. By any standards, that was a challenging proposition. However, when, during yesterday's committee meeting, there was delivered to my clerks a supplementary memorandum from the Executive—accompanied by an indication that the minister, appearing before the committee at that point in connection with another matter, was willing to speak to the memorandum and take questions from members—the situation became risible. I congratulate my committee colleagues on managing to produce any kind of report given that, by necessity, they had to consider a Sewel motion that the minister had indicated would be amended in terms that were not available to the committee prior to the final adjustment of the report. As a demonstration of responsible handling of legislation and respect for the committee system of the Parliament, the Executive's behaviour has been a lamentable charade. However, that deals only with the process; let me turn specifically to the Serious Organised Crime and Police Bill. There is an argument that issues such as compulsory investigative powers, financial reporting orders and other measures included in the bill are technical adjustments and, as such, could properly be dealt with under the Sewel procedure and be supported. Ironically, however, those are not the issues that seem to have loomed large in the Executive's thinking. According to the Minister for Parliamentary Business in a broadcast on Sunday, the big issue is the regulation of private security in Scotland. If that is a justification for Seweling—

The point that I was making was that it is bizarre if that is the justification for Seweling the bill, because the bill will simply apply the Private Security Industry Act 2001 to Scotland. Why did the Executive not use a Sewel motion when that legislation was being dealt with so that we could have had a debate on it at that point? Furthermore, at this point, why not let the Scottish Parliament debate the proposals? The worrying feature of the bill is the proposed imposition of a serious organised crime agency.  Quite simply, that proposal is ill conceived. It is a recipe for tension and confusion. The Liberal Democrats have been distracted by the peripheral issue of trespass. They have been induced to roll over by the Labour amendment and have totally failed to see the substance of the issues and to oppose the Sewel motion. I believe in fighting crime and terrorism, but I also believe that we have excellent institutions in Scotland in our criminal justice system and our police forces. Furthermore, we have a devolved Government that is responsible for law and order. We now have the unbelievable irony of seeing the Liberal Democrats vote for a Labour amendment that will deny a role to Scottish ministers on the very issue that they are concerned about—the amendment will leave that matter in the legislative hands of Westminster. However, if the position of the Liberal Democrats is untenable, what about the position of the First Minister? Last Thursday, in relation to the trespass issue, he said: "The absolutely crucial point to make is that the Scottish Parliament will have the final say in any decisions that are taken on the matter."— [ Official Report , 27 January 2005; c 13988.]  Mr Butler's amendment shreds the First Minister's words of last week. What a mess. What a sorry day for devolution. My party will oppose the amendment and the Sewel motion.

I commence with an attempt to be positive. Unlike my opponents on other benches, my party does not disagree with the use of the Sewel procedure, although we are unable to support today's motion. This Westminster bill has demonstrated a relevant and, I hope, constructive role for the Scottish Parliament committee system in respect of reserved matters. I thank the minister for the comments that he made in his speech. It was indeed the case that the Executive wisely postponed lodging a Sewel motion because of the strange genesis of the legislation and the unusual procedure invoked at Westminster, in which the bill was referred to a select committee of the House of Lords, with the ensuing uncertainty about the bill's shape. That was a sensible course of action to take, because it enabled the Justice 2 Committee to hold an inquiry and produce a report in May last year. Although I disagreed then and I disagree now with the substantive policy content of the bill, the Justice 2 Committee's report was a useful contributor to the debate. As will be seen from the Justice 2 Committee's second report on the Sewel motion, which was published last week, it is encouraging that many of the points in the earlier report were picked up and addressed. There might well be a useful procedural example of good committee practice to be found in all this and I pay tribute to my committee colleagues and the clerks to the Justice 2 Committee for the work that was accomplished. However, I speak in this debate as my party's justice spokesman and I reiterate my party's concern about the bill. What is being proposed is one of the most substantial and radical reforms of the constitution and the British legal system for centuries, yet it has not proceeded on the report of a royal commission; it is not in response to an escalating wave of discontent about the current system; and it is not the consequence of joint representations from the law societies of Scotland, England and Wales. The only specific instances of  discontent of which I am aware are that the SNP just wants rid of the House of Lords and Labour does not think that the current system is good. I do not think that those are good enough reasons to tear up the UK's system of justice. The present arrangements are not broke, so why this political fix?

I do not follow that line of argument because if the current proposals are implemented, a change that will not be for the better will be achieved. My point is that the current system has been proven to work well. For the benefit of the minister, I will expand on that as I proceed. The Executive has made great play of the ECHR and the need for a clear separation of judiciary and legislature—indeed, the minister referred to that. However, I submit that the evidence that such a separation is compromised at present is tenuous and unconvincing. It is reported in The Herald today that a panel of five judges has rejected the appeal of three men against convictions and sentences imposed by temporary sheriffs appointed by the Lord Advocate after the incorporation of the ECHR by the Scotland Act 1998, yet such shrieval appointments were thought defective at the time. That is why I submit that the whole basis of the bill is unsound. The change is not necessary and the case for change has not been made. That is why my party is opposed to the bill and unable to support the motion.

Does the Solicitor General agree that in petition cases it is helpful to the victim to know when the petition will be served, given that it then passes outwith the control of the Crown Office, pending service?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Members who are entering the chamber may be indifferent to the Solicitor General's speech, but I happen to be interested in it; I am not alone in that.

My point was that the two individuals whom I mentioned were free to commit more crimes because they were released early.

If our criminal justice system is to be effective, it is important that vulnerable witnesses and victims are supported throughout the process of cases. I speak as someone who has been a victim in a criminal case in which the accused was duly convicted. Not only does such support provide individual reassurance; it plays an important role in encouraging people to do their civic duty. There is no doubt that significant progress has been made in the past 20 years. A courtroom is a serious forum and it is inevitable that the atmosphere will be austere and sometimes forbidding, but it is vital that no witness should be so intimidated that the giving of essential evidence is inhibited or impaired. In that event, justice will not be served and the criminal justice system will be discredited. It is right to acknowledge the progress that has been made, to which the Vulnerable Witnesses (Scotland) Act 2004 has made an important contribution. There is no doubt that special measures such as closed-circuit television, video evidence, evidence on commission, the use of screens and the use of a supporter do much to dispel austerity and apprehension and to offer reassurance. However, the 2004 act is in its early days and the minister will be aware that the phased implementation defers certain measures. It is also right to acknowledge the Executive's strategy for victims, which was launched in 2001. A report in November showed the progress that had been made on that issue. I have several observations. First, delays still occur. Nothing is more irritating or off-putting to witnesses and victims than to be subjected to abortive court proceedings because a witness cannot be found or the accused has not turned up. Such delays still take place and too many of them lead to proceedings being abandoned. Written answers to parliamentary questions have shown that, last year, 9,000 cases in the sheriff courts were marked "no proceedings" because of delay or the time bar. For every case marked "no pro", there is a potential denial of justice and a frustrated and angry victim and, probably, frustrated and angry witnesses. Secondly, the victim information and advice service may have been extended to all 11 procurator fiscal areas, which is welcome, but who is monitoring the system and is it operating consistently throughout those areas? For example,  are victims being told when a petition is going to be served and, which is important, when it has been served? Thirdly, we now have a presumption in favour of bail, which is allowing many individuals who have been charged with serious crimes to walk the streets. That leaves many victims and witnesses feeling frightened and vulnerable, results in accused persons not turning up for trial, which causes adjourned trial diets, and allows reoffending during the bail period. The interference in the court's primary responsibility to ensure the victim's peace of mind, to protect the public, detain an accused person who is likely to abscond and to exercise judicial discretion accordingly is intolerable. The availability of bail to people charged with serious crimes is utterly unacceptable. When such individuals, many of whom offend on bail and fail to appear for trial, are cosseted with rights while victims are left afraid and the law-abiding majority is put at risk, we have reached unprecedented levels of absurdity. Something has to be done about that, which is why I refer to the matter in my amendment. Implicit in any discussion of witnesses and victims is the acknowledgement that crimes have already been committed. In that regard, I will deal with the criticisms of my amendment that were proffered by the minister and Mr MacAskill. Surely a priority should be given to trying to reduce violent crime, drug crime, rape, attempted rape, handling of offensive weapons and criminal homicide, the incidence of all of which is well up on 1997 levels. If we can reduce such crime—and I am responding here to Mr MacAskill's challenge—we will have safer communities, fewer victims and, therefore, fewer witnesses. There have to be more police officers in our communities to deter the commission of crime and detect it more swiftly when it is committed.

I do not think that the two elements are mutually exclusive and I would say to the minister that a lot of intelligence can be gleaned from communities by having officers working there not as a negative presence but as a co-operative, encouraging presence among our citizens. I recently heard with concern of the proposal in the Association of Chief Police Officers in  Scotland's "Beating Bureaucracy" report that officers should be selective about what laws to enforce. That is a disastrous suggestion that flies in the face of what works. The priority is to get substantially more police officers in our communities. Criminals must be thinking that Christmas goes on all year when they hear of such proposals. It is also clear that abolishing the automatic early release of convicted criminals will act as a deterrent and will cut avoidable crimes of the type perpetrated by people such as James Campbell and Stuart Leggate and will greatly restore public confidence in our criminal justice system. That is why I have lodged the amendment in my name, which I have much pleasure in moving. I move amendment S2M-2241.1, to insert at end: "; believes, however, that the best support and protection that can be given to witnesses and victims is to cut crime in Scotland, and therefore calls for a greatly-increased police presence in our communities to deter and detect crime, a review of the use of bail and an end to automatic early release from prisons."

I hope that my colleague Margaret Mitchell and I made it crystal clear on the Conservatives' behalf that we support our emergency workers and applaud what they do. We question the technicality of whether the bill addresses the need that must be addressed.

Since the bill came before the Parliament's Justice 1 Committee for stage 1 scrutiny, it has been perfectly clear that it has not received a glowing commendation. That has nothing to do with the policy intention and everything to do with the substantive content of the bill and what it tries to achieve. It has been exceedingly instructive to listen to the debate and to the debate on the amendments.  The question that must be posed, and which illuminates the difficulties surrounding the bill, is who the bill is not for. Clearly, it is not for the medical practitioners, registered nurses or midwives who are mentioned in Stewart Stevenson's amendment 2, and it is not for the social workers to whom Kenny MacAskill referred. However, the bill is for the water rescue services personnel whom Jackie Baillie has discussed and for those social workers referred to by the minister. The bill does not cover the bus drivers, estate agents et al mentioned by Pauline McNeill, although she would like it to. The distinction between who the bill is intended for and who it is not intended for is incomprehensible. Margaret Smith has been honest enough to recognise that today. She spoke about the existing anomaly, and was right to do so. She did not want to extend that anomaly by supporting Mr Stevenson's amendments. Karen Gillon mentioned psychiatric nurses. It was interesting that, in responding to her and to Stewart Stevenson, the minister said that, where the bill does not cover a situation, the common law will prevail and will cover the incident in question. The minister reiterated that point when responding to Kenny MacAskill's amendments. It would have been infinitely preferable to allow the common law to do what it is best at: to provide flexibility of application according to the severity of the offence under either summary or solemn procedure. In the cases of the many workers to whom the Parliament is desirous of giving adequate protection, that flexibility could be achieved now by a direction from the Lord Advocate to say that such cases should be prosecuted on indictment and that, on conviction, sentence should reflect the aggravating circumstances. If the existing law is not being applied for the various reasons that Mr MacAskill advanced, the bill will address not one of those reasons. It is deeply troubling that offences under the bill might be prosecuted under a less robust regime than indictment at common law. The policy intention of the bill is commendable, but the bill does not meet that policy intention. It has inadvertently created confusion and inconsistency. In so doing, it does a disservice to all those whom it should protect. We support our emergency workers, but we cannot support bad law. The Emergency Workers (Scotland) Bill is very bad law, which is why my party will be unable to vote for it.

Will Mr Harvie take an intervention?

I am obviously reluctant to disturb the trail of fantasy, but I have to ask Karen Whitefield why, after five and a half years of Executive governance at devolved level in Scotland, we are in the position that we are in?

Mr Pringle says that the answer to these difficulties is to divert many more offenders to community-based services. However, "Scotland's Criminal Justice Plan" refers to a proposal to fund 400 front-line police and social workers. Will he indicate how many of those will be social workers, whose burden of responsibility will increase significantly under his proposals, and how many will be police officers?

Would Mr MacAskill care to comment further on the situation in Spain?

Will the member give way?

Will the minister take an intervention?

The minister says that there are increased numbers of police, but does he accept that that has not meant more police in our communities? There has been a requirement to recruit more police officers to deal with the greatly expanded office duties in relation to issues such as the Macpherson report, asylum seekers, management of the sex offenders register and dealing with the European convention on human rights. Does the minister accept the Association of  Chief Police Officers in Scotland's view that increased resource is being deployed more readily towards technology and office back-up rather than towards putting policemen and policewomen back in our communities?

I am pleased to bring this debate to the Parliament and to speak to the motion in my name. The debate will enable the Executive's justice proposals to be examined. One might have thought that the Executive would have offered such an opportunity itself, but, of course, the Executive is—regrettably—no stranger to disrespect for the stature of the Parliament. It should come as no surprise at all that on 6 December the Minister for Justice launched Scotland's new criminal justice plan by press release. One might have thought that a plan that was described by the minister as "ambitious and wide-ranging" and that comprises five sections and 23 proposals would have merited at least a ministerial statement in the Parliament or an Executive debate. We all know that the Executive has debated far less important issues in the past, so surely an "ambitious and wide-ranging" plan merited parliamentary attention. Unfortunately, however, Executive arrogance transcends Executive accountability and, of course, parliamentary debates have the tiresome habit of being embarrassing for the Executive, which is certainly not part of the devolved governance game plan. Therefore, the Conservatives are pleased to rectify the Executive's omission and to bring the Executive's proposals to where they should have been brought in the first place—the floor of the chamber. Of course, we should not be surprised that the Minister for Justice felt impelled to launch her criminal justice plan, but the public could be forgiven for asking where it has been. The Executive's record on crime is appalling. A crime is committed every 78 seconds. Since 1997, violent crime is up 16 per cent, vandalism is up 23 per cent, drug crime is up 38 per cent, figures for handling offensive weapons are up 49 per cent, figures for rape and attempted rape are up 34 per cent and homicide is up 20 per cent. Significant levels of unreported crime must be added to those figures. I am talking about retailers who cannot cope with the hassle of reporting shoplifting and about incidents involving broken windows, dented cars, disorderly behaviour and mindless acts of petty vandalism. Levels of reoffending are also giving cause for concern.  Therefore, an Executive criminal justice plan is overdue. Unfortunately, the plan is indicative of confusion, incoherence and paradox. For example, what is the underpinning strategy of the plan? I do not know and I suggest that no one else knows. However, I will offer a strategy. We should deter people from committing crime, detect them when they commit crime and, on conviction, ensure that the sentence reflects both the public's desire for punishment, protection and deterrence and the rehabilitation needs of the accused.

It is perfectly obvious from the statistics that I have just given that the overall rate of crime was significantly lower and that visible policing in our communities was significantly greater. There is a clear connection between the two. I asked what the underpinning strategy should be. Do the five sections and 23 proposals offer implement of the strategy? They do not. We cannot protect communities and prevent crime as long as there are only 140 police officers on the beat at any one time throughout Scotland. Indeed, as more police officers are deployed by the First Minister for duty in our turbulent schools, the beat presence will diminish further. That is why we must prioritise the provision of more police officers, which alone would deter first offenders and repeat offenders from committing crime. Fear of being caught is an effective inhibitor. In addition, when the court considers that prison is the appropriate disposal, the sentence that is imposed should be the sentence that is served. That means an end to automatic early release, which my party has consistently advocated. It is interesting that something seems to have penetrated the minister's mind. Apparently, she will consider ending automatic early release for prisoners who are convicted of sex offences. That is good, but to pick and mix who gets automatic early release and who does not is incoherent and illogical. If automatic early release should be ended for sex offenders, it should be ended for all offenders. My party differs from Labour and the Liberal Democrats in that, instinctively, they do not like the concept of prison. They seek to avoid sending offenders to prison and to let those who are in prison out at the earliest opportunity.

That is not so. If Mr Raffan lets me continue, he will hear what he wants to hear. The difference between my party and Labour and the Liberal Democrats is that my party regards prison as a sentencing necessity for certain convicted offenders. Where the courts deem that disposal appropriate, we would ensure that the capacity exists and that the full sentence is served. We are not coy about prison being a punishment, a deterrent and a necessary protection for the public, but we are insistent that the rehabilitation of prisoners and the preparation for their return to the community must be vastly improved, as must community support on release. It is naive and simplistic to say that prison does not work when, under the Labour and Liberal Democrat regime, the full sentence is not served, rehabilitation is ineffectual, community support is frail or non-existent and there are not enough police officers in our communities to stop reoffending. It is true that we have full prisons but, proportionately, Spain sends nearly four times as many offenders to prison and its crime rate is about a quarter of ours. The picture in Ireland is similar. Given the absence of any understandable drugs policy from the Executive it is no surprise that there is an unacceptably high proportion of prisoners with addictions who are offered no meaningful rehabilitation. My party supports drug testing and treatment orders at district court level, which would do a great deal to assist early intervention and rehabilitation and would reduce the pressure on our prisons. In conclusion, the Executive's policies on crime have failed to address the fundamentals of deterrence and detection. While the Executive persists with the discredited option of automatic early release and neglects prisoner rehabilitation, unacceptable levels of crime and reoffending will continue. I move, That the Parliament notes the unacceptable rate of reoffending occurring in Scotland today; accepts that there is a place in our criminal justice system for a range of different sentencing options to address this problem but recognises that when a prison sentence is the appropriate disposal then prison is not simply a punishment but is intended to rehabilitate, deter and protect the public; believes that the way to reduce reoffending and subsequently the prison population is to reduce the overall incidence of crime in Scotland, and therefore calls on the Scottish Executive to increase the police presence in our communities to deter and detect crime and to end automatic early release from our prisons to ensure honesty in sentencing.

On behalf of the Scottish Conservatives, I thank the First Minister for an advance copy of his statement. I too welcome the opportunity to express our profound sorrow for and sympathy with those who, while in care, found themselves victims of child abuse. Child abuse is abhorrent in any circumstances, but when its perpetrators are those who have been entrusted with the care of children, and in whom those children have placed their fragile trust, it is a particularly vile and odious betrayal. The damage that was inflicted on these hapless victims is incalculable and left them with shadows and dark corners for the rest of their days. It takes a particular kind of courage to be prepared to come forward, or even to be able to talk of these dreadful events. On behalf of the Scottish Conservatives I pay tribute to those who, from somewhere, found that courage and in so doing enabled the rest of us to understand, probably for the first time, the hell that they endured. It is important that the Parliament sends out a clear message to the victims of such harrowing experiences that we stand with them and that they are not diminished, stained or set apart by what happened to them. We are with them. It is also important for the Parliament to be alert to what the political process can offer by way of help and support. I acknowledge the measures that the Scottish Executive has already taken, with "Protecting Children and Young People: the Charter" and "Protecting Children and Young People: the Framework for Standards". However, the Scottish Conservatives urge the setting up of an independent inquiry, not only to uncover the problems of the past but to evaluate whether the measures that have been put in place during the past 10 years are effective and whether other measures need to be taken. We will listen with interest to what the Minister for Education and Young People has to say in this afternoon's debate.

In defence of the hapless Mr Scott, I will say that he tried to make it clear that he was suspicious of the bill's implications in terms of actions that are driven by cost cuts. He did not refer to past events.

If that is the member's understanding of the situation, will he confirm that that is what section 2(1) says?

I take this opportunity to thank my fellow committee members, the clerks to the Justice 2 Committee and the witnesses who gave evidence during the stage 1 process. The committee has played a useful scrutiny role and, from the minister's comments, I think that he has understood that there is no acrimony around the bill and that there has been a genuine attempt to be constructive. However, as Mr MacAskill said, we have an obligation to test and probe when there is legitimate doubt about the Executive's ultimate intentions. The Fire (Scotland) Bill is an important piece of  legislation. Our fire service is professional and dedicated and I know that I am not alone in the chamber in being in a position to say that I have had occasion to rely on that professionalism and dedication. I pay tribute to the men and women throughout Scotland who demonstrate those qualities day in and day out. In 2004, it is fitting that we should review the legislative framework as, in effect, that was last done in 1947. Since then, times have changed. We are in a different environment and there are new duties, challenges and threats, not the least of which is the unwelcome emergence of global terrorism. The Parliament owes it to the men and women of the Scottish fire service to scrutinise the bill carefully. We also owe it to the Scottish people to ensure that the legislation is clear and sufficient to meet the complexities of today's world. Much of the new strategy and framework will be set out in the national framework document. Although my committee has seen a draft of that paper, it is private and consultation is to follow. It might have been more satisfactory if the production of the document had been accelerated so that the committee could have fully considered the framework at stage 1. Similarly, the bill depends heavily on secondary legislation and further consultations in relation to control rooms, the firelink project, integrated risk management plans, fire safety regulations, charging and the new advisory structure. Therefore, it is difficult to get a comprehensive or complete view of what the legislation will be like in practice. I simply ask whether that is fair to everyone who will be affected by it. Perhaps it is not. The lesson is that if what has been proposed is worth doing—and it is—more detail at the drafting stage and less haste might be beneficial. Before dealing with my amendment, I will acknowledge what is positive in the bill. Part 1 contains a clear restatement of the structure of the fire and rescue service, which is clarifying and helpful, and part 2 gives a helpful redefinition of the principal functions of the service. The Executive's intention to lodge an amendment at stage 2 to include offshore firefighting is sensible and welcome. Nowadays, the provisions for emergency direction are—unhappily—necessary and the minister has sought to reassure the committee that they are last-resort powers. We accept that reassurance. The consolidation of fire safety legislation in part 3 is certainly complex and technical, but it is also welcome, as it represents a helpful attempt to codify the law and to achieve a degree of consistency throughout the United Kingdom. I would certainly underline the committee's caveats on aspects of all those provisions, but I welcome the minister's comments on chief fire officers and senior fire officers, for example.  As for my amendment, I supported the general principles of the bill in committee for the reasons to which I have referred, but I revert to the issue of clarity. The bill will be a powerful and influential measure. That is particularly demonstrated by the creation of a range of ministerial powers. In his evidence, the minister sought to reassure the committee that the exercise of those powers would be highly unusual. I do not impugn his integrity or doubt the sincerity of his remarks—indeed, he repeated them this morning—but I believe that legislation must stand clearly on its own merits. Let me deal first with the powers that are contained in part 1, in particular the ministerial power to amalgamate fire boards. By any construction, that is a potentially centralising measure, the possible consequence of which could be to reduce the number of boards and brigades. Whatever the nuances in debates about the current situation and what is being proposed, the bill will change existing law. That the pendulum should swing in favour of the Executive is causing unease in Opposition parties.

That is the nub of the disagreement between us. My reading of the bill is that it will provide for a ministerial power that could be instigated by the ministerial presence, as distinct from voluntary proposals coming from the authorities with the decision being whether to give those proposals ministerial countenance. That is the nub of the difficulty. If the Executive's intention is to reduce the number of brigades, that is a new and separate debate and the Executive cannot by stealth deliver that outcome—if that is what the Executive intends, it must be stated in the bill. If the Executive ever intends to bring forward such proposals, it must do so through primary legislation. I know that the minister made a minor concession this morning by allowing that subordinate legislation proposing any change would be subject to the affirmative, rather than the negative, procedure. That is an advance, but it is not enough. That is why I have lodged my amendment. We  need clarity. If the Executive will not support my amendment, the only conclusion that can be drawn is that there is an intention to reduce the current number of boards. As I said, that is not acceptable unless there is a bill before the Parliament for that purpose. If the Executive does not support my amendment, my party will find it difficult—indeed, I think that it will find it impossible—to support the bill at this stage. I move amendment S2M-1960.1, to insert at end: "but, in so doing, seeks assurances from the Scottish Executive that the ministerial powers in part 1 of the Bill will not be used to amalgamate existing fire boards in Scotland."

I, too, thank the minister for making available a copy of her statement in advance. The  11-page statement could, to be frank, be paraphrased in two sentences: things are worse than we thought and we, the Scottish Executive, admit defeat. How else can one view the fact that the number of persistent order referrals is 1,200 not 900 and how else can one interpret the Executive's feeble response to that of hoping to reduce the number by 10 per cent? That would not even take us back to the 900 that the Executive thought it was dealing with and accepted as an already-bad position. It goes without saying that those data cannot take into account the practical implications and consequences of the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004—a measure that the minister, by her own admission, would concede has specific provisions on young people. Far from being reassuring and positive, the statement is deeply troubling. I want to ask the Executive something specific arising from the youth crime action plan, on secure accommodation places. I listened with interest to the minister's response to Mr MacAskill. For the avoidance of doubt, it is necessary for the minister to make one thing absolutely clear. As of 2002 we have proceeded on the assumption that we had 95 secure places for young people in Scotland. The ministerial commitment was to increase that number by 29. In 2003, the First Minister confirmed that no one seemed to have departed from that commitment. Is the Executive still committed to providing a total of 95 places plus another 29? As I understood it, of the 95 places, 24 were at Kerelaw. There are two issues to consider—the existing contingent and consignment of places and the additional quota. Everyone needs to know whether the existing 95 places are secure and the figure is stable. Do we know when and where the 29 proposed additional places will be available?

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive is satisfied with the adequacy of funding provided to NHS Argyll and Clyde. (S2F-1160)

I am sure that the First Minister is aware that the Auditor General for Scotland has issued a section 22 certificate in respect of the 2003-04 accounts for Argyll and Clyde NHS Board under the Public Finance and Accountability (Scotland) Act 2000, because of a projected deficit of £100 million in the board's accounts by 2007-08. The Auditor General has withheld qualification of the accounts because of an assurance from the Scottish Executive that the health board will have access to cash to meet its liabilities during that period as and when they fall due. For the avoidance of doubt, will the First Minister clarify that, in that period, Argyll and Clyde NHS Board will not be required to cut any services through lack of finance and that such sums as the Executive makes available to retrieve the deficit will constitute a write-off of debt, not a loan that obliges the health board to deal with repayment in future years?

Will the minister give way?

It is necessary to clarify what clearly is confusion in Mr MacAskill's mind. I said specifically that the policies that my party promulgates are modelled on what is happening in Sweden. How others construe that is up to them, but that is our position. It is because the situation in Sweden is working that we used it to inform our thinking.

rose—

Will the member give way?

I propose to break with convention and go straight to the amendment in my name, which would, in effect, strike out the Executive motion because it seeks to tell the story as it is. However, I do not seek to diminish the excellent work—indeed, I pay tribute to it—that is being done by many dedicated men and women throughout Scotland as they struggle to make a contribution to the fight against the awesome and, from the evidence, overwhelming challenge of drug abuse in Scotland. Although the evidence of what is now a modern-day plague blighting Scotland is frightening, it also commands attention. In 2003, more than 40,000 drug-related crimes were recorded—that represents a 38 per cent increase since 1997, or a drug-related crime every 12 minutes. In 2003, tragically, there were 317 drug-related deaths, which was an increase of 41 per cent since 1997.  As we know to our great concern from a recent BBC "Frontline Scotland" programme, our prisons seem to be awash with drugs. One prisoner commented that it was easier to get drugs inside the prison than outside. Another prisoner indicated that, in his hall, he could get drugs within five minutes. In answers to parliamentary questions that I lodged, we have seen the appalling revelation—if I may describe it as such—that methadone prescriptions are increasing relentlessly year on year. In 1997, more than 168,000 prescriptions were issued, at a cost of £1.5 million. In the year to 31 March 2004, that figure had risen to nearly 400,000 prescriptions, at an estimated cost of nearly £4.5 million. At that rate, we shall be getting close to 800,000 prescriptions by 2010, at an estimated cost of nearly £9 million a year.

I shall come to that point in my speech. The projection that I have just outlined is terrifying, because it envisages a Scotland paralysed by drug abuse, with increasing numbers of desperate souls parked in the dismal and imprisoning cul-de-sac of methadone dependence. In other words, it is a publicly funded, legalised drug-addiction programme. The tragedy is that the more money we spend on legalised drug addiction, the less we have to spend on rehabilitation. What the Executive has announced today is worthy in its own right, but it is nowhere near enough, because according to the available statistics we are on a disaster course. We are on a disaster course because the Scottish Executive has been scared to give political leadership. It seems to have been embarrassed about looking uncool. It has been wooed by politically correct trendies and has presided over confusion and escalating drug-abuse chaos. If anyone disputes that, let us look again at the evidence. The Scottish Executive does not believe in a drugs-free Scotland; it has never supported that vision. The Executive may have its own reasons for adopting that stance, but that is its view. I listened with interest to the Minister for Justice's comments about tolerance and abstinence, and I have to say that I think that that is the first time that I have heard such views articulated by the Executive in this chamber.

My point is that that is a very recent statement of a somewhat altered position. To that extent, it is welcome. I have to say, in relation to the evidence of what the Scottish Executive has been presiding over, that our prisons are awash with drugs. An estimated 60 to 70 per cent of prisoners are addicted. What is the response? To give heroin injection kits to prisoners. That beggars belief, and the Scottish Executive, whether it likes it or not, is in charge. What about our young people? They seek guidance, their parents seek support, and what does the Scottish Executive offer? Know the score—a publicly funded, explicit guide to illegal substances and how to use them.

Mr Raffan scoffs, but—

Look at the website.

I ask Mr Raffan to go and look at the know the score website for himself. It provides an illustration of how to hide ecstasy tablets in a cigarette lighter. The Scottish Executive—

I have taken enough interventions and I wish to continue with my speech.

The website is the Scottish Executive conniving at telling young people how to hide drugs from their parents and from the police. It is the Executive's do-it-yourself manual on how to end up in trouble if one is not already in it, and it should be more aptly entitled, "Know how to Score". It is a disgrace and the Executive should withdraw it immediately. We are running out of time and a radical change in approach is needed.

I have been generous in taking interventions and I wish to continue with my speech.  We should not be too proud or too uninterested to consider other countries. Twenty years ago, Sweden, for example, was roughly where we are now. Against all the odds, Sweden changed from a permissive tolerance of drugs to a controlled, restrictive and legally enforced approach that was based on education and rehabilitation, not on harm reduction. The results were obvious. I was asked earlier whether my party supported the complete withdrawal of methadone. No, we do not. What we argue for is a switch from a harm-reduction policy, which is the Executive's stated position—

It certainly is, and the statistics prove it. We should switch from that policy to a zero-tolerance approach and abstinence. That is why my party—unlike the Executive—has a strategy for a drugs-free Scotland. That strategy includes zero tolerance of drugs; reclassifying cannabis to class B; early intervention and education to prevent the problem in the first place; improved availability of drug treatment and testing orders for offenders who come before the district courts and, if necessary, the children's panels; and giving convicted offenders a clear choice between rehabilitation and jail. We have to eradicate drugs from prisons, we have to improve prison rehabilitation, and we have to link that work with support on release. We have to ensure that, if drug dealers are found, charged and prosecuted, that is done on indictment at the very least, to ensure appropriate sentencing. Drug abuse threatens the very fabric of our society. It destroys lives, it tears families apart and it leads to widespread and recurring crime and to the disintegration of entire communities. It is essential that we use all the resources of the state not only to discourage drug abuse but to do everything possible to eliminate it. That is why I have lodged the amendment in my name. I move amendment S2M-1882.2, to leave out from "commends" to end and insert: "deplores the escalating drugs abuse problem in Scotland and the implicit reliance on methadone harm reduction programmes and calls for a radical change in policy to reduce demand for drugs by providing a route to abstinence and taking more effective action to cut the supply of drugs."

Will the minister take an intervention?

I am listening carefully to what the minister is saying. However, all the statistics show us that, for example, harm-reduction programmes have resulted in an escalating reliance on methadone scripts, at an increased cost to the Scottish Executive. No one disputes that. We know that the harm-reduction programmes are not leading to abstinence. Can the minister explain how she proposes to resolve that dilemma?

Does the First Minister accept that, as Mr Gorrie has indicated, sectarianism can manifest itself in ugly incidents throughout our communities and that, unless we have more police officers in our communities, the measures that he has mentioned are rendered nugatory as there will be no power to detect a breach of law and enforce the law in our communities?

To ask the Scottish Executive to what extent sheriff officers are deployed for collecting outstanding fines. (S2O-3535)

I thank the minister, but for what I think is a singularly unsatisfactory response. The minister will be aware that outstanding fines are running at unparalleled levels. One of the sanctions that is applied is imprisonment. Her Majesty's prisons inspectorate for Scotland has this morning produced a report that highlights overcrowding. Would it not make an awful lot of sense for the Executive to instruct that outstanding fines are collected at an early stage by sheriff officers, who are competent to do that under the  Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995?

I have from my French class in school two enduring memories: plus ça change, plus c'est la même chose; and a poem aptly entitled "La  pluie"—the rain. That, to me, characterises the Cabinet reshuffle. It is more and yet more of the depressing grey sameness. My objection to the motion is not based on any dislike of Mr McCabe; what he deserves in abundance is pity. The first minister says that the reshuffle is a refreshing exercise, but it is nothing of the sort; rather, it is a parade of the recycled, redesignated and recalled cronies of the First Minister. The former Minister for Health and Community Care, who was last week—while facing a Conservative vote of no confidence—publicly endorsed and effusively applauded by the First Minister, wakes up this week to find the First Minister's reshuffle dagger in his back and that he has been sidelined to the communities portfolio. In his place is Mr Kerr, the Brylcreemed acolyte of the First Minister; a man whose capacity to shine has so far been restricted to the pomade on his hair. Even more perversely, the one member of the Executive who has gained respect as a colourful, gutsy and combative performer—Margaret Curran—is rewarded by being stuck in a job that restricts her talents to standing up in the chamber and prating parrotwise, "Formally moved." What an advertisement for government in Scotland. My advice to Mr McConnell's ministerial colleagues is this; "If you earn the First Minister's public support, be very afraid, and reach for the hair gel—it may be your only hope. And in the singularly unlikely event that you display any ability, you are done for." The people of Scotland, who are open about their disappointment with devolution and saddened that the great wave of emotion that accompanied the inception of this Parliament has failed to translate into a better health service, into improved literacy, numeracy and discipline in our schools and into a business-friendly and buoyant economy will derive little comfort from the new ministerial assemblage. The people of Scotland yearn for spark, vibrancy and innovation. The Cabinet is atrophied, stale and devoid of vision. It is thirled to policies that do not work and fearful of policies that might work. Nowhere is that paradox more apparent than in this morning's business. Today, we were to have a statement about efficiency in Government—no doubt a glowing account of all the so-called economies in public spending that the Executive is going to deliver. Instead, we have a dazzling display of Government inefficiency, with the First Minister's announcement about his bloated Cabinet—oversized, overpaid and, most regrettably of all, over there on the Government benches. Is that the same First Minister who said, when announcing his ministerial team last year:  "I believe that a reduction in salaried Cabinet Ministers and deputies was justified"? So much for that hollow declaration of prudence. After another year of Executive failure, the self-awarded prize is to shell out another £30,000 in ministerial salaries. What hypocritical bilge. The Executive is beyond saving by dint of a mere Cabinet reshuffle. We need new policies that will work for Scotland, but there is not the remotest hope that that will happen for as long as we have that Cabinet.

That is the difficulty. The question is whether the bill is in a form in which it can be made good. Our submission is that it cannot be made good; it is fundamentally flawed.

I am absolutely certain that everyone in the chamber is united in condemning the quite unacceptable behaviour of people who attack our public sector workers when they are doing the jobs that we entrust to them. That behaviour is unacceptable and must be the subject of criminal proceedings if the culprits are to be identified, detected, charged and then—it is to be hoped—convicted. The dilemma for us is to take that worthy aspiration, which is shared by numerous contributors to the debate this afternoon, and to be absolutely objective and honest about whether we are turning that into the criminal legal framework that the bill aspires to. As has been suggested by my colleague Margaret Mitchell, it is the Conservatives' opinion that that objective is not being achieved. That is not to impugn what I know is the united endeavour and will of members to create an acceptable environment for workers in our public services. I come at the matter from two angles. I read with interest the Justice 1 Committee's report, because there is an issue about the integrity of our committee system. Many of the committee's members have been frank in their comments about the task that confronted them; clearly, it was challenging. The conclusion at paragraph 28 of the report refers to the committee trying to come to a view on the general principles of the bill. It states: "Much of this evidence has been conflicting, firstly with regard to the need for the legislation and secondly with respect to proposed amendments to it. It has, therefore, been exceptionally difficult for the Committee to reach a conclusion on the general principles of the Bill." The question that I must pose is this: how can there be unqualified support for the general principles if the committee has clearly been lukewarm during its consideration of those principles?

Yes, and I say to Mr Sheridan that that goes to the nub of the issue. I started my  remarks by saying that there has to be an honest appraisal of any legislative proposal. I submit that my colleague Margaret Mitchell, who is on the Justice 1 Committee, discharged that objectivity and honesty by stating candidly in the report that there are concerns that preclude the Conservatives from supporting the bill as it is drafted. Paragraph 54 of the committee's report, for example, refers to what is supposed to be the raison d'être of the bill: "Given the limited and inconsistent information made available to the Committee it has been unable to reach any firm conclusion on whether the nine groups of emergency workers on the face of the Bill have suffered a significant increase in attacks on them when dealing with emergency circumstances in recent years." The committee is candid, because it "considers that the absence of such information seriously undermines the policy intentions behind the Emergency Workers (Scotland) Bill." In fairness, Bill Butler alluded to that deficiency, but it begs the following question. If those are the genuine concerns of the committee, what are we legislating for? What is the underlying purpose of the bill that will be achieved by the way in which it is drafted?

I would like to make progress with my line of argument. Pauline McNeill, the convener of the Justice 1 Committee, repeated one of the most telling phrases in the committee report, which comes in paragraph 110. members should remember that this is a committee stage 1 report on proposed legislation to be enacted by this Parliament. The committee concluded "that the Bill will add, at the margins". The question that must then be asked is this: are we as a Parliament doing our best by the very workers whom we all aspire to protect? Are we creating an environment that is safer and, in terms of criminal law, better regulated to deal with the offenders who offend against them? As an onlooker—I am not a member of the Justice 1 Committee—I have profound questions about the workability of the bill. If I may, I will address the more technical aspect, to which my colleague Margaret Mitchell referred, which is the concept of common criminal law and statutory criminal law. My greatest fear is that there is a genuine misconception on the part of the Executive as to the value of Scottish criminal common law. That law is flexible and we have the capacity to introduce aggravated offences—we can do that now. The Lord Advocate has issued guidelines. We can increase the penalties that are  available to our courts that find offenders before them and which have, on conviction, to determine appropriate sentences. Looking at the bill as it is currently structured, and having regard to the Justice 1 Committee report—which, in my judgment, my colleague Margaret Mitchell was absolutely right to dissent from—I believe that a paradise will be created by the bill. The perversity is that it will not be a paradise for emergency workers, but a paradise for criminal defence solicitors, who will have a field day when the legislation reaches the statute book. That is a cruel disservice to bring upon emergency workers, whom all members value and seek to serve responsibly. That is why the Conservatives have grave reservations about the bill. The bill will not do what we need to do. The minister said that by supporting the bill we will be showing our wish to protect emergency workers—I apologise if I have paraphrased his words incorrectly. In fact, by supporting the bill we might show our wish to augment the earnings of criminal defence solicitors and lawyers and we might do very little for emergency workers. That concern must be articulated, which is why my party is unable to agree to the general principles of the bill at stage 1.

Today, this Parliament debates an issue that affects everyone in Scotland and which, as the motion in my colleague David Davidson's name states, "has led to uproar from coast to coast". Nowhere is public discontent with, anger at and lack of confidence in the insidious centralisation of health services throughout Scotland more apparent than in the West of Scotland, where the public and clinicians are acutely conscious of a fundamental fact to which the Executive seems oblivious: health care provision is useless if the patient cannot reasonably access it. It is no wonder that the people of Inverclyde are at war with the Scottish Executive in their determination to preserve Inverclyde royal hospital. It is simply impractical to expect people from Gourock, Greenock and Port Glasgow to make their way swiftly and without difficulty to the Royal Alexandra hospital in Paisley. That option is flawed and dangerous and no one knows that better than Ross Finnie and Duncan McNeil. I was disappointed that Duncan McNeil did not take interventions to his speech this morning, if only to test the worth of what he said. His speech would have been much more convincing had he done so.  It is no wonder that the people of Dumbarton, Cardross, Helensburgh, Alexandria, Renton and Bonhill are up in arms about the threat to the Vale of Leven hospital, the Jeanie Deans unit in Helensburgh and the Dumbarton joint hospital. If requiring the ill and the frail to make their way from Inverclyde to Paisley is challenging, the prospect for the Vale of Leven area is no less daunting. The friends of the Jeanie Deans unit and the Victoria hospital say: "We feel that Paisley which is two 'local authorities' and a 'river' away (or three trains and a taxi) is too difficult to access regularly from this area for both out-patients and in-patients as well as visiting relatives." No one knows that better than Jackie Baillie, who described the moves to take services away from the Vale of Leven hospital as indefensible. It is no wonder that people are manning the barricades in East Dunbartonshire to preserve services at Stobhill, fearful of impossible journeys through the Glasgow rush hour to try to access the Glasgow royal infirmary. Trying to access the Glasgow royal infirmary from Glasgow in the non-rush hour is bad enough. The proposals for Glasgow affect other constituents in the West of Scotland. A and E facilities at the Glasgow royal infirmary and the Southern general hospital will introduce pressure and clinical congestion in Glasgow. What does that mean for East Dunbartonshire and those parts of Renfrewshire that are accustomed to using the Southern general? What about the senseless proposal to close a showpiece facility in the Glasgow homeopathic hospital? The proposals have other ramifications. What about the effect on intended centres of excellence? In my home area of Renfrewshire, communities might breathe a sigh of relief that the sword of closure does not hang over the Royal Alexandra hospital in Paisley, but they are deeply worried about the hospital's capacity and its ability to cope with the convoys of the sick and frail from Inverclyde and the Vale of Leven. A facility preserved that cannot cope is just as useless as a facility that is not there at all. With such proposals before us, not just for the West of Scotland but throughout the country, we will be relying on Harry Potter's Nimbus 2000 to get patients to hospitals, and on owls to deliver messages from their loved ones. A cynic would say that there is a concerted effort to make our hospital provision as centralised and inaccessible as possible in the hope that people will be discouraged from using hospitals, and that is reprehensible. I am clear that, without local health trusts—which were abolished by three parties in this chamber on a previous occasion—health boards are remote bureaucracies charged with the impossible task of delivering the Executive's  health care strategy, whatever that is, within a fixed parcel of resource determined by the Executive.

I can give a simple answer that will strike a chord with people throughout Scotland: there would have been local influence, local management and local awareness of local conditions, without which the boards have become remote and unaccountable. The mockery of the Executive overseeing this shambles while affecting to be aloof from the turbulence and running behind the skirts of the health boards is disgraceful. For the past seven years, Labour and, since devolution, the Liberal Democrats have run our health services in Scotland—[ Interruption. ] They have done so whatever Mr Rumbles might affect to argue to the contrary. The working time directive and clinical pressures and patient needs have been known about for years, yet the Executive has taken not one radical, strategic step to increase the recruitment of doctors and nurses or to restore local influence to health care provision.

Instead, the Executive has abolished health trusts, which—to meet Ms Robison's point—has removed local influence, and has bought a hospital for £37 million that it did not need to buy. No wonder the public has lost confidence in the Minister for Health and Community Care and the Scottish Executive—that is clear from the deluge of representations from all over Scotland. That public loss of confidence must be translated into a political judgment of loss of confidence if the mess is to be arrested.

Will the member take an intervention?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. An allegation has been made against me in the chamber and I require an opportunity to respond to it.

I am grateful, Presiding Officer. I say to Mr Sheridan that my recollection of the meeting in Kirkintilloch does not accord with his recollection. I certainly remember—

I certainly remember that there was agreement that we should try to find a form of words that might attract all-party support, but I do not recall giving a commitment to debate the matter in my party's debating time. It is not within my gift to do so; I could not commit to debate a motion whose terms I did not know, nor could I commit my party to debate a motion at a time when I had no idea what circumstances would prevail.

The Tenements (Scotland) Bill probably does not have the people of Partick raising their glasses or the folk in Auchtermuchty jigging in the streets. I did not hear from the public galleries many gasps of delight and excitement as we worked our way through stage 3. However, often what is not in gaudy colours is the substantive fabric of what matters in life. It is important to recognise that the bill is a significant piece of legislation that, in fairness, it would probably have been difficult to find time in a Westminster timetable to pursue in the detail in which it has been pursued here. Although I may not have been a fan of devolution before 1999, I accept that one of the virtues of the system is that it enables a legislature in Scotland to give detailed attention to such bills. I pay tribute to my colleagues on the Justice 2 Committee, who have done a commendable job in trying to understand highly technical legislation. In paying tribute to them, I also have to pay tribute to the drafting team. There must have been times when members of the drafting team wished that we would all go away for a holiday somewhere and perhaps arrange for the Justice 2 Committee to be bereft of lawyers for a while. The drafting team has taken a very technical issue, has dealt with the views that have been expressed and has done a creditable job in translating those into sensible legislative provisions. I thank the minister for her comments about the committee and the drafting team. I certainly would not like to see the Parliament with a passive Margaret Curran in non-feisty guise. That would be a deterioration of the situation. I say to her that she should keep her pecker up and we will look forward to continuing exchanges. This may be a rare occasion on which we are significantly in agreement about a piece of legislation. It is good that we are, as the legislation will make a significant difference to property ownership in Scotland. The amendment to section 11 was an important recognition by the Executive of something wider than just the position of a purchaser buying a flat and finding it incumbent on them to pay for repairs of which they were completely unaware. It is right  that, whenever possible, the Parliament tries to recognise and uphold good principles of Scots law. There is much in our Scots law and Scottish legal system that is unique and distinctive. Perhaps more important, it works well and has worked well over centuries. The fundamental principle of buying property has been based on our registration of title system that was the envy of the world for many years. One of the cardinal principles of that was transparency—long before devolution was ever heard of—which meant that someone could go to that register and know exactly what burdens, obligations, liabilities and responsibilities went with the property that they proposed to acquire. It has been very important that that principle of Scots law has been recognised and honoured in the bill. I hope that the bill will make a significant contribution to improving the regulation of arrangements for those who live in tenement properties and properties of the type defined in the bill. It is a good, solid step forward. As Kenny MacAskill said, there may be technical aspects that we have not got right or aspects about which only time and practice will tell. However, one of the features of the Parliament—especially in its committee system—is its review of legislation. That may be a legitimate task for us in future. I commend the bill, which will certainly have the support of the Conservative group.

Will the minister clarify a point in relation to amendment 30? I know that the whole spirit of the bill is such that titles deeds should have precedence where they are relevant. Am I correct in interpreting amendment 30 as meaning that its provisions would overrule title deeds?

I am positively overwhelmed by such uncharacteristic adulation from the Executive. Once again, on behalf of the Justice 2 Committee I extend to the minister my appreciation of the Executive's willingness to take on board important arguments. In lodging amendment 29, the Executive has done a great deal to remove possible restriction and inflexibility faced by the individual flat owners. I welcome the Executive amendment.  Amendment 29 agreed to.

I come to the aid of the minister—she is not the first person to become confused by the Tenements (Scotland) Bill. There were many furrowed brows and perspiring heads in the Justice 2 Committee. The Executive's amendments to section 11 are welcome, as they acknowledge the concerns of the Justice 2 Committee. As the minister indicated, two amendments were lodged at stage 2 to try to avoid the situation in which a hapless purchaser becomes liable for a seller's obligations without knowing anything about it. I appreciate the attitude that the minister has adopted, as the amendments that have been lodged in her name accept the full spirit of the concerns that were expressed by the Justice 2 Committee and which I personally advocated as a member of that committee. The reason why I lodged amendment 22A is that even though the Executive's amendment 22 is excellent, I am trying to make it a little better. Any purchaser who is buying a property, which is an important financial commitment, wants to know as soon as possible what the likely obligations of acquiring that property will be. Under the Executive's amendment, the purchaser will be liable but they will at least know about that liability because a notice can be registered until 14 days before the date of settlement. I thought that it might be desirable, for the sake of the purchaser, to make that date a little earlier, so my amendment 22A seeks to bring the date forward to the date of conclusion of missives.

I, too, am not unsympathetic to what Mr Canavan seeks to achieve. However, my reservation is twofold. The bill goes a long way towards eradicating many of the difficulties that have plagued tenemental ownership and there are remedies in the bill that might have been relevant to and welcomed by Mr Canavan's constituents all those months ago. My principal concern is that an  ombudsman is not a way to address that issue because I suspect that people in the position of Mr Canavan's constituents are looking for enforceable solutions. The role of ombudsman does not provide that, whereas the bill contains available remedies. For that reason, I am unable to support amendment 79, but I am sympathetic to the reasons for its being lodged.

I have listened to the minister and I recognise that, as has been mentioned, the Executive has been presiding over law and order in Scotland for five years, but I must commence on a discordant note. In that time, we have seen a 40 per cent increase in rape and attempted rape, a 26 per cent increase in fire-raising and vandalism and a 27 per cent increase in drug-related crimes. Of course, those figures cover only reported crimes. I am not alone among members in having heard first-hand accounts from individuals in our communities who are so fed up with the lack of police and delays in the system that they do not report crimes. Johann Lamont was right to refer to unreported crime, which is now the lurking ogre in every community in Scotland. It is small wonder that 22 per cent of Scots do not feel safe in their neighbourhoods, which is the point to which I think Mr Rumbles alluded. Sadly, throughout Scotland there are only 140 police officers on our streets at any one time. There is no disconnection between what is happening and why people feel apprehensive. Unlike the Executive, people in Scotland still think that lawlessness, disorder and criminal activity are rampant; they know, because they live with it. I listened to the First Minister's statement yesterday and to the Minister for Justice today and I by no means discount some of the proposed measures. On a positive note, I am pleased that the Executive will introduce legislation to offer children greater protection from grooming for sexual offences. However, I point out that the issue was championed in the Parliament by my colleague Margaret Mitchell. I am glad that the Executive has finally accepted that children in Scotland should receive the same protection as those south of the border receive. Labour and the Liberal Democrats have been talking about reforming family law since the advent of the Scottish Parliament. We are now informed that, after yet another consultation, legislation will be forthcoming. I want to champion a forgotten cause and, in so doing, utter a word that has apparently been dropped from the Executive's vocabulary: marriage. I urge the Executive to remember that everything that we do must be with the best interests of children at the fore. To the minister's credit, she acknowledged that, but the Executive must recognise the evidence that a child who is born to a married couple will do better at school and is less likely to suffer from emotional problems. It is wrong to imagine that, because we applaud and recognise the virtue of marriage, we stigmatise other relationships. That is not the consequence. We must ensure that marriage is not undermined by changes in the law or trivialised by being turned into a conditional contract that is  terminable at short notice. Why is the Executive so cowardly in applauding the institution of marriage?

In nothing I have said have I impugned the Executive's genuine attempts to deal with other relationships, but I am deeply concerned that the Executive is not lauding and trumpeting the one relationship that works to the betterment of society. The Executive is not giving political leadership. Somewhere up the ministerial sleeve, the Executive has proposals on a single correctional agency and the proposals set out by Sheriff Principal McInnes. We await firm proposals, but I have grave reservations about a single correctional agency—another bureaucracy is the last thing that we need. I point out that justices of the peace have provided a valuable contribution to the Scottish legal system over the years and a decision to abolish them should not be taken lightly. As I have indicated, the programme offered by the Executive is far from radical. I suggest that, sadly, that is predictable. There are no plans for extra police on our streets, but extra police are a necessity, particularly if we are to address antisocial behaviour and enforce recent legislation. Further, while the Executive talks about clamping down on smoking tobacco, which is a legal drug, we hear nothing about clamping down on illegal drugs. We are in a position in which the Scottish public, while being told not to smoke, is being told how to take drugs safely. There is an alternative. The Scottish Conservatives are prepared to offer radical policies.

I do not smoke, and in my opinion there is probably not a safe way to smoke. However, the fact is that tobacco is a legal substance and while we are being told not to take that legal substance, the Executive is displaying ambivalence in relation to illegal substances,  which it is apparently suggesting are acceptable. I am deeply concerned about that.

I am running out of time and want to draw my remarks to a close. On policing, one of the most obvious frustrations that I hear mentioned by constituents relates to their feeling of total impotence and their inability to have any say in what sort of policing is provided. Of course, their desires are diametrically opposed to those of our chief constables. As I have previously said, the Scottish Conservatives consider that the only way in which to address this problem is to have directly elected police board conveners. All the other parties in the chamber have scorned that suggestion and have rejected it as a way forward but at least my party is proposing an alternative to the people of Scotland—a workable proposal that offers some way out of the present void. If one combines that proposal with a replication of the situation in New York, where police boards are required to compute what is happening in their areas, publish crime statistics and let the public know what is happening, we would get back on the road towards reinstating order in our communities. I look forward to finding out what proposals are contained in the police bill. However, I think that the people of Scotland want not more police powers but more police. That is an important distinction to draw. My party feels that a host of remedies could be available to the Executive but that the Executive does not have the political will to address the issues. Honesty in sentencing has disappeared, we have an ineffective way of collecting unpaid fines, which the Executive does not appear to want to address, and other elements of our criminal justice system, particularly children's hearings, have inadequate powers that are unsuitable for dealing with the challenges of today. There are elements of the Executive's programme for justice in its legislative schedule that will meet with Conservative support. However, the main concern of my party is that the fundamental flaws in our justice system that cause difficulties with the maintenance of law and order have not been addressed in the past five years by the Executive and there is nothing in the programme to suggest that they will be addressed.

I, too, commend Frances Curran and congratulate her on the passion of her speech, because she is striking a chord that resonates within every person in the chamber and in the areas that are affected. Hospital provision is now a vital issue, not just for Argyll and Clyde but for a wider part of Scotland. Those of us who attended the meeting of the save Stobhill campaign on Monday evening will be aware of how intense passions are in respect of Greater Glasgow NHS Board's proposals. That situation is echoed throughout Scotland. The minister must be sensitive to that and be willing to show a listening ear, because the themes that are emerging on this broad base are common to all areas. Health care for local communities is disappearing or is in threat of disappearing and local communities feel more and more distant, not just from the care but from having a say in the kind of care that they need. There is increased centralisation. Questions arise, such as what the role of the health boards is, what the role of Government is, and what the role of clinicians is. There is a feeling that patients have too little say and Government has too much control. For that reason, my party supports foundation hospitals. We believe in trying to offer greater choice and giving patients the opportunity to have a greater say on the provision of care. It is important that we understand the general backdrop against which the debate takes place. It is easy to be critical of  Argyll and Clyde NHS Board—I share many of the criticisms that Frances Curran articulated—but the board is purely a bureaucratic deliverer of what it is told to provide within a fixed package of resource. That goes right to the heart of who the provider is—it must be Government. I have read the summary of the consultation document and it seems to me that the proposals are a threat to six hospitals, which will affect hundreds of thousands of people in an area with difficult geography. We should not forget that the geography of the Argyll and Clyde NHS Board area is particularly challenging, which gives rise to problems for communities in accessing the care that they need. A three-month period for a consultation on such proposals is simply unacceptable. I turn to the specific proposals for Inverclyde royal hospital and the Vale of Leven hospital. We cannot deny those areas the hospital care to which they are entitled. The consultation presents the proposals as an option, but I share Frances Curran's concern about what people are being consulted on. People are being told, "Here it is—take it or leave it." That is not good enough. There are legitimate arguments about the kind of care that the population mass in Inverclyde and in the Vale of Leven are entitled to expect. The proposals place a question mark over the current provision from those hospitals, with a view to concentrating everything in the Royal Alexandra hospital in Paisley. In my opinion, that would be impossible because the location of that hospital is difficult, development is constrained by the site and access is problematic—it is one of the most difficult hospitals to get to. The review is not shaping the future; for the area concerned, it is hospital provision meltdown. The proposals are not safe or accessible and they are not acceptable. The consultation should be extended to at least six months. Ideally, the minister should intervene to revisit what the health board is talking about before the consultation process continues. What is at stake is far too important and enduring for the future of the area concerned to leave to something as unacceptable and inadequate as the current proposals.

I, too, take the opportunity to acknowledge, on behalf of the Scottish Conservatives, Mr Swinney's final appearance as leader of his party. It is an onerous position, and I make it clear at this point that my leader is away only temporarily. We all wish Mr Swinney a happy and restful future and contentment in whatever he decides to do. To ask the First Minister when he will next meet the Prime Minister and what issues he intends to raise. (S2F-969)

The First Minister has not answered my question. I had anticipated that what he might say would probably be along the lines of "At some point in the near future, when matters of relevance will be discussed." Perhaps when the happy encounter takes place, the First Minister might like to discuss with the Prime Minister efficiencies in government. Last week, the Minister for Finance and Public Services, Mr Kerr, told Parliament that the Executive intended "to attack waste, bureaucracy and duplication in Scotland's public sector."— [ Official Report , 24 June 2004; c 9577.]  Does the First Minister really believe that spending £300,000 to establish that the saltire is Scotland's best promotional symbol represents good value for money?

We all laud the effective and successful marketing of Scotland—nobody would disagree that that should be done. However, the problem is that every Scot in the land could have told the First Minister that the saltire would be a recognisable symbol and nobody would have charged a brass farthing for the privilege of doing so. Is not what we are discussing part of a wider problem? Last week, Mr Kerr promised us that his efficiency review would save £1 billion, but then— bizarrely and incredibly—he denied that there had been any significant waste in the previous five years. The First Minister then chipped in and told us that the public sector was too big, but that he would not cut it. Will the First Minister now give us the definitive Executive position? Does he, like other parties in the chamber, believe in big government and small people, or does he, like the Conservatives, believe in small government and big people?

The First Minister is an expert at one thing—he is a master of bluster. However, even he has eclipsed his best efforts. He is out of touch and his statements are utterly at variance with reality. On Monday, the First Minister told the Fraser of Allander Institute that "Scotland was a place of big ideas in the past." The problem is that neither he nor his Government has any big ideas for the future. When I say big ideas, I am not talking about flying a saltire in Salzburg, but about really big ideas, like those that are offered by my party: lowering business rates; investing in roads and transport—which the business community is crying out for; devolving power to teachers, nurses and doctors; and giving parents and patients the right to choose in schooling and health care. I invite the First Minister to endorse such policies today so that he can really start delivering for Scotland.

In relation to that prisoner escort contract, the First Minister will be aware that the chief executive of the Scottish Prison Service recently confirmed to the Justice 2 Committee that the contract between Scottish ministers and Reliance was not signed off by Scottish ministers, who we now know knew nothing whatever about what was going on. The contract was signed off not even by the chief executive of the Scottish Prison Service, but by an anonymous and unknown director of finance within the Scottish Prison Service. Presumably, if she had been around, the Scottish  Prison Service tea lady might have signed the contract. Is the First Minister satisfied that that is an acceptable and responsible discharge of Scottish ministerial responsibility?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is satisfied with the way in which Eaga Partnership Ltd administers its central heating programme. (S2O-2678)

The minister may not be aware that I have been in correspondence with her colleague Margaret Curran in connection with the  problematic issue of mobile homes that are permanent residences for pensioners. Early difficulties arose in identifying whether such homes were eligible and Eaga has had to take a fairly arbitrary decision to exclude certain homes. Was it the Executive's intention to exclude pensioner families whose permanent residence is a mobile home, albeit one that remains static? Is that the essence and purpose of the programme?

This is an important topic and I am sorry that it has been crushed into a very short debate. However, for better or for worse, we will try to contribute in that short time. I reflect on the words "for better or for worse", which are synonymous with the commitment to marriage. I have never uttered them myself in that context, but they remain of interest and there is  evidence that they promote and support stability in families. Indeed, the Executive motion says that "stability in families should be promoted and supported", but, interestingly, it does not mention marriage. I listened to the positive comments that the minister made about marriage, which were echoed by Nicola Sturgeon, but I have a slight concern that marriage is not being promoted by Government as the fundamental and stable bastion that it is proving to be. That description of marriage is based on evidence. The recent Civitas study—"Experiments in Living: The Fatherless Family"—contained interesting though very distressing findings. It has been shown consistently that, sadly, many young people who do not live within the framework of a marriage seem to suffer more, do less well, and encounter problems that their counterparts within a two-partner framework do not seem to encounter. In making that comment, I am not being judgmental. Not for a moment am I suggesting that we demote, dismiss or discount other situations or relationships. That would be ridiculous. All that I am trying to say is that, when we consider the context of family law, it is important that the proven stability that is offered by marriage be acknowledged.

I am just coming on to discuss such issues, Mr Barrie. The consultation paper contains some sensible and useful proposals, and I want to make it crystal clear that I am in no way denigrating or disparaging those proposals. However, I am a little anxious that Government is not giving a lead. Government has to give a lead. The role of Government is not always simply to react to what is happening; sometimes Government has to say what seems sensible and good and what may be best for society. Sometimes Government should promote such things as best it can.

I am so short of time that I really cannot take an intervention. I feel that a role of Government is to acknowledge what works and what is good. However, I agree that—as the consultation paper suggests—Government must also make provision for other arrangements. As Nicola Sturgeon said, there are many situations in which it is important to make such arrangements.  Much in the consultation paper is positive. I want to pay particular attention to the issue of contact between children and their wider family. I am sure that I am not alone in having received distressing correspondence from grandparents who are estranged from their grandchildren. Such estrangements are a perplexing and sad part of society today. I have an enduring concern, but I was heartened to hear the minister say that she does not think that statutory or legislative intervention is necessarily best. I would have a deep apprehension about such intervention, because parents may, for very good reasons, decide what access by grandparents is appropriate or not appropriate. If we try to confer rights on grandparents—rights that are enforceable by law—we could get into extraordinary situations in which parents have refused to give access and grandparents have gone to law to seek to enforce their right of access. It does not take much imagination to envisage what the climate would then be like in those families. It would run counter to everything that we all seek to achieve. In urging the Executive to recognise the value of marriage, we do not in any way seek to denigrate other proposals in the consultation paper. However, we feel unease about reductions to the period that is required for divorce on the ground of irretrievable breakdown. It could be argued that that weakens the institution of marriage and we are naturally concerned about that. However, we are prepared to wait for the responses to the consultation, and we are certainly prepared to listen to arguments. I move amendment S2M-1464.1, to leave out from "and therefore" to end and insert: "recognises that marriage has proved to be the most stable and viable framework within which to raise children, and therefore calls on the Scottish Executive, in considering any legislation, to ensure that marriage is not undermined by any such legislative changes."

rose—

There is no doubt that, when it comes to political excitement and passion, the Justice 2 Committee lives life in the fast lane and is at the van—the cutting edge—of thrills and political unpredictability. The Tenements (Scotland) Bill  helped us to maintain that racy pace. As Nicola Sturgeon indicated, many an afternoon was happily whiled away mulling over the delights of chimney heads, stacks and flues and other riveting integral parts of tenemental property law. It would be wrong to say that the exercise was one only for the conveyancing anoraks because, as the minister and Nicola Sturgeon have already indicated, the bill is a watershed in conveyancing law in Scotland. I, too, not only thank the minister for her warm words about the committee and its preparation of the stage 1 report, but pay tribute to the early work that the Scottish Law Commission did on drawing up the bill and thank my fellow committee members and our clerks for their robust work on the stage 1 perusal of the bill. My party supports the principles of the bill and considers it to be an important piece of progress, but I will comment briefly on some specific matters. I am glad that the principle of free variation has been recognised. Some people were nervous that the bill would seek to be prescriptive and didactic and to lay down compulsory measures rather than say that it is sufficient if the title deeds do the job adequately. It is right that, if that principle fails, the bill should step in. The minister specifically mentioned three points and I am comforted by what she said. I look forward to seeing the amendment on small tenements, but I think that it will remove a possible unfairness and anomaly. The question of a purchaser's liability for repairs is perplexing. I noticed that, when the minister referred to the possibility of registering a notice against a title, she said that it was complex, but I argue that it need not be complex. There is a precedent for it: in circumstances in which local authorities have carried out mandatory repairs under statute, notices are recorded against the titles of all the flats, which mean that no seller can give a good title without discharging the debt. It is not rocket science; it is a fairly straightforward procedure, and I urge the minister to consider that carefully. Cathie Craigie raised a good point about a sinking fund, or what would be more colloquially described in the trade as a float. That is how many factors operate; there is a practice whereby, when somebody purchases a flat in a tenemental property, they are required to contribute a sum up front as a float to deal with on-going repairs without a debt arising or continuing. Therefore, it is possible to contemplate a scenario in which, to protect the hapless purchaser—who is totally dependent on a seller's honesty—from being led up the garden path and having a bill that has nothing to do with them foisted on them, protection is afforded for repairs over a certain level. The  mechanism for doing that need not be complicated. I am comforted by the comment that was made about the proposed amendment on the return of moneys. That issue gave rise to interesting discussion among all members of the committee. We saw what the bill was aiming at but felt that in practice it might achieve unfairness. It tends to be the case that no factor will instruct a contractor to carry out repairs until the factor has all the money in his or her hands, so before that point there is no commencement date. There is something of a chicken-and-egg situation—what comes first? Although people may want to talk about a commencement date, they do not have that in their hand until the contract is instructed. That is why the committee thought that it was sensible to distinguish between a commencement date and a genuine refund date by which a proprietor would be entitled to recover moneys if there had been an unacceptable delay. I look forward to seeing the proposed amendment. I also raised the issue of insurance. The bill seemed to make it mandatory for proprietors to have common insurance when perfectly adequate individual flat insurance might be in place. The committee regarded that as a slightly unwelcome usurping of adequate arrangements and, for that matter, of individual proprietorial rights to make such arrangements. Under the bill, proprietors are required to make arrangements, but there seemed to be an attempt to impose a common insurance policy en bloc, which might not be necessary. Subject to those comments, I applaud the bill, which represents a significant step forward. I look forward to seeing the amendments that will be lodged at stage 2.

Does Mr Brown consider that what he has described as the link between the situation when someone is six and the situation when they are 16 is acceptable and that that is a positive reflection of the system or would he concede that that link shows that something is not working?

I, too, am slightly troubled by the time that has been devoted to this subject today. A genuine question arises concerning the object of the exercise. We are aware that the Scottish Executive has a two-stage review in place: I applaud that and think that it is a sensible exploration of where we have got to. The first stage of that review concerns principles and objectives and will conclude by mid-July. The second stage is to be a consultation on how we deliver those objectives and will commence in the autumn. In addition, the Justice 2 Committee, of which I am convener, is embarking on a youth justice inquiry. A great deal of useful activity is taking place; therefore, I question the usefulness of our spending a whole day talking about the  subject—and talking is what we are doing; we are not even debating the matter. It seems to me that the ground has already been ploughed and harrowed to considerable effect, and I am concerned that, by the end of today, we will be groping through dust. I hope that the Executive will have the sense to allow that dust to settle and let the established lines of investigation run their course. I cannot help feeling that what might have been debated today to good effect would have been, for example, what is happening to stop slopping out and when that is going to happen; the rise in violent crime; automatic early release; the fact that we have only 140 police officers in our communities at any one time; or the escalation in drugs-related crime. Those issues are close to the hearts of the people of Scotland and matters of great concern to them. In talking about young people, should we not be considering why, according to a recent study by the University of Glasgow, children as young as 10 are dabbling in cocaine and heroin? To my mind, there would be a certain purpose in debating such issues. However, we are where we are, and it is important to be as constructive as possible. This opportunity permits us to state some general principles. It is important that the Executive is more direct about its opinion of the Kilbrandon principles than recent newspaper leaks have suggested. The Kilbrandon rationale is still sound. Consideration of the whole child should still be the basis for the way in which we approach young people with problems; however, it is unfortunate that such gossip from the Executive is leaking into the newspapers.

The minister makes a completely unconvincing protest. He is not taking any of us in. The fact is that that gossip has deeply troubled children's panel members and reporters. It is important that we acknowledge the underlying rationale of the Kilbrandon report and try to underline what, to be fair, the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill demonstrates. Whatever measures are sought that involve parents—and, rightly, those cases have to be dealt with by the sheriff court—the reporter in the children's hearings system must be at the heart of the process, able to exchange information and have an input. Since the publication of the Kilbrandon report, we have certainly been confronted by new practical challenges, which I will come to in due course. We should also use this opportunity to talk about the panel members. I am deeply concerned at what I can only describe as the low level of morale  that has existed among the panel members whom I have met in recent months. Many of them seem uncertain about the stature that they have in their communities and in the eyes of politicians. That is unfortunate. The Parliament must send out an unequivocal message that we laud and respect the work that children's panel members carry out and that they have our support. Recruitment of children's panel members has already been referred to in passing, but I maintain that recruitment is an issue. We need to be clear about the reasons behind that problem. If people are minded not to participate in the children's hearings system because they are apprehensive about how they will be regarded or about how they will fit in and how the system operates, that is a serious flaw that needs to be addressed. The other side of that coin is public confidence in the system. In various communities, I have heard acerbic comments from members of the public who clearly think that the children's hearings system is an unworkable soft option. I do not share that view, but the fact that such a view is abroad demonstrates that there is a need to reassure the public that the system can be made robust enough to deal with today's challenges, which did not exist in the late 1960s. The challenges that confront us are alarming and they are very real. For example, we know that a physical attack occurs in our schools every 12 minutes—

The Minister for Education and Young People disputes that. Perhaps he will expand on that issue when opportunity permits. The sad fact is that drug abuse is a regular occurrence for many young people. Crimes of vandalism, in which some young people are involved, are increasing. Disturbingly, just under 38,000 children were referred to the children's hearings system in 2002-03—the highest figure since the system began in 1972. According to the 2000 crime survey, half of all 12 to 15-year-olds have been victims of crimes such as harassment, bullying, assault and theft. In sum, the picture is far from attractive and it is clear that times are turbulent. No one disputes that those challenges exist, but the question that faces us all is how we meet them. The challenges comprise two distinct issues. The first is that of the practical problems that arise from the failure of the existing system. Reference has already been made to the Audit Scotland report, but the follow-up report that was published in November last year detailed an alarming sequence of failings at every level. I will not rehearse those issues—as Fiona Hyslop said, the facts have been brought before us in several  debates in the chamber—but that report indicated some serious issues. If those failings are not addressed, neither the existing system nor any reformed system will be able to work. My desire is that the Auditor General for Scotland should command a six-monthly audit of the failings that were identified in his follow-up report so that we might ascertain whether any improvements are being effected. It is important to know what can be fixed and made better before we start tinkering with wholesale change to the system. Secondly, some sensible suggestions are required about the structure and powers of the children's hearings system, given the completely changed circumstances that confront young people and children's panels nowadays. My party would send persistent and serious offenders who are aged 14 or over to youth courts. Removing that element from the children's hearings system would let the system cope and allow it to do what it is good at, which is taking an holistic view of what is happening to young people.

No, I totally refute that. Our proposal tries to fortify and support the children's hearings system. We all recognise that early intervention is key. If the children's hearings system is distracted because a hard core of persistent offenders prevents our dealing with the category of young people who, as Fiona Hyslop mentioned, already demonstrate a disturbing pattern of behaviour at the age of eight, it is absolutely vital that we concentrate on those young people and get involved with them on a broad basis. It is right to remove the hard core of persistent offenders—who are a very small proportion of the troublemakers—and deal with them under a different arrangement. I defend our proposal as one that would greatly assist and strengthen the children's hearings system. I also think that 16 and 17-year-olds who display a recidivist pattern of behaviour should be sent to the adult courts as persistent offenders. However, that is a different issue. Parenting orders will certainly have an important role to play, but we need to consider who will issue such orders and who will be responsible for their enforcement. That is a key issue. It is inappropriate to ask the children's hearings system to be responsible for imposing parenting orders because if there is to be enforcement, there must be sanctions. The sheriff court needs to undertake that obligation, although the children's hearings system should remain at the heart of the  information exchange process and be kept aware of what is happening. Many children's panel members would be understandably apprehensive about the prospect of issuing and enforcing parenting orders. On the powers that children's hearings should have, a range of activity needs to be considered. We need more secure places, but we are all aware that insufficient numbers of places have been pledged by the Executive—no doubt the minister will comment on that when he winds up. Given the drugs problem confronting young people, we need to consider making drug treatment and testing orders available to children's hearings. Without such powers, it will be difficult for children's hearings to make informed decisions on the nature of the problems that they are asked to deal with. My party also supports giving children's hearings powers of weekend and evening detention as well as powers to impose community service and supervised attendance orders. We need to ensure that young children are given a sense of their obligations towards their community and society. They need to be made to understand what the effects are when they breach the fundamental rules of orderly behaviour that we expect them to demonstrate. When my party first supported electronic tagging, we were derided by our opponents for doing so, but I am glad that the Executive parties have now seen the wisdom of our argument and conceded that point. If the children's hearings system is under-resourced—like Fiona Hyslop, I contend that it is—we have a serious problem. If law and order and safe communities are the priority that the Executive frequently claims they are, there is no doubt that additional budgets and resources will need to be pledged to the children's hearings system. As Fiona Hyslop rightly identified, the social work element in the system is a concern. Let me say that I applaud the provision in the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill that will impose a more demanding obligation on local authorities to comply with the requirements of the children's hearings system. One can take a horse to water, but one cannot make it drink if the facilities are not there to provide that service. Without the facilities, there is a real difficulty.

I will, but I am not sure how much time I have left, Presiding Officer.

That is a fair comment. Such statutory provisions that have all-party support also have financial implications, which I suspect are broader than the immediate area that is contemplated by that bill. I hope that today's debate will be an opportunity to praise the work of panel members, who are an often untrumpeted band of heroes. We fail them and we fail our young people when we allow unsubstantiated gossip to percolate through the media, causing unnecessary alarm, apprehension and suspicion. We need to use our debate today to give a clear indication of our universal support for the children's hearings system and for the tremendous work that panel members voluntarily discharge within that system. We also fail our young people and the panel members if we gloss over patent deficiencies in the current system and are blind to the need for innovation and change. Although I think that this opportunity to express our views on the subject could have been slightly curtailed, I hope that some positive outcome will be manifest from it.

I, too, thank the minister for the clarity and robustness of his statement. I note that the statement confirmed that the report concludes that a number of other individuals were, sadly, the subject of neglect, abuse and exploitation. Is that the subject of on-going police inquiries? If so, is it the intention of the minister or of his colleague the Lord Advocate to come to the chamber at some future point to report further on that aspect?

Where such prisoners are the victims of substance abuse, to what extent do the measures include rehabilitation, both inside and outside prison?

I am not usually minded to support Alex Neil in anything, but today we find ourselves bonded by racing pigeons. I should explain that the Conservative group—again, with commendable democracy—is having a free vote on the issue. I am a member of the RSPB and a supporter of the protection of raptors. In Scotland, there are around 12 species of raptor, of which 10 are certainly vulnerable. However, sparrow-hawks enjoy a robust presence, with an estimated 34,500 pairs in the UK. That number is exceeded by the number of kestrels, of which there are estimated to be 100,000 pairs in the UK. I have three reasons for arguing that, to protect racing pigeons, protection for sparrow-hawks—and only sparrow-hawks—should be waived, as the amendment suggests. First, there is no question but that the sparrow-hawk is a threat to racing pigeons—it is the Exocet missile of the ornithological world and pursues other birds in flight, unlike the kestrel, which will tend to eat voles and insects. Secondly, the racing pigeon is not like other feral birds. It is domesticated and trained to return to lofts. That might reassure people who think that some precedent might be set. However, those two reasons would not be sufficient for me. The third reason is that the sparrow-hawk enjoys a sufficiently sustainable population not to be at threat from such a limited removal of protection. Again, a precedent would not be set. My colleague Mr McLetchie was worried that a pigeon fancier might confuse a peregrine falcon with a sparrow-hawk and trap the wrong bird. That would be difficult. The peregrine is bigger and has a white face with big black moustaches, so that would be like confusing Groucho Marx with Jasper Carrot. I support Mr Neil's amendment.

How many licences have been granted?

Mr Pringle misunderstands what I said. Automatic early release is release from prison for people who have had a sentence imposed and for whom, therefore, in the opinion of a judge, prison has been deemed appropriate. I want to get rid of the completely dishonest arithmetic that is involved in imposing prison sentences. The public overwhelmingly wants that, too, and it would not change the discretion of the court to determine when prison is suitable.

Does the member distinguish between what may be practical problems of communication and structural deficiencies? Does she agree that, before we proceed to structural change that might result in the creation of another quango, we should look carefully at existing communication in the system?

I am not usually gripped by the text of Executive motions. The language that is normally deployed invites me to welcome, praise, commend, warmly endorse or fulsomely enthuse over some perceived attribute of Executive activity. It usually stops just short of inviting me to embrace the Minister for Justice on the floor of the chamber with attendant shouts of jubilant acclamation.

The minister—and Mr Henry—are safe because today is different. Today I can praise the candid language of the motion, in particular the phrase "That the Parliament notes the publication" of the consultation document. The motion does not invite us to welcome or praise the publication. I have to say, however, that it is hardly written in the spirited language of ringing endorsement. The rest of the motion is also frank: it recognises the need for significant improvement and change and accepts the need to step up efficiency and effectiveness. Far from being a clarion declaration of success, I have to say that the motion is a frank admission by the Scottish Executive that little has been done in the past five years to try to deal with the genuine problem of reoffending. It may be that Labour is content to let the blame for that lie with its Liberal Democrat partners because, of course, responsibility for justice in the first session of the Parliament rested with Mr Jim Wallace, who was then the Minister for Justice. Having looked at the consultation, I have to say that it is difficult to welcome something that contains no proposals, but merely sets out the difficulties that prevail in Scotland. The reality is that, since 1999, the Scottish Executive has deluged Scotland with consultations. We have just about reached consultation burnout and, once electoral opt-out is added, we have an unfortunate  tandem. People are fed up with Scottish Executive blether; they want some Scottish Executive bottle in the form of proposals and solutions. I have listened to what the minister said about the prospect—I accept that it is no more than that—of a single national corrective agency. I share the reservations that Nicola Sturgeon expressed, but I feel a little more strongly about the matter. There is evidence that public sector departments have been slow to speak to one another across a wide range of topics over the past decade. That problem has been compounded by disparate technology systems that have, in fact, further impeded the process of communication. A rigorous audit is required of the individual departments that are involved in the whole matter of offending and reoffending, in order to establish how they deal with technology, what the efficiency of their operations is and how their management structures attend to authority, responsibility and oversight. It seems that if we are prepared to look at the individual structures and the individual sectoral players, we could go a considerable distance down the road of improving communication of information. That would be a vital step to take; it would address what I consider at the moment to be a deficiency. I also think that solutions can be implemented now. I do not expect the minister to agree with the solutions, but my party believes that measures could be taken at the moment, one of which would be the ending of automatic early release from prison. That in itself is only a part solution; the other part of the equation is improved rehabilitation. I am acutely aware that many prisoners on early release are victims of drug abuse and drug addiction. We have to make a marked improvement in how we cope with this situation. I also think that there is a strong case for investigating the availability of drug treatment and testing orders for offenders whose cases are heard in the district courts. A huge number of offenders who come before those courts suffer from substance abuse problems. At the moment, it is only when that person graduates—ironically, because of a more serious crime pattern—to the sheriff court that that drug problem is addressed. The idea of electing conveners of police forces to ensure that more police are put on the beat met with derision in this chamber when it was advocated by the Conservatives previously, but I think that the need for such action is becoming increasingly clear. The minister would, I am sure, accept that the Executive cannot ensure that more police go into our communities. The Executive might endeavour to allocate additional resources but, at the end of the day, we are in the operational hands of chief constables. There is a  genuine concern in the chamber—certainly on the part of the Conservatives and the SNP—that there are not enough police in our communities. Increased democratic involvement of the public in the way that has been suggested would make a difference.

There is a world of difference between political control of the police—which would be inimical to everyone in this chamber, I am sure—and introducing an advanced degree of democratic involvement that would allow the public to have some say in the general provision of law enforcement in their areas. The solutions that I have outlined could make a practical difference. One area about which I am concerned in respect of the attitude of the Scottish Executive concerns the Airborne Initiative. That situation makes manifest the deficiencies of the Executive's approach as well as the hypocrisy of the Liberal Democrats. The project was dealing with some of our toughest young offenders and, according to an evaluation, was providing a useful addition to the range of non-custodial programmes for offenders who were otherwise at risk of a custodial sentence. Indeed, in their election manifesto last year, the Liberal Democrats hailed it as an exemplary model. However, despite that, the Executive, which comprises Labour and the Liberal Democrats, closed it down in February this year. Although the motion earns praise for honesty and will be supported because it is an honest motion—I should point out that I am prepared to support the SNP amendment as well—it is an all-too-revealing exposé of what I am afraid is a rather depressing failure.

When the First Minister and his colleagues get round to considering Lord Bonomy's judgment in detail and accept that it is a judicial keelhauling of the Scottish Executive, will he say why it was not thought appropriate in 1999 to deploy some of  the year-end surplus revenue—a very considerable amount of money—to meet what most people in Scotland would now regard as the essential public sector obligation to provide sanitation in our prisons?

It is common knowledge that the negotiation and placing of the contract were accompanied by ministerial detachment. In so far as the Minister for Justice has alluded to the contract, she has sought to hide behind issues of commercial and operational sensitivity. I listened to the First Minister's response, but does he accept that, if public confidence is to be restored not just in our justice system but in the political process in Scotland, ministerial disclosure to the Parliament of how the penalty provisions of the contract operate is critical? Does he accept that it is not enough for the contract to be published and that it is essential that we have manifest ministerial acceptance of responsibility and appropriate and regular statements in the chamber about how the penalty provisions are applied?

I thank the minister for providing a copy of her statement. Recent events have dented public confidence in our justice system and gravely prejudiced public safety, which is a matter of profound regret. I see from page 9 of the minister's statement that she does not dispute the concept of ministerial responsibility. That may not be comfortable for her, but it is certainly helpful for the rest of us. The part of the minister's statement to which I was drawn is headed "Immediate remedial action", which is on page 11. The minister lists four specific issues on which she considers intervention on her part was appropriate and necessary. If it was necessary in the past 14 days to listen to the concerns of Sheriff Principal Bowen and for Reliance to employ 200 extra staff—if we include the 50 staff in training—and if it was necessary for Reliance to enhance its training and to introduce additional experienced managerial support, why did the minister not attend to, or at least observe, those matters before placement of the contract? It is regrettable that the minister decided to act only when disaster descended. I have a reason for that question. On 7 October, approximately a month before the contract was signed, I convened a joint meeting of the Justice 1 Committee and the Justice 2 Committee. At that meeting I was asked, on behalf of committee members, who had visited Glasgow sheriff court and listened to Sheriff Principal Bowen, to raise with the minister, at the first opportunity, concerns about security in the criminal courts. I said to the minister at that meeting that we—committee members—had confirmed that we would put the matter to her, and highlight the real concern that exists, certainly in Glasgow sheriff court, about whether the necessary security for the criminal courts would be prejudiced by the new arrangements. Given the minister's response to Nicola Sturgeon, I ask her whether she had any discussions with Reliance during, or prior to, the placement of that contract.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is intended to create any new accesses to, or egresses from, that part of the M8 that passes through Renfrewshire. (S2O-1840)

The minister will be aware that the application in question relates to a junction that would serve a potential residential development of 2,300 houses at the former Royal Ordnance factory site in Bishopton. Can he confirm that, in the consideration of that application, proper regard will be paid to the existing pressures on infrastructure in that community, particularly those that affect the habitations of Bishopton, Erskine and Inchinnan? Can he further confirm that, in any assessment of the application, regard will also be paid to the implications for the emergency services if, with the proposed increase in residential development, there were any reason why the M8 had to be closed and traffic diverted?

To ask the Scottish Executive how it will deliver on its commitment to reduce the public fear of crime and to monitor it statistically. (S2O-1826)

I thank the minister for his response and direct his attention to the justice section of the Scottish Executive's annual evaluation report, which was published yesterday. In brackets after target 1, which relates to reducing serious violent crime, is the word "SLIPPAGE". Under target 3, which is about reducing fear of crime, there is no entry. That is explained further on by the words: "we have not supplied a 'met', 'on course' or 'slippage' assessment" because the milestones are not available. Does the minister agree that such targets are questionable? I was comforted by what he said in his response about the continuing relevance of such targets, but would not it be far more practical and meaningful to the public to provide a much more visible form of policing in our communities, which would really reduce the fear of crime?

In my speech, I seek to do something that does not come easily to the inmates of the Parliament: to see ourselves as others see us. Nothing has offended the public more than the faltering and expensive progress of the Parliament building project. It is sad to say that the project has become an icon for the public of all that is  provocative, frustrating, enraging and incomprehensible about the political process. That angst and rancour have struck at the core of public regard for devolution, and, as one nightmare scenario after another has emerged from the Fraser inquiry, the public ire has intensified. To be frank, the public have an appalling opinion of MSPs; they want both an explanation and the facts. An inquiry without the tapes is tainted, and the public know that. The vision of politicians dancing on debating pinheads that we have seen today—be it Robert Brown and his literary eau de Nil emulsion or the deferential apologist for the BBC in Ken Macintosh—is calculated to provoke further public wrath, and if the public is hostile to the political process, it is no less disaffected by the BBC. If the inquiry is to avoid being discredited, the tapes are required, and Lord Fraser knows that. The disaster of the expensive and tardy progress of the building project is unique—we must be clear about that—but perhaps it is that uniqueness that explains why it has monopolised public interest. None of us wants a project of that type ever to be repeated or an embarrassment of that sort ever visited on the Scottish public again. Politicians can step in today and do two things: something to try to retrieve their badly damaged public image; and something substantive and constructive to try to procure the tapes. If the BBC can volunteer a tape to the Hutton inquiry and can be compelled by an inquiry under tribunals legislation to give information, it is difficult to see why, in the case of a unique, unusual and extraordinary incident of this type, the BBC cannot volunteer to make its tapes available, particularly given that one of the parties that is associated with the tapes was involved in the initial part of the project and herself gave evidence to the inquiry. I support the motion because I think that it will do two things: it will do a lot to justify our belief that the Parliament is worth while; and it will explain to the public that the Parliament can actually do something useful that they want it to do. That would assist the inquiry the whole purpose of which is not to comfort us or to excuse, absolve or explain what we have been doing, but to explain to the public, beyond a shadow of a doubt, what happened, and then leave them to make their judgment. The inquiry cannot do that unless the tapes are produced. I support the motion.

Will the member give way?

I declare an interest as an enrolled solicitor in Scotland. I welcome the opportunity to contribute to the debate. At the outset, let me say that I am not inimical to Sheriff Principal McInnes's report, which is a helpful contribution to the continuing debate on our criminal justice system.  On the substantive content of the report, however, I feel rather as I used to feel about school dinners—I liked the mince and gravy, but was less certain about the cabbage, and I was very keen on the jelly but remained to be convinced about the tapioca. That demonstrates my ambivalence towards the report, because, for example, it is Conservative party policy to deal with fine defaulting by more efficient collection of outstanding fines rather than by resorting to custodial sanction; I have spoken about that in the chamber. Equally, it is our policy to modernise our courts to meet the needs of society as it is structured today and to introduce weekend and evening sittings to reduce the current backlog; my colleague Bill Aitken has spoken about that. I am delighted that the McInnes report endorses our thoughts on those issues. There is compelling common sense about a mandatory discount in sentence following an early guilty plea; about relaxing rules of evidence when introducing closed circuit television or other recorded evidence; and about taking a much more pragmatic approach to social inquiry reports. Those are all positive suggestions and, on their own, they would facilitate the improvement of summary criminal justice. The minister alluded to what we mean by summary criminal justice, and I think that that is an important point for us all to bear in mind. Summary justice is meant to deliver swift and local justice within a procedural framework that is simpler than that attaching to more complex and serious criminal cases. That is why I would be strongly influenced by public opinion on its delivery; we have already referred to that in this debate. Public perception is important and perhaps it should be instructive, because what it may suggest is that there is nothing wrong with the role of the summary courts, but that we ought perhaps to reform the function and administrative operation of those courts. I say that for two reasons. First, there may well be merit in reviewing how district courts operate. Perhaps there is a need to examine consistency of sentencing, and that is brought out in the McInnes report. Perhaps it would be desirable to bring those courts under the Scottish Courts Administration; I can see attraction in that. Perhaps there is an overdue need to allow district courts to impose drug treatment and testing orders. Most drug-dependent offenders appear before the district courts, not the sheriff courts. At the moment, only when an individual graduates to the sheriff court after committing more serious offences is their drug problem assessed under the criminal justice system. There are certainly innovations, changes and improvements that can now be brought to the operation of the district courts.  My second reason for thinking that we need to look at function and administrative operation rather than at role is the reason that Michael Matheson referred to by asking about the practical effect of merging the district court case load into the sheriff court. We know that the consequences of the Bonomy review, which will be implemented under the Criminal Procedure (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill, will increase that case load. Estimates vary, but there is no doubt that there will be a significant increase to sheriff-and-jury work. If we look at that increase against a current sheriff summary case load that has shown a pattern of increase over 2000, 2001 and 2002, and if we also study the similar pattern of increase for the stipendiary magistrate courts, we see that there is a pressure point. That pressure point will certainly be brought to bear in the sheriff court system if there is amalgamation.

There is attraction in that proposal. Indeed, to be fair to the Executive, the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill incorporates some of those measures. I would be much more minded to see how the measures work in practice to quantify whether there is a reduction in the burden of casework going to our criminal courts; I certainly would not want to judge that in advance. If we take the increasing pattern to which I referred, and add to that the district court work load throughout the rest of Scotland, it is quite clear that there will be pressure on sheriff court infrastructure, buildings and personnel. It seems to me that, before any change to the structure and role of non-jury courts is contemplated, some searching questions must be asked and the answers must be procured. Unlike their counterparts down south, members of the Scottish Executive should not be caught up in a storm of change propelled only by the gale force influence of reforming zeal. To be fair, I do not think that they want to be. If deficiencies exist in the current system, they should be identified and answers should be found. What are the deficiencies? Can they be addressed under the existing structure? Is dispensing summary justice with more than 700 full lay justices a more cost-effective provision of justice than incorporating the system into the sheriff court? Does anyone know what it currently  costs to administer lay justice throughout Scotland? Is it intended that the district courts would be shut? Would the public have to attend sheriff courts? Is that level of local justice acceptable to the public? Can our sheriff court infrastructure cope? When one of the most important groups in our society, young people, is dealt with by what is, in essence, a lay system, why is such a system inappropriate for minor summary crime? Does there exist, or is it proposed to procure, a property survey of sheriff and district court buildings to ascertain their condition and quantify current or latent repair obligations? I do not know the answers to those questions, but I know that no structural change in the role of our summary courts should proceed without first the answers being obtained. Although I welcome many aspects of the report and I urge that the positive aspects be implemented, I also urge the greatest caution before we storm ahead with wholesale change without compelling evidence that the change is justified.

I was interested in the minister's assessment that the system is not working well. I was intrigued by the public opinion research that was procured by Sheriff Principal McInnes, because it showed that, on the whole, there was a favourable response to the administration of summary justice. What is the basis of the minister's assessment?

To ask the Scottish Executive how many criminal cases were processed by district courts in the west of Scotland in each of the last three years, broken down by parliamentary constituency. (S2O-1771)

I am unaccustomed to receiving unqualified comfort from the minister, but I regard that as half comfort. Does the minister agree that—as we approach this afternoon's debate and enter an important consultation period for summary justice—precisely such information would be extremely helpful to everybody who wants to proceed with the debate? Is she prepared to produce such information for the rest of Scotland, if doing so is within her competence?

Everyone agrees that racist attacks are a particularly repugnant form of criminal activity. The First Minister referred to our Scottish police forces. Is he satisfied that there are enough community policemen on the ground to deter such vile activity? It is not disputed that at any one time only 140 police officers are in our communities, on the streets. Is the First Minister satisfied that that is an adequate safeguard?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Despite the recent concentration of public and political attention, antisocial behaviour is not a new phenomenon. We should not be gulled by jargon into thinking that it is. Sadly, behaviour that is offensive or causes distress to another citizen has been a fact of life for centuries, hence the development in Scotland of a comprehensive criminal justice system. Indeed, the definition of antisocial behaviour that is used in the bill was devised for the Crime and Disorder Act 1998. What seems to have changed is the apparent mushrooming of the number of people who behave more often in a manner that is unacceptable to law-abiding citizens. The kernel question that has to be asked is whether that pattern of behaviour arises out of too little law or because there is not enough enforcement of existing law. I want to make clear that my party agrees, as does every other party, that antisocial behaviour is the blight on and a nightmare for too many of our communities. For that reason, we will support the general principles of the bill, which we recognise as a genuine and sincere attempt to address the problem. However, the answer to the question whether the bill is regarded as a landmark piece of legislation or as window dressing that simply slaps on a bit of lipstick to the face of our criminal justice system depends on two things: first, the extent to which our law is enforced, the new provisions are monitored and the breaches are enforced; and, secondly, the substantive content of the bill. The Executive will not be surprised to learn that I have grave reservations about the first aspect. Those reservations are not borne out of some bilious party-political prejudice, but are founded on fact. Mr Douglas Keil told the Communities Committee: "We can have as much legislation on the statute book as we like, but unless we have police officers to deal with the problem, there is little point in that legislation."—[ Official Report , Communities Committee , 21 January 2004; c 479.] A further fact for the ministers is that, at the moment, only 140 police officers are on our streets at any one time throughout Scotland. Many of them are doing things in other places, but they are not out on our streets. A final fact on this subject is that, in New York, the template for the reduction of crime and the restoration of law and order is for  there to be one policeman for every seven committed crimes, whereas in Scotland there is one policeman for every 27 committed crimes. That is why I have very serious concerns about the capacity of our Scottish police forces to deal with the enforcement of existing law, far less to cope with the deluge of new statutory obligations. I turn to the substantive content of the bill. In that connection, I thank and pay tribute to my colleagues on the Justice 2 Committee. However the bill may be painted, in essence it is a justice bill—the majority of its provisions relate to law and order. The Justice 2 Committee carried out a robust and forensic scrutiny of the bill and I hope that our stage 1 report was of assistance to the Communities Committee. The issue of principal concern to me and my Conservative colleagues is part 3, which I was unable to support. We are not concerned because we think that groups of two or more persons who are breaking the law should not be dealt with—they should be dealt with, and under current law they can be dealt with if there are sufficient police officers in our communities to enforce the law. It is interesting that the only witness before my committee who supported the dispersal powers in the bill was the Deputy Minister for Justice.

The context for the bill is the framework of Scots law. I remind the minister that, in the criminal context, Scots law is very different from English law. We have an amplitude of available remedies, but they are not being enforced. If they are not being enforced now, what perils may lie in wait for the subsequent enforcement of the bill when it is enacted?

I am sorry; I am running out of time and I do not propose to take any more interventions. Those members of my committee who were supportive of the dispersal power described it as another tool in the box, but there are two difficulties with that analogy. If there is no one to take the tool out of the box, it is useless. If the tool, once taken out of the box, is found to be unfit for the purpose, it is still useless. The dilemma of part 3 is that existing solutions are not being applied and the new provisions do not provide a solution.  Part 3 will simply create a conveyor belt that will transfer groups of people from area A to area B. No doubt when area B is then designated, the group will move on to area C. Why not deal with the problem in area A in the first place? It is frightening to me that this ill-thought-out proposal could criminalise people who are not committing any criminal act. That is illiberal, oppressive and excessive. Far from being a tool in the box, part 3 is a case of mobilising a JCB to manicure a toenail. We need greater accountability to local communities and transparency in police operation, hence my party's suggestion of having directly elected conveners of local police boards. The Executive may deride that suggestion, but it is finding favour elsewhere. My colleagues will mention other aspects of the bill, but I echo Nicola Sturgeon's concern that the children's hearings system should be tied into any measures that will affect children and young people. That is absolutely critical, but the minister's comment on the matter lacked clarity. I confirm that we support the general principles of the bill, but I hope that the minister will regard seriously the concerns that I have expressed.

Would the minister be concerned to learn, as I did recently, that some panel members feel that they lack stature in the eyes of the agencies with which they have to interface? If that is the case, it seems regrettable. How would the minister propose to address that issue, which is a vital consideration when we are seeking to recruit people to increase our panel membership?

I, too, shall be brief. My concept of brevity may be slightly different to the previous speaker's—I will do my best. Unaccustomed as I am to supporting the Executive on justice matters in Scotland, I find myself in the slightly unusual position of welcoming the Vulnerable Witnesses (Scotland) Bill, which has the support of Conservative members. There is no doubt that for witnesses who come forward and who are vulnerable and in need of support, the bill offers more structured and certainly more extensive measures than have previously been available. The bill is to be welcomed as a worthwhile contribution to improving the court environment for vulnerable witnesses. I thank the minister for her remarks about the Justice 2 Committee. I think that I speak for all members of the committee when I say that we found it an interesting bill with which to be involved, and I am glad if our scrutiny and discussions assisted with the clarification and drafting of the bill. There is an important issue in relation to resource, and I reiterate the concerns that were expressed at stage 1 by both the Finance Committee and the Justice 2 Committee, and indeed the admission of the Executive even at that stage that some of the costs might be higher than the estimates. It would be regrettable if the legislation ended up being either obsolete or unworkable because proper resourcing was not in place, and I urge the minister to be cautious and careful about ensuring that resource is there when the bill is enacted and its provisions are implemented. In relation to the point that Nicola Sturgeon mentioned, evaluation will also be important. I would welcome a commitment from the minister if, for example, the Lord Advocate was prepared to assess the working model of the legislation as it proceeds, and if any difficulties are identified they should be quickly picked up on and noted. I hope that the absence of the right of the accused to question an application for a witness to be treated as a vulnerable witness will not impugn the integrity of the succeeding trial, but only time will tell—there are important issues lurking in that. In conclusion, I make a plea about draftsmanship; I raised the point at previous stages of the bill. I have to say that, as a working tool for practitioners and judges in court, it is not user friendly. About 14 fingers and 10 pairs of eyes will be required to assimilate the provisions quickly, particularly where practitioners refer to the provisions in submissions to judges, and similarly  where judges consider the submissions of practitioners. If I have a plea to the parliamentary draftsmen, it is that it is far better to be simple, even if that extends the length of legislation, because that makes bills simpler to read and more readily understood. As Nicola Sturgeon indicated, the bill is part of the broader framework of the criminal justice system in Scotland. The legislation is predicated on witnesses being available. Of course, witnesses will not be available if the law-abiding public is in any way apprehensive about the efficacy of our criminal justice system and if, having witnessed an offence, they are concerned about whether it is worth while to come forward. Delays, lack of resource and—dare I say it—the prospect of automatic early release are all factors that influence the law-abiding public's willingness to be witnesses. I urge the minister to have regard to that broader picture. The bill is welcome and I have pleasure in supporting it on behalf of the Conservatives.

I understand the thrust behind what Mike Pringle said. I accept that an important point is involved, but I am concerned that the effect of amendment 66 would be to freeze implementation and, quite frankly, I would be very unhappy about that. The sooner that the act comes into force, the better it will be for all classes of vulnerable witnesses. I am unable to support amendment 66 for that reason.

I am uneasy about amendment 47 because it seems that section 1 contains the necessary safeguard as drafted, in that there is a  presumption that the accused will not be present. If the defence agent thought that there could be prejudice to the accused, the accused could apply to the court for permission to be present. No doubt the defence agent would then present the necessary arguments in support of that proposition. It is wrong to seek to interfere in the discretion of the court further by placing an additional directive. At the end of the day, we must respect the discretion of the court to make a decision on presentation of the arguments. It is not for the bill to try to sway the discretion of the court one way or another, particularly when the bill expressly creates a presumption. I cannot support amendment 47.

I might be speaking out of turn, Presiding Officer. I wanted to speak about amendment 19, which I thought was in the group to which the minister just spoke. If the amendment is not in that group, I will deal with it later.

As members will appreciate, amendment 19 is very technical. Indeed, it has all the lucidity of the ancient dialects of Chinese dynasties. I want the minister to reassure me that it is entirely technical in import and adjusted purely for other statutory provisions.

I am sympathetic towards Nicola Sturgeon's argument. Indeed, I am minded to support amendment 37, because if it is not accepted the legislation will contain a potential Achilles' heel. This bill must not interfere with the fundamental requirement that a trial be fair, which is essential to the whole framework. However, it is technically possible that the concept of a fair trial could be prejudiced by measures that the court might adopt in relation to the provision of procedures for a vulnerable witness. It would be regrettable if the only facility for addressing that issue were to be either at trial or on appeal on conviction. Amendment 37 sets out a sensible technical provision that seeks to allow any such concerns to be addressed before the case gets anywhere near trial. As a result, those concerns can be identified early and the court can make a proper determination about how to deal with them. Under the concept of natural justice, it is desirable that if one party seeks to do something in any court proceedings the other party should have the opportunity to comment. I agree with Nicola Sturgeon that her amendments are not an attempt either to delay or  to obstruct the expeditious process of proceedings—they represent a sensible safeguard that will avoid trouble further down the line. As a result, I support amendment 37.

I applaud the spirit of Jackie Baillie's amendment 28, but am confronted by a technical difficulty. I am not sure what the sanction would be if there were a default in compliance with the proposal. Mr Henry made a fair point. Everybody desires to see criminal cases proceed as expeditiously as possible, but control of witnesses rests with the parties to the criminal case, whether prosecution or defence. My concern is that the only sanction might be that the case could fall, which would clearly be regrettable and certainly not in the best interests of the parties concerned or justice as a whole. Therefore, although I applaud the spirit of the amendment, I cannot support it. I endorse the sentiments that Mr Henry expressed.

That might be regarded as a penal imposition by certain parties.

I have a great deal of sympathy with the rationale that underlies Mr Harvie's amendments, but I am confronted by a technical concern. It is a cornerstone that the evidence in our criminal courts is given as directly as can be managed. That is critical to a fair trial and to a court's and jury's understanding of the evidence. I have a real concern that, if we depart from the purity of that structure—which is an important component of our criminal justice system—it may be possible for evidence to be diluted, albeit unintentionally and inadvertently. In that, I am confronted with a real problem and a significant concern, so for that reason I am unable to support Mr Harvie's amendments.

This has been a useful debate, even if it has been held under unfortunate time constraints. We would all agree that the administration of criminal justice in Scotland has, in recent years, become a field that is increasingly strewn with boulders and that among the significant boulders are, undoubtedly, the problems of delays, adjournments and lack of preparation, to which numerous speakers have referred, including the minister, Michael Matheson, Pauline McNeill, Margaret Mitchell, Bill Aitken and others. That issue is at the heart of the embryonic formation of the problems. The bill tries sensibly to address some of those issues. The mandatory preliminary diet is sensible but, if that diet is sensible, it is my view that the managed meeting is absolutely critical. Nothing will focus the minds of the accused and his law agent more than a fixed trial date: lawyers and accused persons are human beings and—unless they are aware of when the sword of Damocles might fall—they are unlikely to consider with urgency when preparations should be made, when thought should be given to certain matters and when questions should be asked. Critical to how we address the matters of preparation and early disclosure is a change of attitude on the part of the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service. I was having a look at the increased volume of work in the High Court between 1995 and 2001, which saw an  approximately 23 per cent increase in new indictments. That increase is significant, but I say to the Lord Advocate that it is not formidable; it is no more than many other organisations have had to cope with. In coping with such increases, those organisations have had to consider their procedures, management, technology and so on and they have had to think about how they can better progress and more swiftly process their business. The Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service is no different and issues that relate to such aspects need to be considered. I have a lot of sympathy for early disclosure's being included in a mandatory framework. I have an uncomfortable feeling that a code of practice might prove to be a limp directive—again, the matter is about focusing minds and making people who are crucial to the provision of this vital service for society realise that there are specific checks and balances that must be observed. Capacity is another boulder. The High Court has been under strain and it may be that, in theory, transfer of business to the sheriff courts is the way forward. I do not disagree with that in principle, but the biggest boulder of all would then roll into place. That boulder is resources. Without significant resources, the transfer of business simply will not work. Pauline McNeill and Bill Aitken spoke eloquently to that point. Although I accept that the bill genuinely seeks to get some of the boulders out of the field, it is important that we do not crush healthy activity in the process or—which would be equally alarming—deposit other rubble in place of the boulders that we remove. I will consider one or two of the bill's specific proposals. I have concerns about the proposal to allow those who are refused bail to apply for bail while they are electronically tagged. It seems to me that an individual who has been refused bail and who has been deemed to be a danger to the public will be a danger with or without a tag. Like Mike Rumbles, I am concerned about the provision to allow a trial to go ahead in the absence of the accused. Important principles are at stake and there is a grave danger that the accused would not receive a fair trial in his or her absence. I also have difficulty with the plans to force judges to give discounts for early guilty pleas. Again, that might be a sensible proposal, but surely it is watered down by the current system of automatic early release. If offenders know that they will get early release, they might be less likely to plead early because they will not serve the full sentence that is handed down by the court. I turn to one of the most significant areas that is at risk and which is in danger of being crushed under the bill; that is, the removal of the 110-day rule. I understand that Lord Bonomy found that  only 25 per cent of cases require extensions to the 110-day rule, which does not seem to me to justify abolition of the rule; it means, rather, that 75 per cent of cases proceed timeously under the current arrangements. It seems to me that with early service of the indictment, managed meetings and preliminary diets can be adjusted to cope with the procedure. Colin Fox made that point well. I say to the Executive only that the 110-day rule is one of the most valued and respected embodiments of our criminal justice system in Scotland. Fairness to the accused is vital and it seems to me to be illiberal for an innocent accused person to be detained for longer than is necessary. I must say that the proposal is regrettable and that I have not heard any compelling argument that justifies removal of this essential safeguard: I do not think that there is any problem that cannot be addressed intelligently by other mechanisms. We would thereby retain something of which we should be proud. The 110-day rule is an important component of safety for the accused in our criminal justice system. That said, the bill offers a variety of mechanisms that will improve the administration of justice in Scotland so—subject to my earlier comments—I endorse and welcome its general principles.

Does the minister accept that in the provision of those vital services there is scope to have regard to what the voluntary and charitable sector is trying to do? Will the minister confirm whether, within the new national provision of data, it is proposed to quantify the work of that sector?

I start by referring to what Hugh Henry finished with: he used the phrase "useful debate". Indeed, it is germane to consider the validity of the debate. We know that, in Scotland, a crime is committed every 1.2 minutes and we know from HMIC's 2002 report that we have only about 140 police officers on our streets at any one time. We also know that the public have a huge appetite for more community policing and more police on the streets. Indeed, that was a top priority for respondents to a BBC survey and, interestingly, it emerged as a significant desire in the public's response to the Executive's consultation on antisocial behaviour. However, all parties accept that public demand is not being met by police supply. That is the credibility gap to which David McLetchie referred. I was struck by some of the comments on the kernel issue of the debate's validity. The minister conceded its validity, although he rubbished the Conservatives' ideas—at least he accepted that we are presenting ideas—and Paul Martin's speech was in a similar vein. Their speeches  contrasted with Nicola Sturgeon's, in which she simply said that accountability was not the problem and that there should be more police. My question to Nicola Sturgeon is, "But how?" The public want more police and have wanted them for a significant period of time. When I look at Nicola Sturgeon's amendment, I have to ask how, under the current structure, she would implement one jot or tittle of what she proposes. The dilemma is that she cannot. Duncan McNeil also conceded the debate's validity, although he does not agree with the Conservatives' proposals. He made an important point when he intervened on Nicola Sturgeon to ask, "What will more police do? Where will they go? Who will decide that?" In essence, I think that he is saying that the public are not getting what they want.

I have not changed my mind. As David McLetchie said, the Conservative party opposes the dispersal power in its entirety—the ministerial direction power is in that part of the bill. As Conservatives, we also have a strong suspicion that ministerial direction means centralised political control, but that is not what we are talking about in the proposal. Let me continue to examine the reasons for the apparent frustration of the public—something about which everyone in the chamber seems to agree, as far as I can gather. Those reasons are multiple. The Scottish Police Federation is saying that we need more police officers. The Scottish Executive is saying, "It is not our fault. We have an excellent record of providing police." I do not think that having 140 officers on the beat at any one time substantiates that view. The Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland has another, starkly different view from that of the public. An ACPOS representative indicated that the association has a certain antipathy to beat patrols or, at best, a lack of enthusiasm for them. Are the Scottish Conservatives being radical agents provocateurs for leading this debate and for suggesting that accountability lies at the heart of the problem? It seems that, in principle, the minister, unlike the Scottish National Party, is prepared to accept that that is the issue. David  McLetchie alluded to the Home Office consultation that is being carried out. It is easy for Mike Rumbles to be snide and sneering about that—acting entirely in character—but that is to be entirely blind to the germane principles of what I think is a very important argument. The Government at Westminster has conceded that there is an issue. Members may talk about different legal systems and structures, but the issue remains the same. As David McLetchie said, democratic accountability is essential. There have been challenges to that view, but democratic accountability is not political interference. A structure in which the public have a rather greater say about the provision of policing at a local level, in terms of control and accountability, does not, in my book, need to be inimical to the professional operational activity of the police force. It is important that the police authorities should respond locally to overall public demand.

The operational independence of chief constables—which arguably exists at the moment—is, by any criteria, raising questions. We are submitting a proposal that tries to introduce greater accountability for chief constables and their colleagues. As I said, that is not, in my judgment, necessarily inimical to professional operational policing at a local level.

As for the current structures, Mr Henry attacked the undemocratic nature of what he thinks our proposals represent. What he said posed a paradox, however. I probably know more about the dietary habits of the indigenous tribes of Papua New Guinea than I do about the convener of my local police board.

It is that remoteness that—

It is that remoteness that gives rise to much of the public's concern about the provision of policing. Speaking of remoteness, I should add that nothing that Stewart Maxwell said would resolve that issue.  The Executive amendment dodges the issue, hiding behind the inadequacy of the current structures, while the SNP amendment simply fails to recognise the problem. I support the motion in the name of David McLetchie.

If that is the case, what power has a person living in a ward in Greenock in Duncan McNeil's constituency, for example, to do something about the police board?

I thank the minister for taking an intervention. If the litany he just gave us is so impressive, why are we now in a situation in which a crime is committed in Scotland every 1.2 minutes? That has never happened before.

I concur with the minister's sentiments on this tragedy. My colleagues and I extend our condolences to the families and friends of those who died and pay tribute to the work of the emergency services and related local agencies. Our thoughts are certainly with the management and staff of the care home.  As the minister has indicated, an inquiry or inquiries will require to be held. If we are to learn lessons from this tragedy, it is vital that they emerge from a professional, thorough and informed investigation of the facts surrounding the fire. I suggest to the minister that the sooner an inquiry can be announced, the greater the sense of public reassurance will be. As a result, I urge early consideration of a fatal accident inquiry, although I appreciate that the minister does not want to be precipitate or premature in announcing the form that an inquiry might take. I should point out that there is a precedent for such tragedies. For example, in 1960, 19 firemen were killed in the Cheapside Street warehouse tragedy and, in 1968, 22 workers died in the James Watt Street tragedy. Will the minister confirm that such examples offer some instruction as to the appropriate model of an inquiry? Will she also confirm that the soundness and respected structure of a fatal accident inquiry will not be overlooked as a suitable model?

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to the debate. I have always respected Fiona Hyslop as an eloquent and articulate contributor to debate in the chamber and this evening was no exception. I commend Fiona Hyslop, because I think that in the promotion of her argument she highlighted the dilemma that exists in relation to this debate. She has—and I accept that her conviction is sincere  and well held—deep concerns about the concept of private prison provision and she maintains that others share her concerns. I accept that she holds that view, although I do not agree with it, but the matter perhaps serves to indicate the kernel issues in a debate on the topic. Two fundamental factors in relation to the provision of prison facilities in Scotland must be recognised by politicians. I say that not merely from my experience of the justice portfolio, but because I have visited various prisons in Scotland during the past six to eight months. First, it is perfectly obvious to me that we need more capacity, whether we think that that is good, bad, right, wrong, reprehensible or otherwise. That is the tragedy; we need more capacity now and we need to be taking the necessary action to provide it as soon as possible. Secondly, the environment in a number of prisons that were constructed in Victorian times is oppressive, unproductive for prisoners and difficult to manage. I have visited Low Moss prison within the past few months and I urge members who have not been there to go. I maintain that members would be aghast at the conditions there. They would be astonished by staff morale and by the success the regime achieves, but they would be simply appalled by the prison's infrastructure and environment. Jean Turner referred to the background to that and, as far as I am concerned, anything that can be done to renew and refresh that facility is overdue. When we consider the issues to which Fiona Hyslop alluded, it is important that we are clear about what we are talking about. If we are determined to identify priorities—and I have just outlined what must be the priority for politicians—we must accept that other, broader political issues should be considered and addressed at another time. I accept that Fiona Hyslop has articulated issues that are genuine for the purposes of debate, but I believe that such issues are genuine for debate, for example, as we approach local council or, for that matter, Scottish Parliament elections, when people can make their own judgment about what the different political parties offer and consider whether their policies serve their aspirations and create the kind of Scottish society they need. It is dangerous to try to cloud the issue of the provision of an overdue facility with debate on more esoteric matters that might be legitimate matters for debate, but which in the germane consideration of what is needed now are no more than that. I shall briefly consider Alex Neil's contribution to the debate. Of course, Alex Neil's antipathy to private prisons and in particular to the manifestation of that system in Kilmarnock is legendary. In defence of the Kilmarnock prison, I  should say that when I visited it a couple of months ago I found so many positive features that I was anxious to ascertain how some of those features might be replicated elsewhere in the prison service. I quote from the 2002 Scottish Prison Service estates review: "It has been recognised by HM Chief Inspector of Prisons that Kilmarnock can deliver not only effective services, but can often be innovative. For example, this resulted in the formal recognition of twelve items of best practice in the formal inspection report (March 2001). This compared to eight at Edinburgh and four at Greenock, both of which had inspections during the same period." My impression of Kilmarnock prison was that the environment was beyond comparison with other prisons' estate. It was bright, modern and manageable. The prison population confirmed that they found it agreeable—in so far as it is possible to find a prison environment agreeable—and their morale seemed good. There is much to commend in the provision of private prison facilities in Scotland. Politicians urgently need to address what society needs now. In doing that, we must have strong regard to the best interests of prisoners—believe it or not—and we can do more and better for prisoners than we do just now.

Does the First Minister accept that the public perception in Scotland of the reclassification has been different from what he envisaged? Is he concerned that an organisation entitled the Purple Haze Cafe has interpreted the reclassification as a relaxation, which will undoubtedly incur greater demands on police time? How does he propose to assist the police in dealing with increased breaches of the law?

I am grateful to the Solicitor General for taking my intervention. It is quite important to establish just what principle we are talking about. Does she agree that, when we talk about the separation of powers, we are discussing the issue that I mentioned in my speech of the judiciary being neither compromised nor influenced by Government interference? That is the reality that we need to address, and the idea that structures obstruct such a process might be a red herring.

Will the member give way?

Does the member agree that it is extremely important never to patronise ladies who have attained positions in their sectors of activity on the basis of merit?

I, too, am pleased to take part in the debate, and I thank the Executive for ensuring that it is occurring early in the new year. The subject is an extremely important one. We recognise that any legislative change in respect of a supreme court will be the responsibility of Westminster, but it is vital from the Scottish standpoint that we influence the debate to secure the best outcome for Scots law, Scottish civil litigance, and, in relation to devolution issues, the Scottish people. At this early stage, I regard myself as departing pretty well totally from Nicola Sturgeon's argument. The nub of the issue is that the SNP is  not interested in a UK structure. Nicola Sturgeon said that she would like to get rid of the House of Lords and have what would be—however she might consider it—a completely insular system of law in Scotland.

I want to expand my point. I listened with, I think, a great deal of patience to Nicola Sturgeon and I am at an early stage in my argument. It seems to me important to recognise that it will be difficult to find a sustainable argument that bridges the political differences about what the suitable or sensible adjustments to the existing structures might be. I make that general point from the beginning. The general proposition in the Executive's motion is that the judiciary should be separated from the legislature. If that means that the judiciary should be free from Government interference or influence—or both—and should feel able to discharge its judicial obligations freely and impartially, there is not a scintilla of difference between my party and the Executive. What I do not know is whether that aspiration will be served by the proposal—in so far as it exists—to create a supreme court. It is just a proposal; there is no draft bill. I want to consider the process that has brought us to this point. I am not in the habit of conferring credit on the Scottish Executive, but if the Scottish Minister for Justice or the Lord Advocate had contemplated a change to our legal institutions, particularly to structures that have existed for centuries, I think that there would have been what is by now a familiar process. The First Minister would have given a well-trailed speech to a community. That would have been followed by a ministerial odyssey as his colleagues rushed off around Scotland to speak to people. Then we would have had a consultation process. We might even have had a general debate in Parliament on the proposed principles of change. Indeed, one of the justice committees might have been asked to undertake an inquiry. Finally, a bill would have been published. I probably would still have disagreed with the Executive, but at least a debate would have taken place, nobody would have been ignorant of what was proposed and an extensive range of views would have been exchanged before the parliamentary process commenced. What is proposed in the case that we are considering is one of the most substantial and radical reforms of the constitution and the British legal system for centuries. Has it proceeded on the report of a royal commission? No. Is it in response to an escalating wave of discontent  about the current system? Not as far as I am aware. The only specific instances of discontent that we have heard are that Nicola Sturgeon just wants rid of the House of Lords and the minister does not think that the current system is good. Is the proposed change a consequence of joint representations from the law societies of Scotland, England and Wales and their respective judiciaries? I do not believe so. As we are well aware, the proposals stem from a Cabinet reshuffle at Westminster last summer, which abolished the ministerial office of Lord Chancellor and created a vacuum that necessitated a consultation—of four months, no less—to consider how to replace structures that have been in place for centuries. I do not make my points in a mood of trite humour. It is important to understand the process that has brought us to this stage. Unless we are alert to the process's manifest deficiencies, we are in grave danger of coming to simple and, arguably, erroneous conclusions. I will consider briefly the current structures. The highest court of appeal for civil cases in Scotland is the Appellate Committee of the House of Lords. There are 12 law lords, of whom two are usually of Scottish origin. The special nature of Scots law and the need to protect that within the UK was enshrined in article 19 of the Act of Union 1707, which specifically excluded the jurisdiction of English courts over Scottish cases. That is not just a tedious historic statistic; it is one of the all-protecting guardians of the stature of Scots law. On a broader front, as members of the House of Lords, judges, like appointed bishops, are free to take part in debates. Far from regarding that as a deficiency, I think that it is an attribute. It is not a coincidence that many people consider the debates in the House of Lords to be well informed and eloquently argued and that that chamber benefits from the constituents of intellect, wisdom and experience. Under the current proposals, that will virtually be lost. Further, we should not underestimate the significance of judges' being able to express in debate views and opinions for the record. There will be no channel for that to happen under the new proposals. What I would like is specific evidence of how the current system is failing.

That depends on whether we accept that there is confusion. Nicola Sturgeon's argument is that there is. My argument, as I said in my earlier intervention on her, is that whatever the patent inconsistencies of the current system may  be, it works. All I am asking for is evidence that the system does not work; I have not had such evidence so far.

If Mr Swinney does not mind, I am getting a bit—sorry, I beg his pardon. I mean Mr Swinburne. I am getting just a little tight for time. I want to know where the instances of the judiciary being influenced by Government or of its impartiality being compromised under the present system are. Indeed, the evidence is to the contrary and is very dramatic and recent—the Hutton inquiry. Did the Prime Minister have difficulty in finding a robust, competent, independent figure to lead that inquiry under the present system? Of course he did not. I turn now to the proposed change in the appellate function for Scottish cases. Because the proposed new structure would exist predominantly to serve England and Wales, it is vital that its Scottish component should be based on an informed appointments system that is knowledgeable about the Scottish judiciary. The appointment of any Scottish judges or panel members should require, at best, the knowledge of the First Minister. Indeed, there is an argument that the appointments should emanate from the Judicial Appointments Board for Scotland and not from the proposed appointments commission. Surely a mechanism could be found to achieve that, because only in a structure such as that could there be confidence in the ability of the proposed new supreme court to determine Scottish appeals and devolution cases fairly and competently. I turn now to my amendment. On the effect on Scots law of appeal decisions emanating from any supreme court, it is essential that decisions that are appropriate only to England and Wales are not binding in Scots law—hence the amendment in my name. That simply reaffirms existing practice. We must make it crystal clear that unless specific provision is made, that will not happen. We are talking not just about a proposed neat construction of a supreme court; we are talking about a fairly massive dismantlement of the constitution, with all the precedents, practices and conventions that have attached to it, some of which now have the force of judicial precedent. I am unable to support the SNP amendment because, frankly, it is irrelevant to the debate. We have a legal system that operates within a UK framework. Some law is appropriate only to Scotland, but UK-wide law covers other issues and it seems—

I am sorry, but I am running out of time and, in fairness to the Presiding Officer, I must proceed.

In that case, with the Presiding Officer's usual compassion and indulgence, I will let Nicola Sturgeon in.

No, I am not, but I am grateful to Nicola Sturgeon for raising a valuable point. I have always felt that there is a genuine distinction between criminal law and civil law in Scotland. Nicola Sturgeon will be aware that the situation that, as I understand it, induced the creation of the criminal appeal court in Scotland was the Oscar Slater case, which demonstrated the deficiencies of the system at that time. However, in Scotland criminal law is significantly founded upon common law, which is completely different from that in England and Wales, and on the principles of Justinian, which are also irrelevant to the legal system of England and Wales. Therefore, I have always been able to make a complete separation between how the two systems in Scotland are treated. The criminal appeal court in Scotland has worked well, and we must recognise that it was introduced—heavens above—getting on for nearly 80 years ago. I see no reason to disturb that court. We must also recognise that civil law in Scotland has developed and evolved in a manner that is to be expected. To return to my starting point on the SNP's position, we are where we are. We are within a UK framework and there are extensive areas of law that affect the whole UK. Therefore, I think that the SNP proposal is inappropriate and that, if it were adopted, it would result in the Scottish legal system becoming insular, as the Lord Advocate said. Interestingly—and I would have thought that the Scottish nationalists would applaud this—there have been appeal cases. The appeal of Donoghue v Stevenson in the 1930s, involving the famous snail in the ginger beer bottle in the Paisley café, determined such an important point of law that it was applied not just on a UK basis but worldwide. To me, that is a refreshing illustration of how significant Scots law is. Where an important legal principle is involved, because of what we all acknowledge to be the sound underpinning principles of Scots law, the benefit can be  conveyed to a wider audience than just Scotland and the United Kingdom. That application of the best principles of Scots law would not apply under the nationalists' proposal. In general, I do not consider that the Executive has made the case for change, but if change is to happen, vital safeguards must be incorporated to protect the Scottish interest. I move amendment S2M-828.2, to leave out from "it is" to end and insert: "in the event of a United Kingdom Supreme Court being created, the Scottish Executive needs to ensure both that Scottish judges are appointed to sit in all civil appeals from Scotland and that decisions of the Supreme Court in non-Scottish cases are not binding in Scots law except in so far as the law determining such cases is applicable on a United Kingdom basis."

Does the member agree that that has never stopped it from working extremely well?

Will the member give way?

The Executive has confirmed that the proposed supreme court, if introduced, would not affect criminal appeals in Scotland. It also said that early in the new year a debate would be held on that court, at which such issues could be more widely discussed. When will that debate take place?

I, too, welcome the spirit of the Executive motion. It is clear from the tone of the motion that the Executive no longer wishes to categorise young people as the villains of the piece, and I pay particular tribute to the minister for her remarks about that. However, in relation to youth justice, two adages come to mind: the road to hell is paved with good intentions; and hard cases make bad law. The Executive would do well to bear those two traditional maxims in mind. Although I draw comfort from the recognition in the Executive's motion that many good procedures, partnerships and initiatives exist—and the minister has spoken expansively about them—I am distinctly uneasy about the Executive's enduring obsession with new law. In the field of justice, the Executive has been producing new measures with a fervour that makes the proverbial sausage machine look like a rusting relic. It is not for me to pre-empt what the Local Government and Transport Committee, the Justice 2 Committee and the Communities Committee will say in their stage 1 reports on the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill—a bill that will certainly affect youth justice—but the Executive will be aware that support from witnesses to the  committees has been less than resounding. Given the recent publicity surrounding the evidence from the police on the proposed power of dispersal, I hope that, somewhere in the recesses of Executive intellect, common sense will be found and will prevail. Nicola Sturgeon was a little uncharitable to the new hairy Hugh Henry. I have never impugned his intelligence; I just though the beard was a disguise. To dwell on one aspect of the bill on antisocial behaviour is to distract from what is an important debate. Delivering a quick and effective youth justice system is the aspiration of everyone, but clarity is required—in determining who is doing what and the effectiveness of doing it. There must be adequate resource to underpin the whole structure of delivery. [ Interruption. ]

I have not often been serenaded during my speeches in this chamber, Presiding Officer. [ Laughter. ] The support is very welcome. In youth justice, our focus has to be on the children's hearings system. If, as has been demonstrated by evidence from the United States, early intervention is the key to dealing with young offenders—and particularly with persistent young offenders—our children's panels have an immensely important role to play. I should like to pay tribute to the many dedicated men and women who voluntarily contribute to that important task throughout Scotland. In this debate, I want us to consider what we might do to assist them in delivering a quick and effective youth justice system. Not only is that our fundamental obligation to society, but we must ensure that our panel members remain motivated and interested and have the satisfaction of knowing that their contribution is not only vital but valued. There has to be clarity in the role that we expect our children's hearings to perform. To assist in creating that clarity, I would remove from children's hearings persistent 14 and 15-year-old offenders and would bring them before the youth courts—although I know that that proposition does not meet with the agreement of other members in the chamber. I welcome the extension of the pilot scheme for youth courts to Airdrie, as announced by the minister. There is a strong argument for retaining adult courts as the forum for 16 and 17-year-olds. If people are, regrettably, law breakers by that age, they are adults and fully aware of their circumstances. Therefore, I would consider the adult court system to be appropriate. In connection with that, I refer to the issue of secure places. Persistent offenders will require to be placed in secure accommodation. We need  those places now; we have needed them since late in September 2002 when the Scottish Executive promised them. The matter is overdue for consideration. Nicola Sturgeon is correct: many children's hearings are desperately frustrated by their inability to locate a secure place when that is the appropriate destination for a young person before the panel.

That is undoubtedly a positive contribution to what is needed, but "plans" and putting things "on track" are not the delivery of what is required now. There must also be clarity in the relationship between children's panels and the partnership agencies with which the ministers have to work. The minister referred to that issue. One of the most important agencies is local government. Reference has been made to the Audit Scotland report of 6 November 2003, which was a follow-up to its original report on offending by young people. The findings in the report are troubling. I will not rehearse them in detail, as the minister is familiar with them. The particular issues that were identified show that there are huge deficiencies in the system. It is small wonder that our children's panels become so frustrated in trying to do the very important job with which we have charged them. In short, none of what the Audit Scotland report disclosed will lead to quick, firm and effective youth justice. I must also pose the question whether it is acceptable that the report, "Children's Hearings Representative Group Report on Children's Hearings Time Intervals 2002-03", which was published on 16 December 2003, found that only one third of local authorities deliver a service on time. The minister alluded to that, but the report is recent and it is a matter of great concern that the disclosures are coming forth. It is troubling that no agency in Scotland met all of its targets in all areas. The delivery of police force targets invites comment and only one local authority met the target for its assessment of young people. The Scottish Children's Reporter Administration met none of its standards in any area. We cannot just skate over those figures and pretend that the deficiencies are not there.

I am sorry, but I am a little short of time. I think that the Presiding Officer expects me to make progress.

How charitable.

I welcome the minister's comment, which is reassuring. I urge the Executive to expand the disposals that are available to children's panels and youth courts, including weekend and evening detention, community service, supervised attendance orders and, if necessary, drug treatment and testing orders. Sadly, drug abuse and addiction know no barrier between the ages of 16 and upwards. Unfortunately, as we know, there are also tragic cases of young people below the age of 16 who are addicted to illegal substances. I am heartened that the Executive has come round to the Scottish Conservatives' view that electronic tagging is an appropriate disposal in some cases. There is also no doubt about the effectiveness of community mediation, which is the reason why I made reference to it in my amendment. Interestingly, community mediation as a phrase is not mentioned in the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill. However, it offers intervention before an individual is criminalised. It is an important element in the field of youth justice and it should be further explored as a worthwhile resource. Community mediation must be part of what should be an holistic approach. My amendment is deliberately focused on the children's hearings system for that reason. The children's hearings system is the pivot of anything else that we try to achieve in the field of youth justice. I welcome the debate. Although the minister has gone some way towards explaining where improvements are being sought and endeavour is being discharged in trying to make progress, which is positive, it is clear that a great deal is still to be done. I move amendment S2M-762.1, to insert at end: "; in particular considers that at the heart of effective youth justice is the Children's Hearings system; calls, therefore, for the Children's Hearings system to be better resourced with a wider range of disposals in order that  hearings can perform a more effective role in relation to youth justice and assist in the wider function of community mediation, and further calls on the Scottish Executive to alleviate the burden on the Children's Hearings system by sending persistent 14 and 15-year-old offenders to youth courts, while keeping 16 and 17-year-olds in adult courts."

I would like to correct a piece of misinformation. The Tories do not want to send 14 and 15-year-olds to adult courts; we want to send them to youth courts.

To ask the First Minister when he next plans to meet the Prime Minister and what issues he intends to raise. (S2F-460)

When the First Minister does get an opportunity to meet the Prime Minister, I hope that they will consider the lessons that all of us can learn from the proceedings of the Soham murder trial, which has implications right across the United Kingdom. One of the key lessons of that tragic and horrific case is the importance of the exchange of information between police forces not only in England but throughout the United Kingdom, as criminals do not respect boundaries. Can he assure me that, as the inquiry that David Blunkett announced proceeds, he will liaise with the Home  Office to ensure that there is an effective system for the exchange of information throughout the United Kingdom?

I thank the First Minister for what was not only a politically reassuring message but one that will offer considerable reassurance to the people of Scotland. I hope that he will agree that it is not rafts of new regulations that are needed to prevent such tragedies from occurring in Scotland but a sensible application of existing regulations. I hope that he will also share my concern about the increasing pressure that is being put on the police force, for the best of reasons, in respect of the background checks that take up an enormous amount of police time. Will he undertake to consult the Minister for Justice and our chief constables to ensure that any individual in Scotland who has a pattern of behaviour like Ian Huntley's could not slip through the intelligence net?

If it is enacted, the proposed bill will change the criminal law of Scotland. I understand that the Minister for Justice will not lead the bill through the parliamentary process, following the example of the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill. Why is the First Minister bypassing the Minister for Justice on these important issues and, consequently, disregarding the justice committees as the proper mechanism for first scrutiny?

If the Tories are indifferent to the concept of communities, why do we advocate a policy that will protect communities by allowing parents to choose to keep schools open in their communities instead of being the victims of a centralised educational approach that is denying them freedom and opportunity?

It is my pleasure to contribute to this debate on the general theme of improving the provision of our public services. As David McLetchie has indicated, those services go to the heart of what the public in any civilised and  responsible society is entitled to expect. Nowhere is that more relevant than in the obligation of Government to preside over a safe society in which the rule of law is both respected and enforced. Few people, not even the Executive, would agree that we live in a safe Scotland in 2003. A crime is committed every 1.2 minutes and there is a violent attack every 32 minutes and a drugs-related death every day. Nearly a quarter of Scots do not feel safe when walking alone in their neighbourhoods after dark. Depressingly—and contrary to what Mr Rumbles was saying—all serious crime is up since 1999 and, with the exception of fire-raising and vandalism, it is up dramatically since 1997. The EU average of crimes per 100 people is 5.9. In Scotland, it is 8.3, which is exceeded by Denmark, where it is 9.4, and England and Wales, where it is 9.8. As I have previously demonstrated in this chamber, all the evidence from New York and, indeed, Middlesbrough confirms that crime levels fall in the face of neighbourhood policing. Despite the best efforts of a committed and courageous Scottish police force, we do not have neighbourhood policing. The first people to confirm that would be the police officers themselves. That is why my party is calling for an expanded neighbourhood policing presence. That will be the first step towards restoring the rule of law and respect for the rule of law, reassuring the law-abiding majority that they have a role to play and deterring the potential law-breakers from their pattern of crime. Another vital component in the delivery of law enforcement is the combination of accountability and visibility, as Mr McLetchie's motion suggests. According to the Executive's publication "Narrowing the Gap", published in 2002, only 22.6 per cent of the total number of Scottish police officers are available for patrol or to attend incidents at a given time and, disturbingly, only 4 per cent of duty time is allocated to foot patrol. That means that only 138 police officers are on foot patrol across Scotland at any one time. That useful report also said that more than 80 per cent of people agree that an enhanced targeted and visible police presence would make people feel safer and would reduce crime. However, that is not happening and that failure is fuelling frustration, cynicism and disillusionment. The current governance regime for the police force is provided by the Police (Scotland) Act 1967, which provides for a tripartite sharing of legal responsibility for policing by police authorities or joint boards, chief constables and the Scottish ministers. As we know, many of those boards  straddle three or more local authority areas and, to most members of the public, the members of the board and the chairman are unknown and completely anonymous. There is a vacuum between the public, who know the kind of policing that they want, and the providers of that policing. That is why my party argues that police board conveners should be directly elected at the same time as we elect our councils.

I thank Dr Murray for her helpful intervention. That is the situation in England and Wales, where police board authorities contain people other than councillors. At least in Scotland we have an ex facie democratically elected structure. That is why we think that an improvement in the element of accountability could genuinely be achieved by making only the chairman the directly elected member.

I hope that Cathy Jamieson will forgive me, as I want to expand the point that Dr Murray has mentioned. The two elements are visibility and, importantly, accountability. All members would regard any attempt to politicise the police as regressive and profoundly undesirable. That is where a delicate balance has to be struck. Directly elected police board conveners would have a public mandate, particularly on boards that are made up of councillors from other local authorities, and they would have the authority to drive forward neighbourhood policing plans and would be accountable to local people. Dr Murray and the minister might be interested to know that the position is not peculiar to the Scottish Conservatives. Her Majesty's Government's consultation paper "Policing: Building Safer Communities Together", which was published on 4 November, seeks views on wholly directly elected police boards south of the border. When we seek to empower people in relation to health and education, it is logical and desirable that we ensure that they have the same influence in relation to procuring a safe society.

Will the member give way?

I, too, pay tribute to Trish Godman for allowing us to acknowledge the work of Unity Enterprise and in particular the positive and constructive work that it has carried out at Glasgow airport, as the motion carefully describes. The charity was established in 1989. However, if we are being honest, I suspect that many of us have been unaware of the good work that it does. It was, of course, initially an inter-church initiative, which gave it strength when it was first formed. I have been struck by the extensive work that the charity has discharged, and not only in relation to the age groups and categories of young people that it helps. It has been forward looking in considering the issue of integration with society. In respect of its core values, it states: "We believe that every person has an equal right to participate in the economic and social life of our society." Nobody would disagree with that, but the challenge sometimes is how to give effect to that aspiration: the charity demonstrates impressively exactly how effect can be given to that. I am aware from my experience with the Prince's Scottish Youth Business Trust—which is also a charity—that some of the most interesting developments for young people come in the most unexpected ways. Often, they happen because young people in particular circumstances and situations are provided with a medium through which they have an opportunity to show what they are capable of contributing. They are given a framework within which that contribution is encouraged and in giving that framework, we hope to nurture their confidence in how they will proceed through life, and contribute to society. Trish Godman will be aware that I have not signed the motion. There is a reason why I have not done so, to which I shall come. My remarks are not meant in any discordant sense, but I have four slight concerns that I thought it necessary to articulate. It seems to be important that the voluntary and charitable sector is seen to be independent and not to be associated with the Executive. I say that for no narrow party-political reasons. One of the strengths of the voluntary and charitable sector is that participants feel that they are doing their own thing. Equally important, perhaps, is that the public acknowledges that they are doing their own thing and are not being propped up by the Executive, which could have a negative effect on perception of them. It is important that the charities are autonomous in their operation. It is right that Unity Enterprise should make decisions about how it wants to work, where it wants to work and how it should set about discharging its responsibilities  and implementing its aspirations under its charitable purposes. The invitation at the end of the motion is for the Scottish Executive and other appropriate agencies to "do what they can in order to extend similar services to other airports, bus terminals and railway stations." However, I am not sure that I think that that is the role of the Scottish Executive. Although it is certainly the role of the charity to do that—Unity Enterprise is to be commended for what it is doing and encouraged to investigate the possibilities—I do not think that it is appropriate for the Executive to play a lead role in that task. It is important to mention another implication. Throughout Scotland local charities do extremely good work. It is important that we recognise and respect their independence and their right to contribute to their communities in whatever ways they think are fit. We need to be careful, before we set out too prescriptive a direction for any one charity, that we do not prejudice the work of other charities. I thank Trish Godman genuinely for bringing Unity Enterprise to Parliament's attention. I thoroughly applaud the work that the charity does, but I felt it necessary to express my slight concern about the last three lines of the motion.

Does the minister concede that for as long as crimes go unprosecuted, for as long as there are delays in court procedures that lead to adjournment and postponement of cases and for as long as there is doubt in the minds of members of the public about the number of criminal activities that end up with a conviction, the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 will have limited practical application? Does that concern him?

I am genuinely interested in Jackie Baillie's speech. Has there been any opportunity to consider with the local legal profession its interaction in the provision of that service?

I have an important point of information. I have tried to resist the temptation to defend the legal profession against charges, but I must say that no responsible lawyer would ever advise a client to embark on litigation without first obtaining the fullest explanation of what the foreseeable costs could be and discussing with the client how those costs could be met. We do a disservice to responsible lawyers if we create the impression that that is not the case.

I declare my interest as an enrolled solicitor in Scotland, a member of the Law Society of Scotland and a partner in a Glasgow law firm. It might be tempting for someone in such a position to approach the debate as a lawyer who advocates a case for himself or herself, but given the old adage that a lawyer who acts for himself has a fool for a client, I shall deploy a different tack. I shall also try to minimise the Mogadon effect that is usually attendant on any discussion of the law or related matters.

In no way do I impugn Ms Sturgeon's speech. To the average individual, the motion has the same degree of excitement as has watching rain run down a window. Lawyers have tended not to be high in the public affection stakes and the provision of legal services is pretty dry fare as a topic for discussion. Of course, that is until an individual needs advice, when a different attitude prevails. The debate is timely. Devolution has offered an opportunity to consider in detail the provision of legal advice and information and the delivery of legal aid. Post devolution, some interesting information has emerged. The strategic review that the minister announced on 24 October this year is welcome. It provides a sensible opportunity to take stock. A strong, independent and flourishing legal profession will be a core component of any civilised and democratic society. For decades and centuries, Scotland has been revered for possessing such an attribute. On the broad front, we have a legal system that has been not only admired, but emulated abroad and, interestingly, south of the border in some respects. The Executive and the Parliament should be the passionate and vigorous custodiers of that gem. In passing, I say that I have concerns about the proposed supreme court that is being considered at Westminster. I urge the Executive not to spare the baring of its teeth about that proposal if the danger exists that the court of ultimate appeal for civil matters in Scotland will move from the judicial independence of the House of Lords to the more questionable structure of a political creation whose  purpose and relevance to Scotland are less than clear. Our independent legal system has created a legal profession that, for decades and centuries, has been an important source of fearless and independent advice to generations of clients and has played a significant part in maintaining a strong and cohesive civic community throughout Scotland. Therefore, in any consideration of the provision of information and advice throughout Scotland, we need not only to identify what the public needs—and how best to serve those needs—and to distinguish between general provision and the specific requirement to procure legal advice, but to be mindful of nurturing and safeguarding the best elements of a strong and independent legal profession. As has been indicated, we need to distinguish between the public's needs. At any one time, members of the public may need guidance, advice and information. However, those needs might not be the same as the requirement to have access to legal advice under Scots law. At the simplest level, people may need to speak to someone about debt, faulty goods or services. They might require information about the court system or court procedures. They might need guidance about where they can go to seek the help that they need for their specific problem. In fact, in the first instance, all of those matters could be—and very often are—addressed by a variety of solutions. For example, tribute should be paid to citizens advice bureaux, law centres and the Executive's public information websites on justice. However, the Executive does not have a simple website that contains basic facts, such as what happens if someone reports a crime, the role of the police or the procurator fiscal, what court procedure involves or what powers the court has on conviction. All of those are areas on which the public would welcome more information. There is merit in continuing to develop those facilities. The four pilot projects under the Legal Aid (Scotland) Act 1986, which involve partnerships with local agencies throughout Scotland, are an interesting contribution to the debate. The pilots should be rigorously assessed so that they can inform future thinking. It would also be worth while to examine the community legal service that is being developed by the Executive, again on the basis of four pilot partnerships. Similarly, the in-court advice service, which has been available in Edinburgh sheriff court since 1997, merits examination in the light of the announcement in March of this year that the service was to be the subject of further pilots.  The Executive is to be commended for being prepared to test those innovations. However, it should not be scared to review how they operate if the evidence shows that they are not meeting need.

I do not accept that that is an accurate description. Interestingly, it was a Conservative Government that piloted the concept of the Public Defence Solicitors Office. I will address that subject later in my speech. The Conservative Government is to be congratulated on trying to operate a legal system at a time when a population with a burgeoning expectancy of advice and assistance sought recourse to that advice and assistance. I talked about the difficult-to-define area that arises when a member of the public strays from needing general advice into territory where legal advice will be required. I want to emphasise to the minister that, although a bridging presence is essential for many people, it should be regarded as just that—a bridging presence. The next destination is always going to be a solicitor who is competent to give independent advice and who is regulated by a rigorous mechanism in respect of their conduct, the handling of their clients' finances and the advice that they give. That mechanism is in place solely for the consumer protection of the client. The public is entitled to independent advice that is given without fear or favour, and that advice demonstrably available from a solicitor in private practice. The public might question whether the same independence could exist in a publicly-funded community provider. Such a provider might feel an understandable inhibition about challenging the state or a quango or—indeed—the activities of other public sector providers. One area in which legal advice is definitely required is when someone has been charged with committing a crime. I made mention of the Public Defence Solicitors Office. The extension of the service to Glasgow and Inverness offers a valuable opportunity to assess how the service is working. The extension of the service should be robustly examined and analysed. I hope that in its strategic review, the Executive will regard the Law Society for Scotland as a  partner and not as an adversary. The Law Society has a great deal to offer.

I am equally happy to hear that reassurance, for which I thank the minister. Protection is available to members of the public when they use a solicitor. That comparable protection—

I am running behind time and as I have been fairly generous about allowing interventions, I would like to continue. On the important issue of the protection that is available to the public when using a solicitor, I observe that comparable protection is not available to the public when it procures services from an unregulated sector of advisors, such as claims companies. I suggest that that area should be considered under the strategic review. It is necessary to be clear that legal aid is the funding mechanism available to people who require legal advice under Scots law and fundamental principles must apply to that. The solicitor is entitled to a proper rate for the job and the client is entitled to know that the solicitor has experience in the relevant area of work and that the advice will be delivered in an efficient, competent and understandable manner. Once again, information about eligibility levels for legal aid can be provided on websites or in community locations. When legal aid is provided from public funding, the public, the Executive and the Scottish Legal Aid Board are entitled—not unreasonably—to evidence of the provision of quality advice. In that respect, a quality assurance system is desirable, but not at the price of the system being bureaucratically oppressive or disproportionately expensive for the solicitor to comply with. I make a final entreaty to the Executive. I ask the Executive to treat with the same disfavour as the odour from a bucket of rancid fish a legal services commission. The Legal Services Commission in England and Wales is a monolithic, regressive structure. There is no need for it in a country the size of Scotland and we can do better here. The debate has to take place against the backdrop of public confidence in our legal  profession and in our legal system. Recent evidence in that respect is discouraging. If the public is to be reassured that those components can work well and are strong, we must advertise our criminal justice system far better than happens at present. We need to restore that confidence, which is why in drafting the amendment that I lodged, I chose carefully text that I used. I thank the Presiding Officer for his tolerance. I move amendment S2M-685.1, to insert at end: "; acknowledges, however, that improving confidence in our justice system means more than ensuring that people get legal advice, but is about creating a system of criminal justice in Scotland which works and in which the public has confidence, and therefore calls for an end to delays in cases coming to court, an end to automatic release of prisoners and the introduction of proper public accountability within our police forces."

Will the member take an intervention?

I am grateful to the member for giving way. I just want to offer a minor point of information. I was careful in my phrasing; I talked about "tougher court sanctions", which are not the same as tougher sentences. I was referring to the fact that, with automatic early release, the sentence imposed is not the sentence served. The repeat pattern, which to me is the profoundly disturbing aspect of domestic abuse, would be addressed if the miscreants and perpetrators realised that the penalties that the courts could impose were real and offered a deterrent effect.

I am struck by what Mr Gorrie says about the attitude of the police to teenage sons. If Mr Gorrie has more information about that, the chamber would welcome a slight expansion of his comments. I confess that I was unaware of that attitude. If what he said is true, that is appalling.

It is not with pleasure that I take part in the debate, but with a sombre sense of awareness that violence against women and domestic abuse are still the reality for far too many families in Scotland. On a highly-charged issue such as this, it is important that we consider the facts, disturbing and alarming though they are, because from them we may be able to reach some conclusions to instruct us, as politicians, about what we should be trying to do. Reference has already been made to statistics, according to which more than 36,000 incidents of domestic abuse were recorded in Scotland in 2002. That is the equivalent of 99 incidents of domestic abuse a day, which all of us would agree is a very troubling statistic. The Executive's statistics show that domestic abuse is increasing. Even more alarmingly, the number of incidents against the same victim is increasing, highlighting that more women are trapped in abusive situations. It is that pattern that I want to consider in more detail. For the period 1 April 1999 to the end of 1999, 33 per cent of victims of domestic abuse had been involved in previous incidents. For the year 2000, the proportion in that category had risen to 42 per cent. For the following year, 2001, that category had risen again to 49 per cent and, sadly, for 2002—by which time, the number of recorded instances was more than 36,000, as Nicola Sturgeon said—the number in the previous incidents category had reached 50 per cent. I do not think that anyone in the chamber is comforted by that; all of us are deeply disturbed by that pattern. Nicola Sturgeon raised an important point about the relationship between reported incidents and prosecution. I suggest that we should be careful before we lurch to simplistic analysis of the problem or simple solutions to it. I know, from my years in practice as a solicitor, particularly when I had occasion to handle matrimonial work—some of which involved very distressing instances of this type—that one of the  most difficult issues to surmount is persuading the abused person to go forward with a court case. Calling the police provides immediate reassurance and comfort and is the first step in dealing with a threat to safety or security or a threat to children. However, for many reasons, victims are understandably concerned about proceeding to criminal prosecutions. We must be sensitive to that. A domestic abuse victim's situation is unique. We must approach it with encouragement and, as the minister said, a combination of procedures that shows the victim that he or she is not alone and that the procedures and facilities out there can give help and support. I will return to the statistics, about which I am especially concerned. All parties in the Parliament have made a genuine attempt to bring to public attention the enormity of the issue and to invoke measures to increase support for the victims of such abuse, including the "National Strategy to Address Domestic Abuse in Scotland" and "Preventing Domestic Abuse: A National Strategy". The motion refers to the work of the national group to address violence against women, which is another welcome initiative. Of importance is the Protection from Abuse (Scotland) Act 2001, which the Parliament passed with all-party support. All that is commendable, but when the Executive's research report on the 2001 act shows that many victims were not aware of it, it is clear that much still has to be done. I have reluctantly reached the inescapable conclusion that a culture remains in Scotland in which, for some cowardly and contemptible individuals, violence against spouses and partners—if behind closed doors and in the privacy of the home—is acceptable. The Parliament should collectively condemn that barbaric, primitive and repugnant culture. For as long as it endures, Scotland is stained and diminished. Is it a coincidence that, as domestic violence has increased, serious crime in Scotland has gone out of control, as the figures that were released yesterday show? I regret to say that that is not a coincidence. We have a wider crime culture that only enhanced law enforcement and tougher court sanctions will address. I realise that the minister is not responsible for the justice portfolio, but I suggest that the Executive is collectively derelict in respect of its obligation to maintain wider law and order in our society. If law and order appears to be dissembling, there is—sadly—an inevitable implication for domestic abuse. As politicians, we need to send out from the Parliament a message to victims, their children and their wider families that we have the political resolve to rid Scotland of this curse and to support victims with help, advice and practical measures. I welcome the minister's obvious commitment to  attaining that objective. On domestic violence, we need to improve the transmission and dissemination of the messages of condemnation to perpetrators and of support to victims. We need to get those messages to where victims are, bring information to them about available help and advice and tell them what practical measures are on offer. Two obvious examples of such measures are refuges, which I praise, and the proposed pilot domestic abuse courts. It is important that the procedures are dealt with through the sheriff court system and it is vital to ensure that procedures are as swift and efficient as possible, because otherwise, we shall discourage victims from taking to the criminal process their rightful charges against perpetrators. The Vulnerable Witnesses (Scotland) Bill will also have an important role to play. I commend to the minister an initiative that my party launched at UK level last Christmas, when 10,000 posters about domestic violence that carried helpline numbers from Women's Aid and the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children were placed in general practitioner surgeries, hairdressers' salons, police stations and other locations where women could discreetly write down the numbers and seek help. Why do we not consider our own Scottish version of those posters, which could include the number of the domestic abuse helpline? That would give hope to victims at this pressure-point time of year—that is another factor of which we are all conscious. Such posters would also serve notice on perpetrators that no longer are their evil deeds invisible behind closed doors and that their nasty little secret culture is being brought to an end. I am aware that legislative proposals at Westminster may include a register of those who are convicted of domestic abuse and that the Executive may be interested in replicating that proposal in Scotland. I urge considerable caution in examining that. I have referred to one difficulty that has dogged the prosecution of domestic abuse cases—victims' understandable reluctance, for many reasons, to bring criminal charges. If a victim felt that an additional penalty might attach over and above the court penalty, they might be uneasy about being responsible for that further imposition, especially if it could affect employability and stigmatise children. I support the motion but warn against complacency, which is why I lodged the amendment in my name. The statistics do not permit complacency and the minister acknowledged that honestly in her speech. I move amendment S2M-660.1, to insert at end: "but notes with grave concern the escalating pattern of  repeat victimisation highlighting the fact that more and more victims are trapped in abusive situations."

I seldom agree with much that the Executive says when I come to the chamber to take part in debates on law and order. I am sure that the minister's disappointment would be uncontained if I were to adopt a markedly different stance today. I shall, therefore, on the whole be predictably consistent by making some prickly introductory comments. To me, the Scottish Executive's approach to law and order is like a Christmas tree whose lights fail to come on. In Scotland, a crime is committed every 1.2 minutes. Since 1997, we have seen escalating increases in violent crime, vandalism and drugs-related crime. A quarter of Scots do not feel safe outside their front door. That means that there is little cause for Executive rejoicing. Increasing the number of police and ending automatic early release for prisoners would be a bright illumination of the gloom. In the meantime, I concede that the Vulnerable Witnesses (Scotland) Bill is a small but welcome glimmer. However, as long as potential witnesses remain discouraged by a lack of police in our communities, recurring delays in the criminal  justice system, inadequate resourcing of the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service and the prospect of convicted criminals getting automatic early release, there is a huge disincentive to the law-abiding public serving as witnesses.

The carefully dangled bait was not just tickled at, but swallowed in a most satisfying manner. I am glad that the minister raised the issue of police numbers. It is only because police numbers have plummeted under Labour that any increase looks dramatic. At the moment, we are marginally above operating levels for 1997. Although that is unimpressive in itself, it is even more disquieting when we consider the huge extra burden of responsibility that intervening legislation has placed on the police.

Nonetheless, it is immensely enjoyable. Presiding Officer, I am trying to accommodate your desire to keep the chamber occupied for the duration of the debate. I come now to territory that is a little more congenial to the minister. For witnesses who come forward and are vulnerable, the bill offers more structured and extensive support than has formerly been available. I echo the comments of Nicola Sturgeon and welcome that as a positive step. It is only part of a very big picture, but I am prepared to commend the bill on its merits. It is a worthwhile contribution to improving the court environment for vulnerable witnesses. Although I speak as a Conservative front-bench spokesman on this issue, I am also convener of the Justice 2 Committee, which was responsible  for stage 1 scrutiny of the bill and the ultimate publication of the stage 1 report. I take this opportunity publicly to thank our clerks for their invaluable support and guidance to the committee. They have shown remarkable capacity for unstinting work in the face of formidable time-scale challenges and displayed exemplary diplomacy in dealing with a convener of whimsical and carnaptious disposition. I am sure that the minister will not disagree with one word of that. I thank the members of the committee who are present for their constructive approach and the witnesses who made time to give evidence. As I have indicated, the general principles of the bill have my party's support. Although my colleagues will wish to address particular areas, I propose merely to comment on the broad aspects of the bill, as indicated in the committee's stage 1 report, that require the Executive's careful consideration and which I hope will merit specific comment by ministers at the winding-up stage. My first comment is a general housekeeping one—I am speaking as a lawyer who has practised in the Scottish courts—on the structure of the bill and the drafting, which is referred to in paragraph 90 on page 16 of the Justice 2 Committee's report. When the bill is enacted, it will be held in the hands of prosecution and defence lawyers or pored over by the presiding judge as arguments are addressed by solicitors. It is not user-friendly as a working tool in that environment. My plea is that the Executive has its drafting team examine the cross-references and consider whether greater clarity and transparency might be achieved by simply repeating ad longum the parts of the bill that are incorporated by cross-reference. It is extremely difficult to read the bill in a continuous manner as it is not cohesive. I turn to what is critical to the success of the bill, which has already been alluded to: the early identification of vulnerable witnesses. Although the bill will extend to civil proceedings, I think that everyone anticipates that the provisions will be invoked most frequently in relation to criminal proceedings. The first point of likely identification of a vulnerable witness in that context will certainly be at the stage of the police's initial involvement when an incident is first reported or investigated. That will then have an on-going implication for the transmission of information to the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service. The committee report acknowledges that other agencies will have a role to play, but the two vital components of the police and the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service in the criminal justice system will be the key to whether the bill will work without the introduction of further delays to the system. I draw to the minister's attention the  paragraphs on page 6 of the report that cover that aspect. The other component that is essential if the bill is to work is resource. The minister will be aware that the Finance Committee flagged up that aspect on page 38 of its report and the Justice 2 Committee has drawn particular attention to it in paragraphs 98 to 103 of its report. There are two important aspects to the resource and implementation issue. One is that the resource must be in place to deal with the immediate consequences of the bill when it is enacted. The other is that, given the phased implement of the bill, there must be total clarity on the part of the Executive in identifying the funds that are needed to meet its requirements. In the time available, I have dealt only with broad issues, which are of singular importance if the bill is to work. I welcome the Executive's comments on those aspects. Three specific matters are of concern to me. One, which Nicola Sturgeon raised, is the important matter of the fair trial element to which the Faculty of Advocates referred. I do not think that that is a meaningless exercise in semantics; the faculty made a genuinely important point and I would welcome its being given further thought. The application form to have someone considered a vulnerable witness should have within it the specific reasons why the applicant seeks to have that status accorded. That is important, because unless the other side knows why the application has been made and understands the reasons behind it, we build in the potential for delay and disputatious conduct in the procedural aspects of the case. Nicola Sturgeon also covered the rights of parties to a hearing, which is another important technical element. Subject to the comments that I have made, the bill is worth while and it will be helpful in encouraging witnesses to come forward. My party supports the general principles of the bill.

I welcome the opportunity to acknowledge the work of the former Justice 1 Committee in compiling such a full and informative report. This is an occasion on which it is helpful to consider not only a certain aspect of law and order in Scotland but the wider picture. Pauline McNeill spoke eloquently about the report and the current backdrop to it. Unfortunately, alternatives to custody fall to be considered only when people have committed crimes and have been convicted of those crimes and appropriate disposals have to be considered by the court. It is of paramount importance to meet head on the challenge of reducing crime in Scotland. We have a Scotland where a crime is committed every 1.2 minutes.

I thank Christine Grahame for drawing attention to my perhaps sloppy use of text. This is a Scotland where serious crime exists. Violent crime is up since 1997, vandalism is up since that time, and drugs-related crime is up 37 per cent over the period. Sadly, this is a Scotland where a quarter of our people do not feel safe outside their own front door. The most important question to be answered is why the Executive is not tackling that problem at grass-roots level by providing more police in our communities to catch those who commit crime and to deter those who are tempted. Our police numbers are now only marginally greater than they were in 1997, but many more obligations fall on our police, which take them out of operational duty. I have referred before in this chamber to the New York experience. We should draw from that the fact that in New York there is one police officer  for every seven recorded crimes, whereas in Scotland we have one police officer for every 27 recorded crimes. Of course, although by taking the same approach we could reduce dramatically the incidence of crime, we shall always have to consider appropriate disposals for those who commit crime. In my judgment, the court has to be the sole determinant of what is an appropriate disposal. As I have stated frequently, if that is a custodial sentence, the sentence served should be the sentence imposed and any element of remission should be earned. Indeed, one of the important views to come out of the Justice 1 Committee's report was the reflection of public attitudes to sentencing, which ranged from public backing for greater truth in sentencing to a lack of understanding by the public about early release, and an increase in cynicism about and distrust of the system. Among other disposals, we have fines, about which the Deputy Minister for Justice has been voluble. Inevitably, his press release focused attention on that issue, and it is to that issue that I wish to address my remarks. According to a parliamentary answer, the amount of outstanding fines in 2001-02 was £11,533,923. We know from the former minister Richard Simpson that many people expunge their fines by presenting on a Thursday morning, and they are out by Friday—in other words, there is a 24-hour write-off of liability, which is a very smart option. Incidentally, that process costs the taxpayer somewhere between £400 and £500. What is shocking is that non-payment of fines has reached that level.

Yes, I accept that there is a difference, but it is also relevant to assess in some quantifiable form the figures that we are talking about. The figure in the answer to the parliamentary question is, by any standards, a very significant figure, and it should not be forgotten by the Executive. We should also remember that the court has determined the fine having regard to the circumstances of the convicted criminal. The convicted criminal should then pay the fine, and non-payment should be robustly pursued by diligence. Statutory provision exists for that, as does statutory provision to allow for the deduction of fines from convicted criminals on benefit. The question that the public wants to pose is, how many extra police would have been provided if many of those fines had been paid or  ingathered? That is the question that the minister must answer. What effort has been expended on recovering fines? The Deputy Minister for Justice referred to that in his speech, and I know that he referred to it in an earlier interview, but there is little evidence to demonstrate how effective recovery processes have been, and whether they have been instigated to any extent. What is deeply disturbing is that, because of the apparent inertia in recovering fines, significant numbers of people have ended up in prison. Apart from the legitimate question of whether that is a sensible use of resource, sadly we seem to have fallen into a culture of, "Won't pay, see no need to pay and have no intention of paying. Go direct to jail." That may suit the publicity seekers of this world, such as Tommy Sheridan, but would not much more good be achieved if those fines were pursued—as the law provides for—and the prison option became academic? Supervised attendance orders, to which the minister referred, raise an important issue. A Conservative Government introduced those orders and affirmed them with the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 but, if I understand the minister's press release correctly, he proposes that supervised attendance orders will become mandatory if there is a fine default. That is objectionable. It is not the power of the Executive to interfere with the proper discretion of the courts.

If I may conclude, Presiding Officer, I was quite generous with my interventions, so I thought that I might get a little elasticity. It seems to me that the Executive, in purporting to deal with the problem, is not solving the obvious aspect, which is to do more to collect fines that are due. It is walking away from the real problem, which is how to cut crime in Scotland.

Is the minister concerned about the level of drug addiction among people who appear before the district courts in Scotland? Does he feel that adequate measures exist to bring those people into some system of rehabilitation and monitoring?

I am indebted to the Deputy Minister for Justice for his response. It is important to place within the public domain the fact that the minister has assured me that, when prisoners from England who are serving a minimum term on an unrestricted basis are transferred to Scotland, "There would be no reduction in the time to be served in such a case by virtue of being transferred to Scotland". Given that assurance, I am prepared to withdraw my concern about the motion.

I welcome the opportunity to debate the provision of a Scottish fire and rescue service, about which I am sure that there will be areas of common accord, not just in the chamber but in the service and among the public. It is the legitimate expectation of the public to have a well-manned, well-resourced and professionally operated fire service. Conversely, it is an obligation on the public never to take that service for granted, nor to underestimate the bravery, dedication and professionalism that is daily represented by the men and women in our fire brigades. Having experienced a serious fire, I have seen those attributes at first hand. It is an equally legitimate expectation of those men and women to work in an efficiently structured organisation that offers satisfying and worthwhile career opportunities. Again, however,  the men and women in the fire service have an obligation to acknowledge that, in a changing world with challenging demands and constant technological innovation, the fire service is no more immune than any sector, private or public, to the need for vision, change and flexibility in how its service is provided. Of course, as countless people in other sectors have found, those demands bring uncertainties, turbulence and disquiet. If there is to be positive progress with reorganisation, it is vital that the proposals are proffered in a rational and constructive manner, and that reaction and response to such proposals are delivered sensibly and objectively. I am sure that we are all agreed that there is no place for stridency, posturing or prejudice in that process. I accept that the minister is offering a genuine opportunity for debate on the issue. At first sight, the Executive's proposals seem to offer a constructive way forward. For example, the five core duties that have been identified seem to form a sensible acknowledgement of the undoubted changes to society and our environment that have taken place since the Fire Services Act 1947. However, lurking within the proposals are express or implied arrangements that merit careful examination. I will examine some of the express arrangements to which reference has already been made during the debate—the introduction of a national framework to provide strategic national direction, the establishment of a common fire services agency and the replacement of the current Scottish Central Fire Brigades Advisory Council with a strategic advisory group. By their nature, those proposals are heavily flavoured with centralised control and potential ministerial interference, which, to my party, is a retrograde step. I detect from what Nicola Sturgeon said that she favours the ministerial mantle of control, but that may be regressive. When the Executive sought covertly and at the last minute to repeal section 19 of the Fire Services Act 1947 with an amendment to the Local Government in Scotland Bill, my party voted against the amendment and the repeal on the sole basis of the ill-judged way in which the Executive introduced the matter. On the merits of the issue, it is our view that the repeal of section 19 of the 1947 act is to be welcomed, because it will end the process of bringing ministers into local decision making. It is about devolving power down to the front line and to those who deal with the hazards of the service, which is a principle that my party supports.

Yes, and I was comforted by the observations in that connection. I do not think that there is any objection to the need for the Executive to have a strategic overview of what it thinks is necessary for the domestic provision of fire services and, as has already been alluded to, for the possible implications of terrorist activity or, as Mr Morgan suggested, of activity on ferries. I accept that at some point there has to be a co-ordinating strategy to cope with that, but it remains to be seen exactly how the balance falls in relation to the details of those proposals. Sensible progress can be made—indeed, I think it is already being made—with a fully co-operative approach in partnership with all the stakeholders. Rather than be in any sense prescriptive, that may be a more constructive way forward. It is paradoxical that the Executive's proposals to which I have referred go against the grain of decentralisation and more local control by local fire service authorities. There are implied concerns in the proposals. For example, the integrated risk management plan reeks of centralisation but also presents an untested, and therefore unquantifiable, operational strategy for fire authorities. Frankly, far from managing risk, such a plan seems to me fraught with risk. It is essential that such a radical change to operational activity is piloted. By their nature, the proposals are heavily flavoured with centralised—[ Interruption. ] I am sorry, Presiding Officer—I have gone backwards in my speech. I am pleased to say that it made as much sense the second time as it did the first time. On the centralised nature of the proposals, my party's overriding concern is with the whole thrust of what is being contemplated. If one examines the practical framework within which the fire service in Scotland has to operate, a markedly diverse pattern emerges, which is partially attributable to the geography of Scotland and partially attributable to varying population densities. The 2001-02 report from Her Majesty's chief inspector of fire services for Scotland graphically illustrates that diversity. Of the eight brigade areas, geographical extent varies from Fife, with 1,323km 2 , to the Highlands and Islands with 31,348km 2 . After Fife, the second smallest geographical area is Central Scotland with 2,652km 2 , but while Fife serves 350,400 people and Central Scotland serves 278,000, the vast area of the Highlands and Islands serves 277,700 people.  Within that configuration, local decision making, local operational autonomy and flexibility are absolutely vital, which is why my party has a sense of suspicion and opposition to any framework that includes top-down targets and performance indicators and which interferes with the local autonomy of our fire services. That gets to the nub of the matter. I listened to what the minister said about the possible situation in respect of the number of fire brigades in Scotland.

I am short of time. I am sorry. If one examines the pattern that I have described, it can be seen that any reduction in the number of brigades could reduce the link between brigades and local communities, as well as allow for more control from the centre. That is worrying and explains why I lodged my amendment. I noted the minister's comments about that, but I repeat that Scotland's geography and its disparate population patterns militate against any cut in the number of brigades. As we take steps to modernise the fire service with improved working conditions, work satisfaction levels and career opportunities—all of which are vital—the time has also come for fire brigades to be recognised as the essential service providers that they are, like the police, the armed forces and prison officers. Our view is that strike action is no longer an option. A no-strike agreement should be an essential part of a modernised fire service in Scotland. I move amendment S2M-456.1, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: "notes that the consultation paper The Scottish Fire and Rescue Service: Proposals for Legislation builds on the responses received to the Scottish Executive's first policy paper; is concerned, while commending the engagement of the Executive with stakeholders to modernise the service and work together to provide greater impetus to protect the public from fire to reduce Scotland's poor record of fire fatalities, that the new National Framework, which includes centrally-driven top down targets, performance indicators, monitoring and guidance, will prejudice local operational flexibility, and calls on the Executive to confirm that it will not cut the number of fire brigades."

This debate is aptly entitled. Can there be many more antisocial, anti-fruitful or anti-functional forms of parliamentary proceedings than occupying MSPs for a whole day with no motion to address, no opportunity to lodge amendments reflecting different views and no vote to decide anything anyway? That is not a snide pop at you, Presiding Officer, because the topic is hugely important. It is a genuine comment on whether time in the chamber is being used for qualitative purposes or simply used just to pass the time. On the matter of antisocial behaviour and the current consultation process, the public may want to ask why the Scottish Executive seeks views on 21 proposals to deal with antisocial behaviour when we lack adequate policing and prosecuting resource to enforce existing laws. The public will certainly want to ask why politicians are wasting time talking instead of using time to do something. The Minister for Communities talks about a graduated approach and a ladder of intervention. She should tell that to the fed-up communities, the frustrated victims and the frightened pensioners who want action now.

Well, let that dialogue begin, Presiding Officer. I think that Cathie Craigie has misunderstood the objective of my criticism. I do not fault the consultation process or the undoubted desire of people in Scotland to play a part in it. However, as everyone here has been elected to take action, I question whether a debate such as this is the most sensible use of parliamentary time for a whole day. I am expressing a personal opinion, and clearly the Presiding Officer will have his own views on that, but I think that anyone watching these proceedings so far might have a degree of sympathy with what I am saying.

I shall continue, Presiding Officer. On their pre-election crusade, Executive ministers may have become latter-day converts to addressing antisocial behaviour, but the rest of us have been living in the real world for slightly longer. It is a real world inhabited by vandalism, graffiti, deliberate damage to property, the dumping of rubbish and litter, drunken and abusive behaviour, drug abuse, intimidation, harassment, nuisance from vehicles and sporadic acts of fire-raising. The question that has to be asked and which the Executive really needs to answer is, where has the Executive been? Antisocial behaviour did not just happen in the past few months. There has been an escalating situation—

I have taken a significant number of interventions so far and I need to make some progress. How can it be that the Executive has presided over a situation in which, in 2002, there were 94,924 acts of fire-raising and vandalism in Scotland, which is 20 per cent higher than in 1999, when the Executive took charge? Even more depressingly, the clear-up rate for those acts in 2002 was only 22 per cent. Antisocial behaviour is not some manifestation that came winging out of the ether in April this year, which is when the Executive seemed to stagger into awareness of what was happening. It has been there and has been getting worse. With latter-day converts, the danger is that the zeal of the conversion induces an ardour of passion to do things, to blame people, to see ogres and demons where none exist and to be utterly blind to such presences where they do exist. The Executive, predictably, has behaved true to form. Let us start with the urge to do things. There has been positively frenzied activity over the summer. The strategy for tackling antisocial behaviour was put out to consultation on 26 June. Ministers, with commendable nobility, gave up their summer recesses to race across Scotland visiting communities and discovering the novelty of listening, and of listening as they had never listened before, so we are told. It is no surprise that the consultation document has 21 proposals covering a multiplicity of activity, but there is one interesting omission. There is no considered analysis of existing law, whether that law is being adequately enforced and whether the range of powers available to courts, children's panels and social work departments is currently being fully deployed. Nicola Sturgeon has already alluded to that to some extent. My first criticism of that frenzied activity is that the Executive did not do the one thing that it ought to have done. I am not alone in holding that view. Julia Kennedy, antisocial behaviour manager at City of Edinburgh Council, said: "It is pretty hopeless introducing even more legal mechanisms and blocking up the system even more, if you can't get the ones you already have working as efficiently as you could."

In that case, the minister needs to discuss Julia Kennedy's use of language with her. To me, what Julia Kennedy said does not reflect a very warm view of the proposals in the consultation document. She is not alone. Grainia Long, the parliamentary officer for Shelter Scotland, whom the minister may have met in some other manifestation, has said: "There are already enough legal remedies to deal with anti-social behaviour—the Executive's own research shows that. What we see now are quick solutions that were presented before the election. We already have anti-social behaviour orders, which are very positive, but we are moving away from what is necessary." I would like to pick up on a point that Cathie Craigie made about antisocial behaviour orders during Nicola Sturgeon's speech. Between 1 April 1999 and 30 November 2001, only 127 antisocial behaviour orders were granted, many taking a very long time to be conferred by the court. Let us not get carried away by the dream that they are an instant solution to the problem. Let me now consider the second trap for the zealous convert: blaming people. The Scottish Executive, as is clear from the proposals, is pinning a significant amount of blame for antisocial behaviour on young people. It proposes to "encourage wider use of Acceptable Behaviour Contracts for children and their parents ... extend Anti-Social Behaviour Orders to those aged 12 to 15 ... strengthen the range of options available to Children's Hearings for dealing with cases of anti-social behaviour ... introduce flexible Parenting Orders ... extend the availability of electronic monitoring for under-16s ... ban the sale of spray paint to under-16s", and, with reference to under-age drinking, it proposes to "give the police tougher powers to enter and close licensed premises." With reference to her response to my earlier intervention, I have to tell the minister, as someone whose family ran licensed premises for many years, that the greatest fear my parents had as licensees was that they might lose their licence because of breaching the law in relation to the terms and conditions under which the licence was granted.

There are two issues. One is the current system of granting liquor licences, which is a local authority responsibility. The other is enforcement by police of the law as it stands.  Many existing crimes and offences by licensees or by other people acting under their authority and instruction can be dealt with, but the police have to be on hand to be alert to offences that may be taking place. Not for one moment do I think that all young people under 16 are law-abiding little angels—some are not—but neither do I accept that the predominant perpetrators of antisocial behaviour are such young people. Much of the behaviour so rightly deplored by people in communities throughout Scotland, and graphically referred to by the Minister for Communities, is attributable to people over 16. When the Executive's woolly analysis descends to such dubious populism as giving the police power to disperse young people just because there is a group of them, I think that we are getting into very dangerous territory. Young people are as entitled to their freedom as anyone else is, and only if they are committing an offence should the police intervene. Otherwise, politicians are becoming no more than the licensed harriers of young people, with the police as hapless intermediaries. That is a recipe for festering resentment. Of course, if those young people—or any group of persons—are committing an offence, before they can be dealt with under the existing law the police, rather than sitting remotely, have to be there to deal with the matter. The Executive clearly had no difficulty in conjuring up ogres and demons where none existed but, disturbingly, has been blind to where the real ogres and demons exist, which is in the failure to resource the police adequately and let them be a neighbourhood presence, responsive to local needs and demands, and in the failure to resource the prosecution facility adequately, to ensure that crimes that are detected by the police are prosecuted.

The minister has misunderstood what I identified as an ogre and a demon. As will be clear from the Official Report , the lack of adequate policing is an ogre and a demon. Antisocial behaviour is a huge problem. Like other members, I have been the victim of antisocial behaviour. When that has been dealt with, it is the local accessibility of the police that has been the sole determining factor in enabling it to be dealt  with. I recently referred to the compelling example offered by neighbourhood policing in New York. When police are part of, are known to and work with the community, crime is more readily detected, criminal activity is more effectively deterred, and the willingness of members of the public to report and be witnesses in the prosecution of crime is more pronounced. My party has costed and demonstrated where we would find £25 million of new money to be made available to police forces as a supplement to police grant. In addition, we would give the police access to the £20 million allocated to the wardens scheme within the securing safe communities fund to facilitate neighbourhood policing. That alone would dramatically cut antisocial behaviour, without requiring consideration of even one of the 21 proposals in the consultation document. Doug Keil, the general secretary of the Scottish Police Federation, is quoted as saying: "From everything we know and understand about the public's desires, there is no call for community wardens. There is no public call, there is no police call. The call is for additional police officers."

I am sorry, but I have to make progress. I am getting near the end of my remarks. The call is for additional police officers. Doug Keil said that the proposals—£20 million for community wardens— "will not put an extra uniformed officer in the street and that is a missed opportunity." In considering whether the police, the prosecution services, children's panels and courts, if fully resourced, need additional powers, the Executive is once again ambivalent. Having raised its hands in horror at the prospect of electronic tagging being extended to under-16s, the Executive is apparently now at ease with proposing it. Of the 21 proposals, that is one that my party does support. However, it must not be used as an alternative to placing young criminals in secure accommodation, if that is deemed the most suitable way of dealing with the worst offenders. There are other disposals that could be considered. Weekend and evening detention, community service, and supervised attendance orders all need to be explored. Presiding Officer, I have been very generous with interventions—

One of the most important  influences in dealing with young offenders is early intervention. I think that the minister and I are in agreement on that. Before the Executive clutters up the statute book with new laws and burdens all our agencies with new responsibilities and obligations, all requiring more resource from the Executive, will it carry out a radical assessment of what laws are currently available that are not being used, and consider how the existing agencies can better be used? That will result in a dramatically improved capacity to deal with antisocial behaviour.

Does the minister accept that we already have rigorous laws on the sale of liquor from licensed premises, which cover the retail of alcohol to under-age people and which mean that the licence holder risks the loss of their licence? Why are those laws not implemented more rigorously?

Circumstances in the early 1990s in Scotland were totally different from circumstances nowadays. Nobody would disagree that circumstances were different everywhere in Europe then. The issue is not what the Tories feign to do. Does the member accept that, as we speak, the public in Scotland have a real concern about automatic early release and levels of policing?

Will the member give way?

rose—

I refute that in its totality. Interesting though the minister's history lesson may be, we are now in 2003. Scotland has a devolved Parliament that has responsibility for law and order, yet we are in a shocking state. The public knows that and wants the Scottish Executive to tell them what is happening. I ask the minister for a point of clarification on the sentencing commission. When the Minister for Justice confirmed that the commission will look at automatic early release, she said that it would do that only in respect of sentences of fewer than four years. Is that the—

I welcome the opportunity to bring this debate to the Parliament. If the issue that is hot on the lips of Scotland is the cost of the new Parliament building, the second most frequently voiced concern is undoubtedly the state of law and order in Scotland. In my experience of speaking to audiences throughout Scotland, I have found that two particular aspects of the problem are preoccupying the minds of the public—sentencing and policing. I therefore welcome the fact that those concerns have been recognised by the First Minister, who has rightly identified as critical the regaining of trust and confidence in our criminal justice system. Equally, I am pleased to propose for genuine debate the other issue that is critical to public confidence—policing in our communities. Implicit within the phrase "regaining trust and confidence" is recognition that somewhere along the line, trust and confidence have gone. Sadly, gone they have, in a big way. According to the 2001-02 Scottish household survey, a crime is committed every 1.2 minutes—in the time that this debate will take, 62 more crimes will have been committed—a violent attack takes place every 32 minutes, and every day there is a drug-related death. Disquietingly, 24 per cent of Scots feel not particularly safe or not safe at all when they are walking alone in their neighbourhood after dark. If we look at the Executive's crime statistics for 2002 and compare them with a base point of 1997, we see that rape and attempted rape are up 24 per cent, non-sexual crimes of violence are up 25 per cent and drug crime is up 37 per cent. From the prison statistics that are provided by the Scottish Executive, we see that that the number of persons who were recalled from supervision or licence is up 430 per cent and, according to the General Register Office for Scotland, drug-related deaths are up 70 per cent. Lawlessness in Scotland has reached unacceptable levels and public confidence has disintegrated. That leads to yet another undesirable and unquantifiable consequence, which is that many people no longer report crime because they believe that there is no point in doing so. People  are unconvinced that the perpetrators will be detected and charged. Even if that is accomplished, they believe that the subsequent court process will be tortuous and unpredictable. For many members of the public, the final straw is the prospect of automatic early release from prison. The public are as fed up with the situation as they are with the sight of ministers weeping, wailing and gnashing their teeth. The public want political leadership; they want action to be taken now. The first step towards re-engagement with the public is higher police visibility in our communities. The best intelligence in crime detection comes from forming a relationship with the community. The police cannot detect crime and deter criminal activity by sitting with a laptop in a command centre. Of course, strategic intelligence policing has a role to play, but not in isolation. The founder of the modern police force, Sir Robert Peel, said: "Police, at all times, should maintain a relationship with the public that gives reality to the historic tradition that the police are the public and the public are the police; the police being only members of the public who are paid to give full-time attention to duties which are incumbent on every citizen in the interests of community welfare and existence." That is why my party has several suggestions to make. First, we would place before the police an additional resource of £45 million to facilitate concentration on neighbourhood activity. If anyone seriously questions the wisdom of that approach, they need only look at New York. In the 1980s and 1990s, New York had an appalling record on crime and, interestingly, community policing had withered away. Rudolph Giuliani applied three principles to address the situation in New York: crime should be seen as a crime and not as a social statement; police should be deployed in the streets, working in partnership with communities; and the criminal justice system should work swiftly, with effective action being taken against reoffenders. During Rudolph Giuliani's eight years in office, crime fell by 60 per cent. Secondly, we would require all police boards, through their chief constables, to prepare a neighbourhood protection plan that was designed to deliver a zero tolerance approach to crime. Thirdly, we would require regular publication of localised crime statistics to highlight areas that were in need of attention and methods of best practice. Given that that information is currently available to crime prevention panels throughout Scotland, I fail to understand why it cannot be made available to the public at large. I call on the Scottish Executive to comment on our proposals; I urge its members to come forward  with their own thoughts. There is capacity for debate in this area and I hope for some constructive distillation of thoughts. It is not enough to reconnect the police with communities. I welcome the intention to reform High Court procedure in Scotland. Indeed, I am certain that the McInnes review will make proposals for summary court procedure. Those proposals, of themselves, will not reinstate public confidence in the criminal justice system. They are merely lubricants for a mechanism that has in part become rusted. The nub of the problem is that, for as long as automatic early release applies to sentences that are imposed by the courts, the public will continue to have a major problem with the criminal justice system. I agree that it was a Conservative Government that introduced that well-intended measure. The road to hell is indeed paved with good intentions—as the Liberal Democrats frequently find out. However, it was the Conservatives who, recognising that the measure was not working, abolished automatic remission in 1997. The Crime and Punishment (Scotland) Act 1997 laid down that early release would take place only if it had been earned by co-operation and good behaviour. It also set down that the maximum remission would be one sixth of the original sentence. However, the reprieve never happened. The Labour Government at Westminster repealed the provision, which is why we are where we are today. If anyone has any lingering doubts over the continuing nonsense about automatic early release, they need only look at today's newspapers. They will see that appeal judges have doubled the prison sentence of a stealth rapist from 18 months to three years, which is good news, as far as the public and I are concerned. However, the Executive's refusal to end automatic early release means that the sentence will be brought back to 18 months. I doubt that the public will understand the sense of that. The sentencing commission has been asked to look at automatic early release, but only for sentences of less than four years. What a nonsense that will create; criminal A, who is sentenced to five years will spend two years and eight months in prison while criminal B, who is sentenced to four years, will spend four years in prison. If the First Minister is serious about regaining the public's trust and confidence in the criminal justice system, his two priorities have to be neighbourhood policing and an end to automatic early release.  I move, That the Parliament welcomes the recognition by the First Minister of the need to "regain trust and confidence" in our criminal justice system; believes that a step towards restoring such confidence would be to introduce honesty in sentencing by re-enacting sections 33 to 41 of the Crime and Punishment (Scotland) Act 1997, which were repealed by section 108 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998; notes that public confidence has been further undermined by the lack of visible policing in too many communities, and calls on the Scottish Executive to consider how accountability to the public in the delivery of police services might be enhanced.

Is it not alarming that, instead of there being a presumption in favour of public safety, there is a presumption in favour of allowing persons who have been charged with serious crimes out on the loose?

To ask the First Minister whether there are any plans to issue operational guidance similar to that recently issued by Her Majesty's Government to police forces in England and Wales in respect of the possession of cannabis resin. (S2F-206)

I thank the First Minister for that response, which I found unexpectedly comforting.  On Tuesday evening, the First Minister did not hesitate to ripple his political pectorals before elements of the criminal justice system—I found it as unprepossessing as most people. Is he prepared to be similarly muscular with reference to the prosecution of persons in possession of cannabis and does he consider that existing prosecution guidelines in that respect are patently inadequate?

Will the member give way?

On Mr Brown's amendment, will he clarify whether he believes in no detention at all of children at Dungavel?

The motion is one of the shortest to have been lodged and it contains the simple proposition that children should not be detained in Dungavel. However, the SNP could have abbreviated that statement to the even simpler proposition that in Scotland, children should not be detained. Why did it not do that? It is because even the SNP recognises that in any society, children will, because of particular circumstances, need to be detained in a minority of distressing situations. No one in the chamber welcomes that but, of necessity, it cannot at times be avoided. It is not surprising that in its simplest form, the motion could not be advanced by the SNP, because it would be unsupportable. To give any proper consideration to the motion as drafted, the question must be asked why children are detained in Dungavel. The answer, of course, is that their parents are asylum seekers. However, they are not just asylum seekers—they are asylum seekers who merit detention because they fall into one of the following categories: doubt exists about their identity and the basis of the claim; there has been a failure to abide by the rules that govern temporary admission or temporary release; or removal of the asylum seeker from the United Kingdom is imminent.

On those asylum seekers' being among those who merit detention, the Scottish National Party's motion gets into difficulty, because either the party has no workable asylum policy—so that the Dungavels of this world would be redundant facilities to the SNP, whose regime would have no checks, balances, doubts or detention—or the party has some kind of policy on asylum seekers, the details of which are a closely guarded secret, but which acknowledges the need for a form of detention in some cases and draws the line at detaining children with their parents in those cases. Whichever option describes the Scottish National Party's position, that position is incredible. Few people in Scotland seriously think that we can have no asylum policy, or that we can operate an asylum policy without a facility for detention in some cases.

If the Scottish National Party concedes the principle of detention in some cases, I can think of nothing more brutal and inhumane than separating child from parent in such a case and placing that child in the care of a stranger—a foreigner who might not even speak the child's language. The motion should address the asylum policy that is operated by Her Majesty's Government, the shortcomings of that policy and the practical consequences of those shortcomings for asylum seekers in Scotland, but it does not. The whole asylum system is in chaos and needs to be overhauled. Indeed, the Conservative party has urged Her Majesty's Government to take immediate action to introduce 24-hour-a-day monitoring of all ports of entry and it takes the view that no asylum seeker should be given unrestricted freedom of movement until all the necessary vetting procedures have been discharged by the security services. Most important of all, the processing of applications should be dealt with quickly and efficiently rather than in the turgid and lethargic manner of which Her Majesty's Government has been culpable. In short, we need a swifter, safer and fairer system. I say to Mr Swinney that the successful applicant deserves such a system and that decisions must be made as quickly as possible to be fair to applicants who have no entitlement to stay here. At Westminster, the Conservative party's policy is to introduce one-stop accommodation centres for all new arrivals in order to facilitate the objectives of speed, safety and fairness. Our view is that, internationally, we need to reinstate the 1995 to 1997 bilateral agreement with France, which allowed us to return asylum seekers from France within 24 hours.

If that were policy, I would be under an obligation to expand on it; however, it is not policy. The suggestion was one of many suggestions that were contained in a discussion paper. Mr Letwin has confirmed that what Mike Rumbles describes is not policy. Indeed, if the Scottish Conservatives have anything do with the matter, it will never be policy. The risk of its becoming policy is very slight. The need for dramatic change to asylum policy at Westminster is evident from the statistics. In 2002, there were 110,700 applications for asylum. Of those, more than 54,000 were refused at an initial stage, so it is clear that some form of  checking or monitoring is necessary. More than 54,000 applicants were supported in national asylum support service accommodation at the end of March 2003. On detention, at the end of June 2003, 1,355 people were detained in removal centres, 120 of them in Dungavel. My party would like the population in Dungavel to be reduced and children to remain in Dungavel for the shortest possible time. However, only a change of policy and procedures at Westminster will achieve that aim. In the implementation of any asylum policy, asylum seekers—whether they are detained or not—must of course be treated with dignity and compassion. Where detention is involved, any suggestion that the regime that is operated in any centre is oppressive, callous, insensitive or cruel must be investigated and immediate remedial action must be taken.

If Mrs Ewing will forgive me, I would like to make progress. I do not have much time. The motion does not make it clear whether the SNP finds material fault with the Government's asylum policy, the conditions and regime that prevail in Dungavel, or with both. As a result, I have lodged an amendment to the motion. The perplexing question is, why has the SNP raised the matter in the chamber, given that it is outwith the competence of the Scottish Parliament? Having done so, why does the SNP then shy away from a full debate on the real issue, which is the deficiency of Government policy at Westminster? I submit that there are two answers. We know that the SNP is not interested in a United Kingdom, wants to be shot of Westminster at the first available opportunity and will use any device to justify destabilising the framework of the UK. However, it is as duplicitous as it is tasteless for children to become the armoury of that political assault.

I am running out of time. The second reason for the SNP's raising the matter is that its interests in the matter have far more to do with its leader, who is being harried from within his ranks, hounded from without and haunted by his party's flagging political fortunes. I might disagree profoundly with how the Scottish Socialist Party has behaved in relation to Dungavel, but when it comes to publicity, the SSP makes the SNP look like a bunch of amateurs. That is what has rubbed salt in the wounded electoral flank of the SNP and why the motion as it stands is unsupportable by any commonsense assessment.  I move amendment S2M-329.1, to leave out from "calls for" to end and insert: "deplores the operation by Her Majesty's Government of an inadequate and ineffectual policy on asylum and profoundly regrets the policy implications of such deficiencies for asylum seekers in Scotland."

Today's debate is based on what might seem to be an anodyne notion of closing an apparent opportunity gap. I use the word "apparent", because the Executive's programme has involved talking about various strategies, pilots, targets and consultations, all of which are at the edges and do little to affect the actual problems on the ground. Although I do not impugn the Executive's sincerity or the manifest passion of new man McNulty, the wash of whose speech is still cascading over me, the best way to close any gap is to tackle our public services head on. That would offer real reform, rather than condemning everyone to a poverty of ambition and a lack of choice and freedom. If we do not do that, instead of having an opportunity gap we will have something much worse—a Scottish Executive-created opportunity trap, which will trap the most vulnerable. Micro-managing from the centre simply increases the swell of bureaucracy, rather than helping the vulnerable. Giving our teachers, police and hospital staff the freedom to run services while facilitating choice and freedom would be a huge step in the right direction of improving opportunities for all Scots. The fact that the Executive has shied away from such radical ideas for four years condemns us all to a widening opportunity gap that none of us wants and creates the trap to which I referred. My main interest is justice. One of the best ways to improve Scottish lives would be to tackle our straining justice system. That is vital, because crime preys disproportionately on the poorest and most vulnerable in society. Mary Scanlon mentioned the deeply troubling statistics in the Scottish household survey for 2001-02. That survey indicated that those who rent their homes from local authorities or housing associations are twice as likely to suffer from vandalism and drugs. Johann Lamont referred to her city and nowhere are such threats more potent than in Glasgow. Scottish Conservatives believe that a neighbourly and compassionate society that is built on strong and supportive relationships within families, between neighbours and throughout the community is our best defence against crime. It is essential that we achieve a safe, secure and law-abiding society, because such a society is the foundation on which everything else is built. It could be argued that there is no finer example of the Government's all words and no action  approach than the youth crime problem. On Friday, we had to endure two press releases on related topics—one from Mr McConnell about getting the police out from behind their desks and back on our streets and the other from the formidable Jamieson-Curran duo on how to deal with youth crime. By dodging the firm, clear policies that are necessary to combat crime, the Executive—through its inertia—is creating the very environment in which crime flourishes. Not content with that, the Executive hides behind flowery initiatives and wordy press releases, thinking that the public will be duped into believing that something is happening. The facts tell a chillingly different story: a quarter of our people do not feel safe outside their front door. The Executive's record on crime is woeful.

It is not wrong to be concerned about those problems, but it is utterly wrong for a block-headed First Minister to fail to identify forensically how to address the issue. There is existing law to control unacceptable behaviour by groups outside off-licences and—just as important—to address unacceptable conduct by off-licence retailers, who risk prosecution or losing their licence. Instead of simply using words, the Executive should invoke the law as it stands and show the public that we are prepared to enforce it. The facts to which I am about to refer are uncomfortable. It is a disgrace that a crime is committed in Scotland every 1.2 minutes. Violent crime has gone up 25 per cent since 1997 and vandalism has gone up over 18 per cent over the same period of time. Drugs crime has gone up an unbelievable and deeply disturbing 37 per cent. Time and again the Scottish Conservatives have called for a commitment to responsive, accountable, zero-tolerance policing with a beefed-up Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service. We believe in what works. Indications from places such as New York are that such an approach is successful in reducing crime and the fear of crime and thereby brings benefits to society. Scotland does not need to see its Executive ministers engaging in cheap political soundbites. We must start offering real reform. Judging by today's debate, I regret that it seems that we are  resigned to four more years of inertia and verbiage.

I would like clarification about enforcement. Should I infer from what the minister says that he anticipates enforcement being more in the supply sector than in the regulation of people's behaviour in communities?

Does the minister feel that it is unacceptable for parents to have the right to use non-explosive fireworks with their children in the privacy of their own back gardens?

I will commence by saying to Mr Kerr that, unlike the issue of business rates on which we will never agree, he might be surprised to learn that I find much in his speech to support, including the motion. One of the quirks of Sewel motions is that it is difficult to predict with any accuracy what one is supporting. It is rather like saying that, if the car looks roadworthy and the driver says that he can drive, we should all climb aboard. Although the motion commends itself in principle to the Conservatives, I urge the minister to liaise with the Secretary of State for Scotland, not only to remind him that there is a Scottish Parliament, but—as the bill proceeds at Westminster—to urge him to ensure that the Secretary of State for Scotland has competence under the bill to address the specific issues about the supply and use of fireworks that have emerged in Scotland. As the minister indicated, most members who were also members in the first session of the Parliament have received impassioned pleas from constituents to do something about the current indiscriminate use of fireworks. In so far as Executive ministers are to be empowered by order under the Scotland Act 1998 to deal with devolved elements of the bill, it is important that we use the opportunity that the debate gives us to highlight the sort of activities that cause distress to people in Scotland. Mention has been made of my colleague John Young and I, too, want to pay tribute to him. John Young expended a huge amount of energy in trying to introduce a fireworks bill in the first session of the Parliament. However, the technical  complexities of the devolved and reserved aspects of the issue proved too daunting. As has been noted in the debate, fireworks have been a traditional feature of life in Britain since Guy Fawkes endeavoured to blow up the Houses of Parliament. A colourful, if noisy, celebration has become the tradition on 5 November with bonfires and firework displays. The Conservative group view is that there is no desire to interfere with the genuine enjoyment of children and families at responsibly organised displays. The outright ban that Mr Ewing advocates seems to me to miss the mark. The bill is about control and regulation and we do not need to focus our attention on such a ban.

I have always been opposed to putative bans that ban in anticipation of the instances arising. There has to be demonstrable evidence at the point of implementing a ban that it is appropriate. If that is proved to be the case, the democratically elected fora can take the appropriate decision to apply one. Mr Ewing concedes that there is no desire at present to ban the responsible and lawful use of fireworks by children and families. The intention of the bill is to regulate areas in which it is clear that undesirable patterns of behaviour have emerged.

I would like to make progress with my arguments, Mr Stevenson. I am afraid that I do not have a lot of time. One of the patterns that is emerging is that the sale of fireworks is taking place not only in the week proceeding 5 November but from September and October onwards. Fireworks are being discharged indiscriminately at all hours of the day and night. Members of the public, the elderly, young parents, pet owners and vets will testify to the misery that is caused by their peace and quiet being shattered by youngsters setting off a few bangers for a laugh. Not much amusement is caused for the elderly person who is frightened out of his or her wits, for the young children who are rudely awakened after they have been put to bed or for the pets that have to be comforted by their owners or sedated by vets. We also have the horrific spectacle of deaths and appalling injuries that are brought about by the irresponsible or untrained use of fireworks. The minister referred to the statistics for last November.  Increasingly, families who wish to celebrate Guy Fawkes once a year support organised displays in which responsible arrangements are put in place. That pattern should be welcomed. I am slightly uneasy about the concept of licensing such displays, because it may result in such bureaucratic regulation that responsible voluntary activists with a good safety record are deterred from continuing with them. The practical consequence of that would be for the multiple use of fireworks to return to streets and gardens. I hope that common sense could be applied in order to permit organisations that have held regular displays to continue with them, subject to confirmation of the details of the display and an assurance that safety arrangements are in place. Most responsible users make such provisions. The displays could be covered by a permit along the lines of the licence that is granted to a voluntary organisation that seeks a temporary liquor licence for a social event. It might seem oppressive to interfere with the right of parents to have a bonfire in their own garden and to allow the use of non-explosive fireworks, such as sparklers. What is more problematic in this day and age and with modern housing densities, is whether the use of noise-bearing explosive fireworks can be tolerated any more in residential areas. I come to the issue that people in Scotland are utterly fed up with: fireworks being detonated in streets or other public places indiscriminately by individuals or small groups of people. I have no hesitation in saying that such practice should be made illegal and that that illegality should be enforced. There may be issues with stricter controls over what types of firework are permissible for retail, who should retail them, to whom they should be sold and the possibility of training for organised displays. Those matters are important and merit detailed consideration. However, we should ensure that we do not set up a network of regulation that, at best, discourages responsible people from any longer being involved and at worst—and I say to the minister that it is the worst—creates an unenforceable legal framework. The Litter Act 1983 is testament to how legislation can be well intended, completely ignored and virtually unenforceable. Fireworks are far too important and potentially dangerous to end up in such statutory and regulatory disarray. Whatever changes are made must be enforceable. Enforcement is the key.

One of the more compelling arguments in support of an extension of the 110-day rule surrounds the perception that cases are being lost—that cases are arising in which accused persons are walking free—because of a failure to comply with the time limit. Is the member satisfied about the robustness of the evidence available to substantiate that view?

Will Margaret Smith take an intervention?

I accept the thrust of Margaret Smith's argument that legal tradition should not stand still and that the justice system must, like other things, be expected to change. However, does she sense concern that under the present proposals an accused person, who might be acquitted at trial, will be denied liberty for a further 30 days?

First, may I thank the minister for her kind remarks and wish her well in her ministerial position. I do not know what the watching public will make of three harridans occupying briefs on justice and home affairs. I should also declare my interests for the purposes of this debate, as I am a member of the Law Society of Scotland, an enrolled solicitor and a partner in a law firm in Glasgow. Like Nicola Sturgeon, I welcome the opportunity to debate measures announced by the Executive to improve the delivery of justice in Scotland. I particularly welcome the opportunity to debate the white paper, "Modernising Justice in Scotland" and, in the time available, I will concentrate on it. To some people, lawyers and modernisation might sound like improbable bedfellows, but Lord Bonomy's report raises important issues and modernisation, in its broadest sense, is overdue. I shall come back to that aspect later. It is important that any proposals for change proceed on a proper analysis of the spectrum of justice and do not simply emerge from the powerful platform of lawyers talking to their own in a procedural microcosm. The white paper commences with a commendable objective, stating that the aim is "to reduce crime and reoffending". My party certainly supports that objective. However, the objective also implies that the High Court element of the process is a part of a whole and not a free-standing component. The process of criminal justice starts with someone with a sense of civic responsibility reporting criminal activity to the police and assuming that the police will be able quickly and competently to gather evidence and that the police will charge the perpetrator and set in train the necessary court procedure. The good citizen then assumes, likewise, that the court procedure will be discharged swiftly and that, if conviction of the perpetrator is the outcome, the conclusion will be the imposition of a sentence that fits the crime. That process should produce fairness to the accused and reassurance to the victim and the civic-minded reporter of the incident that the criminal justice system works. However, I have to say that the public verdict on our criminal justice system is currently a little less charitable. My party finds merit in the idea of increasing the sentencing power of the sheriff court in jury cases from three to five years. Equally, we acknowledge that that will place a more onerous responsibility on our sheriffs and will add a significant work load  to our sheriff courts, which already rank among the busiest courts in Europe. It is worth noting that such is the volume of criminal work in a sheriff court that a 20 per cent reduction in indictments in the High Court will represent only a 7 per cent increase in sheriff and jury cases. Against that, we have to consider a further increase in work load that will arise from the Vulnerable Witnesses (Scotland) Bill that is currently before the Parliament. It does not take a mathematical genius to work out that the sheriff courts will grind to a halt unless much more resource is allocated to them. I noticed the minister's hooked comment that some people might choose to make this a debate on resources but, frankly, if seismic changes of the sort that are proposed in the white paper are made, the consequences will be an increase in work for the sheriff courts and the resource implications of that will have to be considered. Quite simply, the courts could not function without some augmentation of personnel and infrastructure. I would like the minister to comment on that aspect and to inform the Parliament what the current estimate is for additional personnel—including, perhaps, new sheriffs—in the sheriff courts, once the new provisions are implemented. My party welcomes an increase in the sentencing powers that are available to sheriffs for summary cases. I hope that that will not be lost sight of. I share Nicola Sturgeon's interest in Sheriff McInnes's forthcoming report on summary justice in the sheriff courts. We welcome the principle of a mandatory preliminary hearing, providing that it does not become the route to adjournment and delay, not only because that would be undesirable but also because failure to bring a case for trial within 140 days for full committal before a sheriff would mean the release of the accused on bail regardless of the charges that the accused might face. Naturally, the public might have an interest in that. Equally, we support, in principle, sentence discount for early plea, although the need for consistency is of paramount importance. I noticed the minister's comment with reference to a judicial commission on sentencing. It will be interesting to learn the specific proposals for that commission, because a fundamental principle of the law of Scotland is that judicial discretion in sentencing is vital. On the issue of the time that is spent by the accused on bail, Lord Bonomy proposed a new nine-month deadline for the case to go to a preliminary hearing, effectively requiring the Crown to issue the indictment within eight months. We support that and regret that the Executive has not had the courage to grasp that opportunity. If the Executive were to concede the principle of a  reduction being possible, the reduction of the existing period from 11 to only 10 months would be much more attractive. The opportunity should have been seized and Lord Bonomy's proposal implemented. I now come to two issues of profound concern, which—the minister will be disappointed to hear this—concern resourcing. They are the overall resourcing of the police and the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service. The availability and swift provision of evidence to the prosecution depends upon the police being able to do their job timeously. The appalling recent disclosure that, due to time bar and delay by police or reporting agency, more than 17,000 cases were marked no proceedings in 2002-03 is the measure of the problem. Unless we resource the police properly, we can reform the High Court until the cows come home, but there will be no improvement. My party, as the minister is aware, supports a significant increase in resources for the police—an extra £45 million per annum. The Lord Advocate described the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service as a cinderella department due to a great lack of resources. If lack of resources is masquerading as a catalyst for changes in procedure, that is not acceptable. That brings me to the nub of my concerns—the proposal to extend the 110-day rule, whereby an accused may spend an extra 30 days in custody before coming to trial. A fundamental precept of Scots criminal law is that an accused person must not be allowed to languish in jail for an unreasonable time and that the prosecution should be given a reasonable time to prepare the case. That principle has reigned supreme for three centuries. The period was 100 days, and the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1887 increased it to 110 days. I find it remarkable that, in the days of Sir Walter Scott and the quill pen—before telephone, fax, e-mail and the internet had ever been heard of—prosecution and defence agents could bring cases to trial within 100 days, but in 2003, with communications technology undreamt of 300 years ago, we need 140 days to get a case ready for trial. The reality is that an under-resourced police force and an under-resourced Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service are not being given the tools to do the job quickly. That is no excuse for sweeping away the 100-day rule. It is no justification for denying an accused, who may be innocent, his or her liberty for a further 30 days. That is not modernisation. It is repression and it is illiberal. I urge the minister to give that aspect of the proposals the most careful thought. The Law Society of Scotland, in its response to Lord Bonomy's report, did not support extending  the 110-day limit. I will quote from that response, which was prepared by the Law Society's criminal law committee: "The Committee would suggest that the solution to the problem is not extending the time limit but rather in directing greater resources to solving the problem." As a member of the Law Society, I am entitled to see that submission. I am somewhat filled with regret that the debate is taking place without full sight of a summary of the responses that were submitted to Lord Bonomy, although I appreciate that they are due to come out imminently. The real modernisation that we need in the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service is the deployment of modern technology in all its forms to facilitate better and swifter engagement with defence representatives, professional witnesses and the panoply of personnel who are involved in a trial and thereby to expedite dispatch of cases comfortably within the 110-day period. That requires increased resources at every stage in the process. That is why I have lodged the amendment in my name. I move amendment S2M-191.2, to leave out from "supporting" to end and insert: "and, while welcoming proposals to make more efficient the processing and disposal of criminal cases, expresses concern at the proposed extension to the 110 day rule, the resources implication for sheriff courts of handling an increased workload and the continuing inadequacy of resources available to the police and the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service."

I would be very grateful if the minister would indicate which of the 36 speeches to which she listened she considers worthy of being taken into account in the legislative programme. What changes will be made?

Mr Brown has been the personification of tolerance and patience, but that is about as far as I can go on consensus. There are various forms of torture that one group of human beings may seek to visit on another, but the Scottish Executive subjecting the hapless group of souls called the wind-up speakers to four and a half hours of sitting in sepulchral Gothic surroundings on chairs akin to picnic stools while listening to 36 speeches is among the more excruciating. As a mechanism for debate, that structure has been cumbersome, unfocused and tedious and I hope that it is not repeated. Despite that, I agree with Mr Brown that there have been some excellent maiden speeches and some worthy contributions from all sections of the chamber. The content of the legislative programme may also be described as unfocused. My colleague, Mr McLetchie, posed a general question: has the Executive analysed what the electorate told it on 1 May, when less than half the population voted? The population told us that there is disillusion with politicians, disillusion with politics and disillusion with devolution. Is that because of the flagship of Scottish Executive profligacy—the cost of the new Parliament building? Is it because of the money that is spent by politicians on politicians, on the number of ministers and on the size of Government? Is it to do with failure of delivery, whereby there are bigger waiting lists, longer waiting times, escalating crime, failing standards in education and mounting indiscipline in the classroom? The list could continue. What is the Executive's analysis of the troubling malaise? Its analysis seems to be that Labour and Liberal Democrat politicians know best. Rather than radical, focused and prioritised measures to dispel the malaise, reassure the electorate and address the problems, there is in the legislative programme either silence or atrophy. This morning, Mr Wallace said that the economy was the top priority. So it should be, as there is growth stagnation, the highest business rate in the UK and a seized-up transport system. What specific proposals does the Executive have? None. Figures that were released yesterday disclosed an alarming situation in relation to law and order. Most disturbing was the increase in drugs crimes, but what specific proposals does the Executive have for improved drugs rehabilitation? None. Are there proposals for more police to address the rest of the turbulence in the law and order scene? No.  Are there proposals for honest sentencing? No. It is surprising that the Executive's focus turns on youth crime. Members may be equally surprised to learn that I agree with much of what Mr Fox said. The focus on youth crime is surprising for two reasons. First, other forms of crime are showing more marked increases than youth crime. Secondly, when in the previous session the Executive had the chance to support Conservative amendments to the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill to achieve greater robustness in dealing with youth crime, it voted against the very measures that it now seeks to introduce. More disturbing health statistics have been disclosed today. The reform that the legislative programme proposes is tinkering at the margins; the programme proposes no radical restoration of control to our health professionals and to patients, but a temporary adjustment of procedures and of some mechanisms. The legislative programme does not answer the plaintive plea of the people of Scotland, which was so clamantly expressed on 1 May. Where the programme should respond it is silent and when it responds it either misses the mark or does not even reach the target. The programme is timid, because where it should shout it is mute and where it speaks it whimpers.

I rise to oppose the motion on the appointment of junior ministers. Today, the First Minister has achieved something quite remarkable, even by his standards. In the face of a damning verdict by the voters that devolution under his governance is synonymous with apathy, atrophy, impotence and waste, does he offer radical reform, innovation, good use of public money, or even a bit of spice? If only. Instead, on the table is a dreary dish entitled the "partnership agreement", by comparison with which cold suet pudding would look appetising. The agreement bears all the scars of compromise, fudge, horse-trading and barter  and is to be delivered by the good old bloated coalition Executive. I say to the First Minister that that is not a good start. Is this the same First Minister who recently told the people of Scotland, "I have listened"? If this is an example of the First Minister listening, a hearing aid is urgently required. My sympathy goes out to the hapless souls who are charged with delivering on this uninspiring and dreich programme. It will take more than the aquiline elegance of Tavish Scott or the Paisley pugnacity of Hugh Henry, or even that likeable cross between a Lanarkshire weasel and a ferret, Tom McCabe, to bring life to this downbeat political prospectus. And what about the mongrels? I know not what other title to ascribe to Nicol Stephen and Frank McAveety, who are apparently not senior enough to be paid the full whack but not junior enough to join their colleagues on the junior benches. Indeed, even Mr McAveety's disconcerting similarity to a mature Harry Potter offers little hope. All the magic in Hogwarts Academy could not transform this turgid political dish, which is beyond miracles. I offer advice to Tavish Scott, Hugh Henry, Euan Robson, Tom McCabe, Mary Mulligan, Allan Wilson and their mongrel associates. If not even decking them out with white-and-green hooped shirts or festooning them with Seville oranges will attract the public's attention, I say to the junior ministers, "Carpe diem"—I hold to the view that classics and culture are not dead in this Parliament—"get a life and resign. Return to the back benches. Be yourselves. Bring some zest into the Parliament. Challenge rather than acquiesce. Save the taxpayer money and be the sacrifice to deliver leaner, more focused government. Take a significant step to dispel apathy, atrophy and impotence." Such a step would be something for which those junior ministers really would be recognised and remembered by the public. I oppose the motion on the appointment of junior ministers.

Will the member give way?

rose—

Mr Andrew Wilson resembles Harry Potter in more ways than one. Both seem to occupy the same magical environment, in which a wand is waved and results are achieved. A game of quidditch has as much prospect as the Scottish National Party has of delivering for the Scottish economy. "An enterprise economy is the key to generating wealth, sustaining high employment and ensuring good-quality public services. To grow new jobs and new skills, the new Scotland requires stability, investment in education, the development of new technologies, greater innovation and a business tax environment that is supportive of business development and growth." Those are not my words, but the words of the then Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, Henry McLeish, when he spoke in the first debate on the Scottish economy in this Parliament on 24 June 1999. He went on to say: "we will build on Scotland's economic success by investing in jobs and skills, promoting a stable and competitive environment for enterprise, and encouraging the growth of new businesses."— [ Official Report , 24 June 1999; Vol 1, c 819.]  How has that cheering and bold prospectus fared as we reach this debate, nearly four years later? Gross domestic product in Scotland rose by 0.6 per cent in the third quarter of 2002. That followed a rise of 0.2 per cent in the second quarter, after two successive reductions in quarter 1 for 2002 and quarter 4 for 2001. Of course, that saw Scotland in recession for the first time in 20 years. In comparison, GDP in the UK as a whole rose by 0.8 per cent in the third quarter. That means that by any comparison, the economy did better under a Conservative Government. Britain has slipped from ninth to 16 th in the world competitiveness league since 1997 and productivity has halved under Labour. I turn to business start-ups. In the fourth quarter of 2002, 4,020 new businesses were recorded in Scotland. Although that is welcome, it represented a decrease of 7 per cent over the year. Business rates in Scotland are almost 9 per cent higher than they are in England—Scottish business rates are currently charged at 47.8p in the pound, compared with the English rate of 43.7p.

There are two components and, as any business person who has paid business rates will tell us, the one stable component is the business rate poundage element. The businessman can then make decisions about the type of premises to occupy, knowing that he has within his control a calculation of the ultimate rates bill. If the Scottish Executive has not visited an uncompetitive business rates regime on Scottish business, why has it sought to freeze business rates over the next year? On top of the stealth taxes already imposed, the average family in Scotland will pay an extra £445 a year following the rise in council tax, the national insurance contribution increase, which is to come into effect on 1 April, and the freeze on income tax allowance. I quote from a letter to The Herald on 20 March from Iain McMillan, the director of CBI Scotland. He said: "We make no apologies for spelling out that by 2005 firms will have paid out just under £6bn extra in tax for each of the years since Labour came to power, a total of £47bn. We would be failing in our duty if we did not point out the impact of rising taxes on company finances. The chancellor would be wise to take note, because this cannot continue without damaging investment and jobs."

I am certainly not going to agree to what is a distortion of the Conservative party's position in Westminster. For the purposes of this devolved Parliament, I say that we are the only party that will present a tax-cutting agenda to business. As the amendment indicates, we are prepared to undo the wrong visited by the Scottish Executive on the business community in delivering the most uncompetitive tax regime in the United Kingdom.

I would like to make further progress.  Before I took Mr Muldoon's intervention, I was indicating the extent to which the tax base has risen in the British and Scottish economies. We can be clear about what has been taken out of the economy in tax, but it is only fair to the Executive to give some thought to what has been put back in to help business. It is interesting that the Scottish Government's budget document, "Building a Better Scotland", which was published on 12 September 2002, lists a combined budget of £521 million for the enterprise networks. The fact that the population of Scotland is just over 5 million people, according to census day 2001 figures, means that Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise have spent more than £102 for every taxpayer in Scotland in 2002-03. Indeed, grants to selected businesses from the enterprise networks have amounted to as much as £27 million in one year—that is £5 for every man, woman and child in Scotland. What has been the effect of that expenditure? If we look at the dismal record on business start-ups, we see that the effect has been negligible. I quote from what Mr Tom Hunter said, as a director of the Prince's Scottish Youth Business Trust—I declare an interest in that regard—at a meeting of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee on 18 March of this year. I am sure that Mr Hunter's political views are very divergent from mine. On helping business start-ups and making them work, he said: "We should take £50 million out of the Scottish Enterprise budget and give it to the PSYBT ... If the PSYBT was given the money that is available from elsewhere it would not be extra money, but it would be money that was being better used and better focused. The PSYBT has a system and it bloody works."—[ Official Report , Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee , 18 March 2003; c 3191.] I could not put it better myself. Although the Labour and Liberal Democrat parties made a sensible assessment of an enterprise economy in June 1999, they stand damned by their own record in March 2003. While those two parties have masqueraded as the friends of business, Labour at Westminster has massacred pensions, strangled business in red tape, sucked tax out of the economy like a vacuum cleaner and seriously damaged stock-market confidence. It has done all that, and the tax on jobs is still to come from 1 April. In Scotland, Labour and the Liberal Democrats have proudly presided over the highest business rate in the United Kingdom, have neglected essential investment in transport over four years, have overseen stagnation in the growth rate in the number of nurses and have stood by as business start-ups have declined sharply. The bulk of the money that they have spent has gone on that  jewel in the crown of economic dynamism and efficiency, Scottish Enterprise—an organisation whose capacity to absorb money is like that of blotting paper.

The Tory policy is to take £264.8 million from the enterprise networks overall, not just from Scottish Enterprise. We would leave intact the budgets for skills, training and modern apprenticeships.

We would remove from the enterprise networks the decision-making process and the funding mechanism, which allow bureaucrats to make decisions about starting up businesses, because it has been proved that the enterprise networks' role in that regard is not working. I refer back to the quotes from Mr Tom Hunter. I will expand further. The Scottish Conservatives have a clear policy commitment to create an annual fund of £5 million for young entrepreneurial business start-ups for people between the ages of 18 and 30.

We must consider the budget for the enterprise networks overall, not just the budget of Scottish Enterprise. It is apparent that the sums that we have in mind could be stripped out. That would leave a signpost facility and a deliverer of training, modern apprenticeships and skills. We would take away from the enterprise networks much of the bureaucracy, which, as I have already said, has acted like blotting paper on resources.

I am sorry but, given the time, I need to make progress. That is the reason why business needs a break from the current nightmare. I submit that business needs the Conservatives' tax-cutting agenda, which would take money from the bureaucrats and reinvest it in business. The amendment in my name indicates exactly how that money would be redirected and how it would be delivered to business to give a direct and immediate benefit to the Scottish economy. Our proposal contrasts interestingly with Mr Wilson's monologue, which might have been strong in rhetoric and in its condemnation of the  Executive, but seemed to be pointedly deficient on what specific benefit would accrue to Scotland's economy on 2 May if people were misguided enough to support the Scottish National Party. My party offers a chance for a real difference: a chance for business to do something about the current situation and a chance for Scotland's economy to be lifted back out of the slough in which it has been placed by the Scottish Government. I move amendment S1M-4057.2, to leave out from first "Scottish" to end and insert: "objectives of A Smart, Successful Scotland and, while welcoming the introduction of education for work and enterprise within Scottish schools, expresses concern that, at the end of the first devolved parliamentary session, business start-ups have declined, business regulation has intensified, strategic transport investment has been neglected and business rates have increased, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to recreate a competitive business environment by increasing the annual transport budget by £100 million, cutting the business rate poundage to the level of England and taking pro-active steps to reduce the burden of red tape on Scottish business."

If that argument is correct, would Mr Wilson care to comment on the economic growth forecast in "European Business Strategies", which predicts that there will be greater economic growth in Scotland than in the United Kingdom as a whole in 2003? If that is delivered, it rather undermines the argument that greater growth can be achieved only in an independent Scotland.

Will the change in culture extend to political thinking? Does the minister recognise that bureaucrats do not deliver business start-ups and that the business sector is best left to do that itself?

Will the minister give way?

I declare an interest as a director of the Prince's Scottish Youth Business Trust. Does the minister agree that the trust has proved to be an impressive model for encouraging young people to start up and succeed in running their own businesses? Does he accept that the trust and others like it could have a role to play in missionary work in our schools in which businesspeople communicate with youngsters? Would they not be better ambassadors for the cause than bureaucrats?

Would the minister concede that a much more convincing message would be sent to deprived communities if Scottish Enterprise were able to demonstrate that it had even a passing acquaintance with the condition of privation? Does he agree that, to achieve that, it would be sensible to direct a significant part of its budget to cut business rates and improve investment in  transport infrastructure?

Will the minister confirm that a heavy rail link might not be the only option for Glasgow and that there might be merit in considering the alternative of a monorail link, which has far less expensive capital-cost implications and which would make land acquisition far simpler?

Given that it might be the natural wish of many of the employees of the relevant bodies and agencies to be as far away from here as possible, and that Inverclyde compares favourably with Dundee in relation to fresh sea air and panoramic views, and having regard to job losses that the Inverclyde area has suffered, will the minister confirm that he will seriously consider, when allocating or relocating jobs, the parts of Scotland that merit specific attention?

The minister will accept that a congenial business environment would help local investment in locally based companies. If the minister and the Scottish Executive accept the need to mitigate the rates burden—which they have done by conceding a freeze on business rates—why will they not go the whole hog by restoring a uniform business rate to achieve real competitiveness and to give real help to locally based companies?

It is my pleasure to open on behalf of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee this debate on the committee's report on the future of tourism in Scotland. I always feel that debates on committee reports are rather curious parliamentary beasts. Much prowling round the jungle has gone on, to the accompaniment of roars, grunts and snuffles, and there has been some locking of horns, but when the ultimate product is unanimous—as this report is—it usually means that no one emerges bloody and bitter. I see the visible disappointment of members, who are no doubt asking, "Does this mean the report is passive or inert—just another committee report?" Nothing could be further from the truth, because the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee has a mind of its own. Indeed, it has been innovatory and, some would say, harbours its own idiosyncrasies. It is none the worse for that. Before we proceed to the report, there are certain courtesies to be observed. First, I am not Alex Neil, the convener of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee—we are not quite that idiosyncratic—but I thank him for departing from traditional practice in allowing me as deputy convener to lead for the committee in this debate. That is an act of characteristic gallantry. I think that he took the view that as one of only two original committee members—Marilyn Livingstone being the other—our dowager status should be acknowledged. If the Parliament will indulge me briefly, I will say that serving on the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee has been challenging but immensely interesting and pleasurable. The committee has been positive for the parliamentary process. It is pleasing that the media frequently accord the adjective "influential" to the committee. I thank the clerking support team of Simon Watkins, Judith Evans, Jane Sutherland and Michael Govind for their advice and forbearance. Judith Evans and Jane Sutherland were the clerks for the case studies in Denmark and California, and I thank them for mothering beyond the call of duty. Our clerks have been of the highest calibre. The committee is also indebted to our adviser Roger Carter for his sage comments; to the many  organisations and individuals who gave the committee oral or written evidence; to Stevens and Associates for its immensely helpful and instructive research, which was commissioned pre-inquiry; to the Scottish Parliament information centre for welcome research support during the inquiry; and to the Parliamentary Bureau and the Conveners Group for making time available for the debate. I think that I am correct in saying that, with the exception of the Finance Committee, the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee has had more debates in the chamber than any other committee. Alex Neil would wish me to express a final note of appreciation to the committee's members. A heavy volume of work had to be packed into a tight schedule. Four cross-party case studies were undertaken in Scotland. They covered VisitScotland's e-tourism venture; rural tourism issues and the impact of foot-and-mouth disease in Dumfries and Galloway; golf tourism in Fife and business tourism in Scotland; and urban tourism and dispersal issues in Edinburgh. Two cross-party studies were undertaken abroad, which involved myself and Tavish Scott—very agreeable—going to Copenhagen and taking in Malmö in Sweden, and Alex Neil and Gordon Jackson going to California in the USA. In short, much was asked of members, who responded spiritedly. The committee had a healthy and robust debate as it shaped its views, but all was achieved without our eating lumps out of one another. That is probably just as well—otherwise, the exercise might have been indigestible. The report is the sixth full report that the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee has produced after holding an inquiry. It is a thorough and robust piece of work. I intend not to go through the report ad longum, but simply to comment on pivotal processes and aspects of the report. I do not intend even to use the full time allocated for my speech, because it is important for other members to be given the chance to speak. In June last year, the committee agreed that the inquiry's remit would be to inquire into the levels and effectiveness of Government support for tourism. The committee also agreed to pose a set of key questions to stimulate and focus debate. Those questions were singularly significant and can be found at paragraph 43 of the report. Of undoubted assistance in pointing the committee in the right direction was the pre-inquiry research from Stevens and Associates to which I have referred. That research achieved a status in its own right and focused the committee on matters that merited investigation. The external research is worth dwelling on. A  sample of countries and territories was identified for comparison with Scotland on five key tourism markers, which were the scale, nature and growth of tourism; the structure and nature of governance in support of tourism; the nature and level of direct and indirect support of tourism; marketing strategies and trends, whether niche or general promotion; and the perception of the country or region as a tourist destination. The report of the findings of those comparisons facilitated the identification of practice that was applicable to tourism in Scotland. It did not always produce an outcome that was entirely favourable to Scotland. The research report identified five key lessons for Scotland. The first was that Scotland should create a clear and focused national tourism strategy that involves leading private sector representatives. The second was that Scotland should encourage different products and service providers to establish a strategic alliance that meets market demand. I think that I speak for the whole committee when I say that those two lessons were material in influencing the committee's approach to the inquiry. The committee had a mission and a compass, but did not necessarily know what it would encounter on the journey. It soon became clear that the tourism territory in Scotland was congested and that numerous bodies, organisations and individuals were struggling to perform roles, provide advice and represent provider groups in the industry—not to mention the prominent roles that some providers play. All of that was set against a backdrop of various Scottish Executive strategies and initiatives. Interestingly, we found that the situation contrasted sharply with that in Denmark and California, where the lead position of the industry was not only prominent but unquestioned. It is no co-incidence that that situation forms part of our key recommendations: members will find them in paragraphs 172 and 173. It is vital that the industry's voice be clear, visible and articulate, and that there is not a chorus of collective contributions. It was also clear that a critical factor in the success of competitor destinations was the attraction of new air links—that was an issue that weighed heavily with the committee. The committee agrees that the Executive's new route development fund is a sensible contribution to meeting that need, but further work needs to be undertaken by VisitScotland and the enterprise agencies to prosecute actively the case for such development.

Mr Ewing touches on an important aspect of the inquiry. I do not think that any committee member would dispute the fact that we found the issue perplexing. What seemed particularly arcane was the structure of the private finance initiative, which had to be unravelled. We were given the clear impression that the structure of the PFI package was hostile to the improvement and expansion of routes. That seems to me to be something of a commercial paradox. I say to Mr Ewing that, as the recommendation suggests, the situation needs to be actively investigated. The minister might want to comment on that. The issue taxed the minds of the committee, hence our recommendation. No doubt others will wish to address particular aspects of the report, but, in promoting Scotland as a world-class destination, it is clear that there needs to be close co-ordination with United Kingdom ministers, particularly in respect of the role of the British Tourist Authority. I know that Tavish Scott, Gordon Jackson, Alex Neil and I were immensely impressed by the role of the BTA abroad, which we saw when we undertook our foreign visits. All members of the committee recognise the potential for partnership between the BTA and VisitScotland. We think that the BTA has the potential to be a strategic and significant partner in VisitScotland's work overseas. We were struck by the professionalism and obvious willingness of the BTA to engage in that partnership. One practical and manageable proposal is to place VisitScotland staff in each of the BTA's eight international hub offices. It is also important to measure activities under any such initiative. It would not be enough to simply put such a structure in place; the committee felt that it was important for it to be measured.

I am not acquainted with the detail of the Westminster report, but I can say that the committee researched fully the role of the BTA as part of its inquiry and took evidence from that organisation. In fairness to the minister, the committee took evidence from him and subjected him to intensive questioning about liaison between the Scottish Executive and the Westminster Government. What is important is that we are where we are. We are working with a new devolved Parliament within the context of the United Kingdom. The BTA is a significant association and operator in the tourism field, and, from committee members' direct experience, I believe that the BTA has a positive contribution to make to the development of Scottish tourism. Perhaps Mr MacAskill will want to pursue those aspects further with either VisitScotland or the minister. There were also key recommendations in the report on Executive strategies and targets for research, business tourism, e-tourism and skills. In relation to area tourist boards, the minister may have some comment to make on the review that is being conducted. Although the committee did not take evidence on the ATB structure—members thought that it would have been premature to comment on the structure per se—it was clear that in the cities of Glasgow and Edinburgh, ATBs have a distinct role in acting as gateways to Scotland in business and leisure tourism, and in dispersing tourists elsewhere. That compares with the successful Copenhagen model, and the committee felt that Edinburgh and Glasgow should be encouraged to maintain that drive. I am pleased to say that the overall reception of the report from the industry has been favourable. However, it is in the public domain that the BAA in Scotland had certain concerns about paragraph 190 of the report, which refers to BAA ownership of the three main airports in Scotland. The BAA has written to the convener and committee members, and that letter is on the agenda for next week's meeting and will be considered seriously.

I am in my closing minutes, so I shall continue. I hope that the minister will feel able to receive the report warmly—I shall stop short of asking him to embrace me—in principle; I appreciate that it would be unreasonable to expect him to respond in detail. Perhaps he will be able to indicate the direction in which he thinks the Executive might go in relation to the report. I commend the report to the Executive and the Parliament as a positive and robust contribution to improving tourism in Scotland. I take pleasure in moving motion S1M-3869, in the name of Mr Alex Neil. I move, That the Parliament notes the 1st Report 2003 of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, Report on the Future of Tourism in Scotland (SP Paper 740), and commends the report to all stakeholders in the tourism sector.

rose—

I ask Mr Scott to confirm whether the Scottish Executive was happy to inherit the Tory creation of a prosperous economy upon which it frequently founds so many of its arguments for expenditure? Will Mr Scott confirm which party in government introduced uniform business rates to respond to the overwhelming plea of Scottish business?

I place on record the fact that the Scottish Conservatives will not abolish the enterprise network.

Although I do not impugn the sincerity of Mr Andrew Wilson, it is difficult to take seriously an SNP motion on the economy. I say that for three reasons. First, enterprise and the economy do not seem to be political priorities for the SNP. In almost four years of the Parliament, it has managed to call only two debates on those matters—Mr MacAskill secured a debate in 2001 and Mr Wilson called one in 2002. That is hardly indicative of a pulsating interest in those topics. In contrast, the Conservatives have secured five debates on the economy. Secondly, in so far as the SNP takes a passing glance at these issues—no doubt fuelled by some imminent boardroom visit—its understanding of the acute problems that currently confront Scottish business seems remote. The motion has all the urgency of watching paint dry. Indeed, it is akin to  looking at a haemorrhaging patient and resolving to take immediate action by forming a committee to discuss coagulation. What is happening to Scottish business at the moment is grim and menacing. Growth was stunted in 2002. The second quarter showed a rise of 0.2 per cent, and the third a rise of 0.6 per cent, and that after the first recession in 20 years. Furthermore, according to figures released today for the three months up to December 2002, we have higher unemployment than the rest of the UK. In 2002, we lost more than 7,000 jobs in manufacturing and, to date in 2003, total job losses are running at more than 2,400. In the third quarter of 2002, the number of business start-ups showed a decrease of 22.6 per cent from the previous quarter. In 2002, the number of company insolvencies increased by 23.6 per cent. Business rates are almost 9 per cent higher than in England because of the higher Scottish business rate poundage. New regulations are piling on cost to business. According to the Institute of Directors, between 1997 and 2002, the annual cost to British business was £6 billion. Compared with when it came to power in 1997, Labour now takes nearly £2,000 a year more in tax for every man, woman and child in Britain. That is a chronicle of economic epitaphs—a chilling thumbnail sketch of how not to create a competitive, vibrant economy. What is the Scottish National Party's dynamic and practical response to that situation? Its response is a motion that—although it might aspire to be a record for verbosity—in 151 words offers not one specific remedy or solution to the beleaguered Scottish business community. For SNP, read, "Sorry, no proposals".

And sorry, no intervention. In Mr Wilson's speech of nine minutes and 18 seconds, we had diagnosis. For one minute and 35 seconds we had two specific proposals—more corporate headquarters should come to Scotland and we need to be more competitive. Well, that is a ringing aspiration for the business community—I bet that it derives small comfort from the modesty of that proposition.

Those words could be spoken only by somebody who has never run a business. I  will tell Mr Wilson what the business community needs now: it needs genuine solutions that can be delivered under the devolved settlement. Even the most intrepid motion reader, persevering to the end of the SNP motion, would have cause for question because, remarkably, Mr Wilson never mentions the word independence, yet that is the Scottish National Party's fundamental credo. Is Mr Wilson, recognising that independence finds little resonance with Scottish business, a duck-and-dive devolutionist? If he is, has he told the rest of his party? However, if he is, where are his specific proposals for improving the lot of Scottish business now, under the devolution settlement? Mr Wilson is, of course, a devolution man, except he dare not speak the name—he has to pretend the cause of independence. He knows that that is a difficult product to market.

I do not have time. Mr Wilson's economic case is not helped by the Business Strategies forecast that, under devolution this year, growth in gross domestic product, if delivered, will be higher in Scotland than in the UK. So, there is no intrinsic devolution bar to higher Scottish GDP. The third reason why it is difficult to take the motion seriously is what the Scottish National Party represents as a political entity. It is a party that has brought to debates on public expenditure all the infinite elasticity of bungee jumping. It is a party to which profit is repugnant. That is why the business community can expect no comfort from the Scottish National Party. That is why the amendment in my name excises the linguistic froth of the nationalists and offers Scottish business what it is crying out for now—specific solutions to restore competitiveness and to get business moving again, solutions deliverable now, solutions costed by the Conservatives and solutions that would help to address the very problems about which Mr Wilson purports to be so concerned. I have pleasure in moving amendment S1M-3880.1, to leave out from "long-term" to end and insert: "competitive disadvantage at which Scottish business is being placed as a consequence of an onerous taxation and regulatory regime aggravated by inadequate investment in transport infrastructure and calls on the Scottish Executive to reduce the business rate poundage to the same level that exists in England thereby re-establishing a uniform business rate and to pledge an additional £100 million per annum for investment in our transport infrastructure."

Mr Wilson is five minutes into his speech. Is the peashooter going to produce something positive by way of the Scottish National Party's proposals for the economy?

I, too, congratulate Gordon Jackson on securing the debate. I endorse many of the arguments that he expressed and support many of the apprehensions that he articulated. As far as the background of the Clyde is concerned, we all have memories of what a thriving waterway it was in past decades. It is an interesting illustration of the turning of the circle that we are again approaching a time when the Clyde offers one of the most exciting opportunities imaginable in decades for a restoration of maritime development. Although my interest is in the lower part of the river, from Braehead to the west, if we consider the concept of restoring maritime development and making the Clyde a major transport waterway once again, it is clear that decisions that are taken elsewhere may have a prejudicial effect on the development of the Clyde as a whole. For that reason, I support Gordon Jackson's view that there should be what he calls joined-up thinking and a strategic overview of how the development of the whole Clyde area is to take place. The regeneration of the Clyde cannot become the subject of petty parochial squabbles that may  inhibit or obstruct the development of the whole river. The proposed Finnieston bridge, on which I will focus, is a matter of concern for many, particularly those who have an interest in trying to resume maritime operations on the river. In fairness, the previous Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning, Wendy Alexander, recognised the difficulties and articulated to Scottish Enterprise her concern that the proposed bridge should not obstruct potential development of the river as a whole. The reality is that Glasgow City Council has now granted planning permission and that huge concerns remain about what the bridge's effect will be on the development of the river. It seems clear that the discussions over the bridge's structure and over a possible modification to its design should be the subject of strategic guidance from the Scottish Executive. Only yesterday, the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee published a well-received report on tourism, which identified the possibility of Edinburgh and Glasgow having gateway city opportunities for tourism development in Scotland. It would be ironic were the Clyde, of all rivers, to be prejudiced with regard to participation in that much sought-after development of the tourism industry if some short-sighted decisions are taken that impair maritime movement on the Clyde. I commend and support the motion. I ask the Deputy Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning to consider carefully whether it is time for some timely advice to be given to those agencies that are working to secure the regeneration of the river.

Although it might be in the future, the predictable consequence that the Westminster Labour Government's higher education proposals will have on Scotland will undoubtedly be increased interest of non-Scotland-domiciled students in seeking university education in Scotland. I am comforted to hear the First Minister's assurance that there is no intention to place a cap on the number of applications from non-Scotland-domiciled students, but will the First Minister confirm how he intends to address what is undoubtedly a potential challenge to our universities?

Scottish Engineering is a member of the Scottish manufacturing steering group. Peter Hughes, the chief executive of Scottish Engineering, is quoted in The Scotsman today saying, with reference to the Executive: "They have failed to form a coherent environment policy, they have failed to form an integrated transport policy, and they have faffed about for two years on business rates, which are still higher than in England." If the First Minister will not respond to the Conservatives, who have frequently expressed those sentiments in the chamber, how will he respond to Mr Hughes?

Surely the minister's response indicates that the Executive is perhaps doing too little too late. In this unhappy situation, does not the problem rest with the education system's failure to recognise that some youngsters, aged perhaps 13 or 14, are not sitting happily in the school environment? Surely more adventurous means should be adopted to give them alternative opportunities, by letting them access other learning source providers such as colleges or a business forum.

Does the First Minister accept that—in what is a competitive sector—it is difficult for business in Scotland to be resilient when it pays higher rates than do businesses in the rest of the United Kingdom, when it must cope with a neglected transport infrastructure and when it is  being surrounded by a cocoon of red tape? Will the First Minister confirm that the tax increases that his colleague the Chancellor of the Exchequer proposed, which will take effect from 1 April, will have a further adverse effect on job prospects in Scotland? Has he engaged with the business community to assess the impact of that tax on jobs?

The support team indicated a shameful and shambolic state of affairs in the Argyll and Clyde NHS Board area—one projection is a £30 million deficit for the forthcoming year. Will the First Minister indicate whether any reliance can now be placed on the Scottish Executive's estimated deficits for Scotland's acute hospital trusts? In reply to a parliamentary question, Mr Chisholm said that, as of 30 September 2002, the projected overall deficit for Scotland was £14.2 million and the deficit for Argyll and Clyde acute services was £3.6 million. Should the figure for Argyll and Clyde be reviewed? What reliance can we place on the minister's answer in respect of the rest of Scotland?

To ask the Scottish Executive what effect the recently published business failure rate in Scotland will have on the economy. (S1O-6083)

The modesty of that answer explains all about the paucity of the Executive's understanding of business and the economy of Scotland. I will continue more in hope than in expectation. Official figures show that the number of liquidations, receiverships and administrations soared to a 10-year high in the third quarter of the year. Does the minister agree that the situation wears thin with the aspirations of a smart, successful Scotland? Will he confirm that he is now prepared to do something to bring help to the coalface of business? As a start, will he show a willingness to consider the reintroduction of the uniform business rate?

Given the extensive riparian developments that are proposed for the Clyde in both Glasgow and Braehead, is there urgency in pursuing the options to protect Glasgow and the Clyde basin from flooding? Are those options likely to include the resumption of dredging?

Although I speak in support of the motion, I would like to broaden the debate. In particular, I will consider rehabilitation and, if it is not too ambitious to do so, prevention. The amendment in the name of Mr Wallace is instructive, because it refers to a number of bodies to which resources are allocated. I accept that those resources are being allocated to considerable effect. Amendment S1M-3641.2 refers to pilot drugs courts, drug treatment and testing orders and the Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency. It also mentions the fact that additional resources are being made available to agencies within the criminal justice system, to local authorities and to the national health service. I am full of praise for the allocation of resources, but I must ask what it is achieving. It is disconcerting that the distribution of resources is fragmented and it is depressing that the statistics point to a steady increase in drug-related crimes and deaths. Are we clear about what does not work? I share Mr Aitken's scepticism about recent documents such as "Taking Drugs Seriously" and the "Good Drugs Guide for Clubbers". If we seek to give guidance to young people—it is interesting that young people seek such guidance—the kind of dangerous babble that those documents contain is unhelpful and has a negative effect. To be frank, they are an affront to the intelligence and the  common sense of our young people. My criticism of those documents is unqualified. I will move on to more positive territory. Have we any idea of what works and of whom we should be speaking to? Mr Aitken referred to Maxie Richards, whom I have known for a number of years. It is no understatement to say that her work and achievements in rehabilitation make her a miracle worker. It is humbling to meet her. Although she is diffident by disposition and nature, when it comes to dealing with drug abuse, she is determined, resolute and unconquerable in seeking to do her best for young addicts and victims who might have nowhere else to turn. I spoke to Maxie Richards just last night. I asked her what she thought rehabilitation meant. She answered that it meant three things: taking young people seriously, providing meaningful rehabilitation in a concentrated manner and introducing a change of environment by removing the individual from the threats that exist. In her opinion, rehabilitation, if handled properly, can take people off drugs in as little as 10 days.

I will give way when I have finished my point. Maxie Richards believes that once rehabilitation has been effected, a change of environment can be vital in continuing to save an individual from going back on to drugs. Her success is proven and I urge the minister to contact her if that has not been done. All I ask is not that the minister expresses an opinion about her work today, but that he sees how she works and to what effect.

I welcome Mr Raffan's intervention, which showed the huge uncertainty about the best way to progress. All that I can say is that I tend to rely on evidence. Perhaps that is because of my dreary training as a lawyer, but the evidence is that Maxie Richards has a proven record of success. Many recovered addicts' families will testify to that. It is interesting that the judiciary's interest has also been evident. She is a not uncommon source of referral by the bench. My message to the minister is that we must consider what we spend resource on. Significant  amounts of money are being allocated in genuine attempts to deal with drug abuse in Scotland. Much more perplexing is to determine whether those sums are being spent to best effect, whether there are lessons that all of us can learn, and whether that means that we must begin to speak to the right people.

Was that £1.5 million the money that the Department of Trade and Industry originally allocated to the Executive to prosecute the "Your Guide" pilot in Scotland?

In 2001-02, Scottish Enterprise required £392 million to exist. In comparison, the English development agencies required a modest £1.14 billion in total. Why does Scottish Enterprise have such a voracious appetite for public money?

Would not the most singular contribution to addressing the deficiency be to focus on young people at school? At the moment, there may be a lack of awareness among young people about the job and career opportunities that are available in the construction industry. Will the First Minister explain what active steps have been taken in our primary schools—even from primary 6 or 7 onwards—and in the early years of secondary school to advise young people and to prepare to deliver a flexible learning base that may be outwith the school environment?

I declare that I am a member of the court of the University of Strathclyde. To ask the Scottish Executive what proportion of funds from the comprehensive spending review will be allocated to university veterinary teaching and research over the next three years. (S1O-5777)

The minister's answer is redolent with complacency that is quite breathtaking. Scotland has two legendary veterinary schools, at the University of Glasgow and the University of Edinburgh. Because of a lack of adequate funding that may be made available to the rest of the United Kingdom, those two schools face a very  grave risk. The minister will be aware that the schools have a high proportion of undergraduates, staff and research staff. Will the minister explain why he is prepared to preside over the diminution of two legendary Scottish faculties?

I do not pretend to be an expert on breeding, but I ask the minister whether there is concern about the composition of the population? It seems that, whatever the migratory movements, we are heading towards a more elderly population. Does the minister anticipate that that will give rise to a serious problem in respect of skills provision?

It is with great pleasure that I rise wearing the national colour of the Scottish Conservatives. Our choice of colour was in evidence long before the SNP's latest wheeze. I am delighted that the Scottish National Party sees the error of its ways—there is much that it can learn and borrow from the Scottish Conservatives. As I listened to Mr MacAskill's speech, it became clear that the opportunities for such learning are legion. We might have been prepared to listen to some of his arguments if he had communicated some enthusiasm for public-private partnerships or private finance initiatives to fund transport improvements, attempted to disguise the SNP's intrinsic hostility to the private sector or recognised that policies that have no costings or specification and that include higher taxation are unimpressive and unconvincing, but he did not do so. Instead, he tediously trotted out yet again the independence monologue. However, credit where credit is due. Mr MacAskill demonstrated one commendable piece of good sense: he did not talk about mutton dressed as lamb, whereas Mr MacKay was getting on to very dangerous ground. It is my pleasure to wind up the debate on behalf of the Conservatives. David Mundell made a telling, eloquent speech. The motion in his name encapsulates the precise problems that surround  the Scottish Executive's transport strategy and plans. As he said, it is evident from the proposals, strategies, announcements and initiatives that there is no commitment and no specification. He said that we need to "flesh out reality and fact". He also pointed out that we look to the Liberal Democrats to conjoin with us on the issue of transport and to provide a degree of opposition and was right to ask where the Liberal Democrat Opposition is in the Parliament. The Liberal Democrats' sycophantic fawning over the Scottish Executive is eclipsed only by the political flatulence that seems to accompany their contributions to our debates—great volumes of gut rumbling, but nothing of substance, significance or relevance emerges. David Mundell focused on the complete lack of specification on transport. This is not year 1, year 2 or even year 3 of the Parliament. This is year 4, and the Executive's performance on transport to date has been, frankly, lamentable. I looked forward to Mr Macdonald's opening speech with anticipation, but not for long. I jotted down the phrases that he was to repeat with great regularity: "priority projects", "partnership", "missing links" and the "resources" that are to be identified for those priorities. When Mr Adam intervened to ask about the western peripheral route in Aberdeen, Mr Macdonald had to be specific, but that was as specific as he got. He quickly went back to talking about projects, partnerships and availability of resources. He then uttered a telling phrase: apparently, "over the coming months", we are to get the detail of the grand plan that the Executive is hatching for transport. With that dynamic and rousing conclusion to a lacklustre and colourless performance, he sat down. I thought that the minister's wind-up speech might afford some comfort, but it exceeded his opening speech in torpor, dullness and lack of specification. I noticed that Bristow Muldoon criticised the Conservatives by saying that we do not want to discuss our record. I am happy to discuss our record. I suggest that Mr Muldoon should sit back—perhaps Mr McNeil will be able to provide comfort and support—while I tell him about our record. He will find the facts distressing. In the final four years of the Conservative Government, £907 million was spent on new construction and improvements. That figure contrasts with the figure of £603 million in the first four years of the Labour Government. It also contrasts with the figure of £617 million for the first four years of Executive responsibility, which includes the 2002-03 forecast.

No. I am responding to the point that Mr Muldoon made, which I think I am entitled to do. If we extend our consideration to local transport network capital, the relevant figure for the final four years of the Conservative Government was £628 million. The figure for the first four years of Executive responsibility under the Labour Government is £381 million. I am happy to discuss Conservative policy on transport whenever Mr Muldoon wants. It was unusual that Elaine Thomson was similarly seized by amnesia. I am sure that the hard-pressed commuters of Aberdeen will derive enormous comfort from her robust contribution. If I understood her correctly, she referred to a move towards delivery on the western peripheral route, which must make it the longest pregnancy out. I always enjoy John Farquhar Munro's speeches. He said that the Conservative motion was "a vain and misguided attempt to discredit the coalition partnership". The Conservatives do not need to utter one word to achieve that—the coalition is doing that magnificently all by itself. Where was Mr Munro's caustic and devastating exposure of the Executive's failures, ambivalence and prevarication? There was a deafening silence, which represents a damning acquiescence and self-condemnation. Mr Munro's plaintive plea was for improved rail transport in the Highlands, which is unlikely to curry favour with his central-belt socialist friends.

Mrs Macmillan should not interrupt me in the full flow of my rhetoric. I am minded to advise John Farquhar Munro that sleeping with the enemy has seldom had a positive outcome for the sleeper, so there is not much hope for the railways. I must contrast Mr Munro's speech with the gutsy contribution of Christine Grahame who, with verve and aplomb, made a splendid argument for the Borders railway. Her effort was not matched by Margaret Smith's. My colleague Alex Johnstone made an elegant plea for a specific commitment on the western peripheral route, which was articulately and ably supported by Stewart Stevenson. That issue illustrates what the Conservatives mean when they refer to the ambivalence, doubt, lack of certainty and lack of specification that characterise the Executive's approach to overdue, much-needed transport improvements.  I was struck by what Lord James Douglas-Hamilton said about the congestion-charge threat to Edinburgh. He rightly pointed out that a highly flawed consultation process has taken place. Margaret Smith was exposed in unusual U-turn gymnastics, which was a revealing spectacle. The Conservative motion has exposed effectively the nakedness of the Executive's transport strategy. More than three years down the line, we are still looking for answers, projects, outcomes, costings and delivery. The public of Scotland is entitled to ask, "Where are we going?" If the answer were left to the Scottish Executive, it would be, "Nowhere fast".

Will the member take an intervention?

Yes. Where is the mutton?

Does the minister agree that a welcome target for the business community would be the restoration of uniform business rates? Why is the Scottish Executive hostile to that?

The minister could hardly contain his excitement in announcing that he considers that business rates have been frozen. Is that the start of a faltering journey by the Scottish Executive minister towards a uniform business rate that relies on the process of convergence?

We are in a challenging time for the Scottish economy. Recession has hit us for the first time in 20 years. That the SNP should choose to debate the economy at this time is a welcome initiative. It is welcome because—I cannot help but notice—the debate is only the second on the economy that the SNP has called since 1999.

If Mr Wilson wants some rather depressing statistics, I will read them out to him, although I would rather not waste the time. The depressing statistics are that the SNP initiated a debate on tourism and the economy, which was led by Mr MacAskill, on 28 March 2001 and it has initiated today's debate. Perhaps it is surprising that a motion that is so lengthy says so little. Indeed, it reads more like a university debating society motion than a serious attempt to present constructive proposals to address problems in the economy that confront business. I listened to what Mr Wilson said about growth and, of course, growth is important, but business is pleading to be relieved of some of the obvious burdens that repress growth. Mr Wilson referred to Ireland. I do not know to whom he speaks in Ireland, but I spoke within the last fortnight to two people there. One, who is in the banking sector, said that there are very serious concerns in Ireland about growing inflation, lack of skills and the non-recurrence of substantial European funding. There are real fears that the Irish economy is heading for crisis.

I am sorry. I want to make progress. To suggest that we should at this time emulate Ireland is somewhat disingenuous. The explanation for the motion is that the SNP is on the horns of a dilemma. On the one hand, it is under a political imperative to argue a convincing economic case to support independence. Indeed, the motion is taken pretty much word for word from a paper entitled "Economic Policy and Positioning" that Mr Wilson prepared for discussion at his party's national assembly. On the other hand, it is clear that popular support for an independent Scotland is limited and that business community interest in an independent Scotland is minimal. That is part of the dilemma. Perhaps that explains why the SNP's motion has nothing constructive or specific to say about the economy  in the devolution settlement. That is a pity, because it is not for want of the business community asking. Mr Wilson's party colleague, Mr Jim Mather, recently confirmed in an article in Business a.m. that when he goes round businesses, he is asked repeatedly not to talk about independence but to restrict his comments to the devolved settlement. That presents the SNP with a political paradox and a pressing problem. Whatever Mr Wilson's views, his colleagues' views clearly centre on a left-wing political agenda that is more interested in spending money than in allowing the economy to generate revenue. Mr Wilson paints an intriguing vision of a tartan Valhalla—a land flowing with Celtic milk and honey—but is completely oblivious to the various proposals, commitments and suggestions that his colleagues have made during the life of the Parliament, all of which involve the expenditure of significant sums of public money. The reality is that the SNP has no natural interest in, or distinctive understanding of, Scottish business. The SNP has, as is evidenced by its attitude to the private finance initiative and public-private partnerships, a profound suspicion and distrust of the private sector.

I concede that, as everyone knows, under the previous Conservative Government the economy of the United Kingdom—not just of Scotland—experienced a watershed. No responsible politician would deny that. The Conservative Government was realistic enough to address the problem that existed and to turn around the Scottish economy, so that it became a modern economy with all the benefits to which Mr Gray was happy to refer. Without the inheritance of 1997, it would not have been possible for him to do that. Mr Wilson raised the issue of business rates. I was in business when the uniform business rate was imposed and as one of many hard-pressed business people in Scotland, I regarded it as an answer to a prayer. It is ridiculous to suggest that the absence of the uniform business rate is in any way beneficial to Scottish business. Before I took Mr Wilson's intervention, I referred to the Scottish National Party's profound suspicion and distrust of the private sector. Despite everything that Mr Wilson said, one would have  thought that the SNP motion might pay lip service to some of the concerns that the business community has expressed recently. Mr Wilson says that we should get back to reality. What planet does he dwell on? The business community to which he refers is not the community with which I engage and that I meet. The chairman of the Confederation of British Industry Scotland, Mr Jack Perry, said at the recent CBI dinner: "We need— he is talking about now— "increased investment in transport—both public transport and the long long overdue completion of our motorway network. Business rates is a classic example of public policy conflicting with a shared business and political agenda of supporting enterprise and growth." If the business community is looking to the Scottish National Party for succour or support, the SNP motion is about as comforting as the throwing of a lifebelt made of cement would be to a drowning man. The amendment that I have lodged is intended to address the void in the motion. Since the Parliament was established, the Conservatives have been the only party to champion the uniform business rate and improved investment in transport infrastructure. Those two issues can be addressed now. If the Scottish National Party has nothing to say, the Scottish Executive has no cause for complacency. New Labour at Westminster and at Edinburgh has presided—with its Liberal Democrat colleagues—over recession, poor GDP growth, poor business profitability and higher unemployment in Scotland relative to the rest of the UK. Most recently, it has imposed a tax on jobs, through the national insurance contribution hike. It is very troubling that since 1997 Scottish business has paid an additional £3.3 billion in tax, which amounts to a staggering £11,225 for each enterprise in Scotland. There has also been a steady decline in business start-ups since 1997. If we add to that the abolition of the uniform business rate by Mr McConnell, the neglect of our transport infrastructure and the imposition by the coalition Executive of almost 500 new regulations that affect business, we will have no difficulty in identifying Labour and the Liberal Democrats in Edinburgh as a nightmare proposition for business. The Scottish National Party has nothing to say that would help. The coalition Executive says repeatedly that it will help, but it does nothing. I have a challenge for the minister. He should not pretend—as has been trailed in today's headlines—that not increasing business rates is a tremendous triumph for the Executive. By the same logic, the Executive would argue that its promise not to use the Parliament's tax-raising powers is a great prize for business. I challenge  the Executive to do something meaningful and to announce today in the comprehensive spending review that the uniform business rate will be restored, which would mean a cut in business rates for many businesses. The Executive should also announce that it intends to embark on extensive road and motorway improvements. Sir David, I move amendment S1M-3376.1, to leave out from "this recession" to end and insert: "economic growth is the key to raising personal living standards, providing opportunity and security for all and the means by which we improve our public services and quality of life; further recognises that this prosperity can only be created on a sound entrepreneurial base, and therefore calls on the Scottish Executive to increase investment in our transport infrastructure and to return Scotland to a uniform business rate poundage throughout the United Kingdom, these being two essential factors in providing the right framework for the creation of wealth and jobs."

Will the minister concede that that would have been difficult to achieve without the inheritance of what had happened before 1997?

The debate is timely and fitting. It enables  us to reflect on our special relationship with America, which is bound by links that have been close and enduring since Scots left these shores to carve a new life in that new country. When the appalling events of 11 September last year unfolded, and that savage barbarism was visited on innocent people, we felt with particular keenness the outrage, horror, bewilderment and dismay that was experienced all over the world. Those of us who were at St Giles cathedral earlier today drew comfort from the service and from the presence of Scots, Americans and people from the rest of the United Kingdom and abroad. We joined together in a sense of human union to share our reflections and to look ahead. Members certainly drew comfort from Johnston McKay's words in the chamber earlier. That is why it is timely and fitting that we should remember those black and horrific events in the Parliament today. It is also timely and fitting that we in Scotland should reassure our friends that, as we reflect on our memory, we also reflect on our friendship with America and look to the future, mindful of the positive virtues and attributes of our friendship. September 11 of last year is a date that is marked indelibly in the annals of history. It is unique for the most horrendous reasons, but it is also a catalyst for going forward positively. That is why I say with regret that the amendment to the Executive motion that has been lodged by the Scottish National Party seems to me to be in poor taste. The amendment is inappropriate to the debate and to the Parliament. The motion was an opportunity for the Parliament to demonstrate unanimity of sentiment and support for an old friend. It is unfortunate that the SNP has chosen to diminish that opportunity. If the SNP insisted on raising matters outwith the motion, it would have been sensitive for it to do so in its own debating time tomorrow, without intruding on this debate. It is my pleasure, on behalf of the Conservatives, to speak to and to support the motion. I remember my first encounter with Americans. When I was a little girl, my father brought home two American sailors—naval officers, I presume—from the Polaris base on the Clyde. It was interesting for two reasons. First, my father was not in the habit of bringing home sailors. Secondly, when the two officers removed their naval caps, they revealed to my astonishment that their hair was cut short across the tops of their heads—to accommodate their caps, as I thought. Without realising that it was a crew cut, I assumed that America must be a very cold place where everybody had to have their hair shaved off to accommodate appropriate headgear. I also remember their geniality and warmth, which was obvious even to a small child. That is a hallmark of Americans. Certainly, the physical presence of Americans in Scotland—perhaps most notably  during the second world war and at the naval base on the Clyde—has been a tangible demonstration of the empathy that exists between our two countries. That empathy is not surprising, however, given the strong Scottish influence that there has been on America. James Wilson, who was born in St Andrews and settled in Philadelphia, and Dr John Witherspoon, of whom mention has been made and who was also born in Scotland, were signatories of the declaration of independence. A further seven signatories were directly or indirectly descended from Scots. That got the States off to a good start. Another Scot, Alexander Hamilton, proposed the American national banking system and is now depicted on the American $10 bill. Thirty-five United States Supreme Court justices have been Scots, and numerous locations in America have been nostalgically named after places that Scottish immigrants left behind. There are eight Aberdeens, seven Glasgows and—here is a statistic to conjure with—eight Edinburghs. No fewer than 11 United States Presidents have been of Scots ancestry and one of them—Woodrow Wilson—said: "Every line of strength in American history is a line coloured with Scottish blood." Small wonder that, with that pedigree and those influences, there is a special historical and genealogical bond between our two countries. That enduring closeness continues in a physical form today. I am delighted that Liane Dorsey, from the United States Consulate General, is with us today. She has taken an enthusiastic interest in the Parliament since 1999—an interest that has been obvious to all members—and her presence here is very welcome. Another prominent American in Scotland, who is also a lady—I still distinguish ladies from women—is Susan Rice, the chief executive of Lloyds TSB Scotland. She is prominent in Scottish public life and has taken a keen interest in Scottish affairs. We are pleased that, after Alexander Hamilton explained banking to America, the United States has been able to send Susan Rice back over here to check that we are still on top of the game. Besides those historical, cultural and personal links between our countries, there are some important business aspects. Figures for 2000-01 show that approximately 12 per cent of Scotland's exports go to the United States at a value of around £2.5 billion a year. Visitors from the USA represent the largest source of overseas tourism in Scotland, accounting for £189 million—24 per cent of expenditure by foreign tourists in this country. There are also roughly 287 American companies in Scotland. Naturally, the events of last year influenced the confidence of Americans in air travel, and that has been visible in Scotland.  We hope that renewed confidence will emerge, so that we can welcome more Americans to our country. As those business links indicate, there is mutual opportunity to be developed. America has a remarkable entrepreneurial aptitude and a willingness to tackle things. Theodore Roosevelt said: "Do what you can, with what you have, where you are." Scots adopt the same practical approach. Recently, Susan Rice said to me: "There is a similarity of mindset. People in the US are brought up to believe that anyone can achieve anything they want. Common man makes good. In Scotland, people eschew airs and graces and make a place for anyone who has merit." I agree with her. However, I think that the Scots would concede that we seem to lack the confidence that is so obvious in the enterprise of America, where there are examples for us to follow. We should look at that unashamed, unabashed entrepreneurial attitude and emulate it over here. We should borrow from that confident, irrepressible energy. We should admire a political climate that nurtures and facilitates enterprise and does not seek to obstruct it. We should copy a model that says that business breeds business. I am told that at the BIO 2002 conference in Toronto earlier this year, Lord Sainsbury, on behalf of the United Kingdom, indicated that research spending in the UK would increase by 5 to 7 per cent per annum. A delegate from the audience intimated that the National Institutes of Health in the USA would increase research funding by 10 to 15 per cent per annum and double the budget in five years. What is our vision? What about our transport links? What about our physical connections with America? There must be improved transatlantic air travel. If we are to develop the marvellous opportunities that exist for both countries, we must find a way of physically manifesting them to enable that mobility of travel for holiday and business purposes. The Parliament has certainly facilitated contact with the United States and tartan day is an obvious example of that. It has also led to parliamentary visits with reference to trade, research and development potential. Indeed, the Deputy First Minister referred to the Scottish affairs office. We applaud those initiatives, which are fruitful and worth while. We would like to see those links improved. The Parliament needs to direct its attention to how best that should be taken forward. As America looks upward and forward after 11  September of last year, Scotland looks upward and forward with her. In our respective domestic affairs, there is a special niche for our two countries and we look forward to that partnership going from strength to strength.

I should mention that my colleague Mr McLetchie regrets that he cannot be in the chamber. Sadly, he is dealing with the bereavement of a close personal friend. I want to ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive's vision of "A Smart, Successful Scotland: Ambitions for the Enterprise Networks"  will be affected by the resignation of Ms Wendy Alexander as Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning. (S1F-1891)

I thank the First Minister for his response although, unfortunately, given where it comes from, it has all the ringing conviction of me  expressing a desire to enter the Miss World contest. As an aspiration, that might fair take the breath away, but as an implementable strategy, it is utterly incapable of attainment. However, unlike the Scottish Executive, I know my limitations. Will the First Minister explain how his intended implementation of "A Smart, Successful Scotland" will reverse the fragile state of Scotland's economy, given that since publication of the vision 15 months ago, business start-ups are, sadly, at an all-time low, the Scottish economy lags behind the rest of the United Kingdom and company failures have soared since the end of 2001?

I applaud the First Minister's sentiments and agree that we should encourage such a culture. The difficult question that confronts the First Minister is whether the business community has confidence in his Executive to achieve that. Is the First Minister prepared to take real action by restoring the uniform business rate, reducing business regulation and effecting immediate investment in transport infrastructure, which would at least be an indication that the First Minister is capable of doing something better?

I cannot help feeling that, when he was informed of his appointment, Frank McAveety must have thought that he was listening to the last blast of music in the never-ending game of musical chairs that is ministerial appointments to the Scottish Executive. I have no personal angst about Mr McAveety—he seems to be a harmless fellow. His appointment is no surprise, as he seems to possess the three attributes that are necessary to secure appointment to the Scottish Executive: a time-served council background; the friendship of the First Minister; and, most important, no visible experience of or connection with the portfolio in which he is to deputise. I wish Mr McAveety no ill—I wish him well in his new office—but I fear that, if precedent is anything to go by, he will be in position for a relatively short time and we will all reconvene in the chamber to make the same speeches again.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. In today's business bulletin, question 2 is listed under the name of Mrs Dorothy-Grace Elder. You will be aware of recent publicity about Mrs Dorothy-Grace Elder's resignation from the Scottish National Party group in the Scottish Parliament and as a member of the Scottish National Party. Is it competent for a member in that position, who sits in the Parliament as the result of election under the party list system, to remain a member of the Scottish Parliament when she has intimated resignation from her party?

To ask the Scottish Executive why participants in the new deal for young people programme in Scotland are more likely to experience two or three periods of unemployment than their counterparts in England and Wales. (S1O-5040)

I would like to quote from a wondrously entitled document from the Scottish Executive central research unit called "Evaluation of New Deal for Young People in Scotland: Phase 2", which states: "Outcomes in terms of employability varied most greatly according to the Option respondents entered." Surely there is a need for education, either by the enterprise network or by careers guidance, to ensure that, in exercising their options, young people are more likely to pursue realistic career opportunities.

I declare an interest as a member of the court of the University of Strathclyde. Is the minister confident that the higher education institutions that provide training can competently continue to do so given the Scottish Executive's complete lack of clarity about what the budgetary provision for those institutions is?

By way of a preliminary comment, I observe that the bill is rather quaintly termed. Following the bill's appearance at Westminster, the public perception of it has not been flattering. It purports to be an Enterprise Bill, but it has been described as a candy-floss measure. Indeed, the Confederation of British Industry considers the title of the bill to be something of a misnomer. I realise that the minister has limited influence on the terminology of legislation down south, but it is important that the minister and his department keep in mind the Scottish dimension that will be affected by the bill. The Conservative party endorses the principle of the motion that there should be UK-wide consistency on such matters and, in particular, on the issue of receivership. This afternoon, I spoke with the Law Society of Scotland. It is the desire of the Law Society to lodge amendments to the bill. It is important that, during the progress of the bill at Westminster, the minister facilitates and co-ordinates the involvement of the Law Society and the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland, should it wish to be involved. It should not be the case that everything is passed to Westminster and the Scottish Executive and its enterprise department keep their distance. The bill has integral features that affect directly the facility of commerce in Scotland. It is important that the Scottish Executive maintains a knowledge of and an interest in the changes that may be made to the bill. The Conservative party supports the motion, but its support is subject to the matters that I have set out for the minister.

The First Minister has alluded to the matter of the loss of skills. Is he disturbed by the possible loss of a particular set of skills? The skills in the defence industry are important. Has the First Minister had any discussions with his counterpart in the Ministry of Defence in Westminster about how we might try to consolidate the retention of the skills in the overall defence procurement situation in Scotland?

The point about business expansion is that, if we are to have an enterprise network that operates according to what its name suggests, we have to let it focus on the enterprise economy of the country. I specifically said that we will do more if we succeed in that. The phrase that I used was: "for universal opportunity and real social inclusion".

What I made crystal clear was the fact that the business community cannot be expected to have any confidence in the devolution process or the presence of the Scottish Executive and the enterprise network if the amounts of budgetary allocation that are being devoted to supposedly improving the economy, starting up businesses and expanding our skills are demonstrably achieving very little. My point was that, if certain substantive measures were taken, such as restoring a uniform business rate at a cost of around £170 million and paying for that out of the enterprise budget, business would rejoice. Business people could see that, instead of that money disappearing into a bureaucratic hole, it is appearing on their territory and providing a much-needed advertisement for  business in Scotland.

The political process in Scotland has never been more visible, more accessible or more expensive. Never have more consultations, strategies and initiatives in glossy brochures been launched than have been launched by the Scottish Executive in the first 1,000 days of this Parliament. The people of Scotland should be dancing in the streets because of pent-up excitement, but they are not. The business community should be engaged in a corporate fandango of unfettered jubilation, but it is not. The general sense of frustration and anger can be easily explained by such public relations nightmares as the new Parliament building and perverse priorities that place issues such as the banning of fox hunting and the smacking by parents of children ahead of creating a health service that treats ill people when they need treatment. There was also the recent embarrassment of MSPs voting on their salary increases. It is small wonder that the public are scunnered. What about the business community? It can now engage in the political process with unprecedented ease. There is a Scottish Executive with 20 ministers and an Executive department that is devoted to enterprise that has legions of civil servants. There are 129 MSPs. There is an Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee and there is the enterprise network, which is joined at the hip with the Executive. What is the measure of that wide spectrum of political access and what has been happening to the business community since 1999? Business start-ups have, sadly, shown a decline. In 1999, there were approximately 19,000 new businesses, but with a declining graph. In 2000, there were approximately 17,000 new businesses.  The 2001 figure is likely to be around 17,000 again. That measurement becomes starker when it is compared with 1977, when Scotland had 24,771 business start-ups. At best, we are declining; at worst, in real terms, we are de-enterprising and going backwards. On Scottish economic growth, Scotland has had lower growth levels, historically, than the rest of the United Kingdom. However, the Scottish position has weakened even further in recent years. The Fraser of Allander Institute for Research on the Scottish Economy, in its quarterly economic commentary, projected a 7 per cent gross domestic product growth in Scotland for 2001 and a 1.2 per cent figure for 2002. A separate Government study suggested that Scotland has been more dramatically affected than the rest of Britain by the events of 11 September. In an article in The Scotsman of 12 February 2002, Douglas McWilliams stated: "Slow growth gradually corrodes a nation." He went on to observe that Scotland might end up poorer than Greece. Lurking below the surface of this bleak economic scene is more disquieting evidence of the disparity between Scotland and the rest of the UK.

I do not agree with Mr Wilson, whose views on the economy are a bit like his sartorial style: casual to the point of being random and demonstrably uncoordinated. Scotland saw significant losses in jobs and skills in 2001. Nearly 8,000 of those job losses were in the electronics sector. We also failed to cash in on 3,700 jobs that were cancelled within that sector. That gloomy chronicle is continuing, with depressing announcements of current job losses. That is not merely demoralising for the workers involved but an alarming expansion of the skills gap. That gap is worsening and employers increasingly despair about that further challenge. This is a picture of a country that does not have an enterprise culture, whose Executive displays an inability to understand business, and in which the economy is stagnating. One must conclude that the Executive and the enterprise networks are not delivering for Scotland. For 2002-03, the  enterprise and lifelong learning department's staff costs budget is more than £10 million for employing 338 people. There will also be ministerial and related costs. The enterprise network budget for 2002-03 is £465 million. One must ask what all those resources and that beaverish activity have been achieving. Scottish Enterprise has been on a rationalisation mission, but the minister stated in a letter to me—dated 18 March 2002—that the projected head count for 2002-03 is estimated at 1,517 people. Still under review is how many of those will be permanent employees, fixed-term employees or contracted staff. That lack of specification is surprising. Far less easy to understand, however, given what the enterprise networks have been presiding over, is why Scottish Enterprise thinks it necessary to increase the in-house resource for public relations, which in 2000-01 cost £1.62 million. Over the same period, external public relations services cost £1.4 million. If my arithmetic is correct, Scottish Enterprise has recently spent over £3 million on PR. I presume that it was explaining to anyone who was interested why business start-ups have declined, why Scottish economic growth is so much poorer than the rest of the UK, why job losses continue and why skills gaps are intensifying. Is it any wonder that the business community does not have faith in the cluttered political scenery or does not believe in the atrophy of the enterprise network bureaucracy?

Forgive me for not doing so. I want to expand my point. It was predictable that on 13 March 2002 the newspaper Business a.m. should have an article entitled: "Businesses demand answers from the Executive." Bear in mind that the Executive has had nearly three years to provide answers. That brings us to the kernel of the problem. What has the Executive been providing? The previous debate on transport indicated that there was a complete absence of strategic planning for transport and roads infrastructure, which is one of the most frequently articulated concerns of business. It is more startling that the Executive has seemed impotent as a conduit to Westminster to stop the aggregates tax, which will have a devastating effect on the Scottish rural economy. The Executive also seemed blissfully indifferent to the lurking menace of tax stamps for the whisky industry until my party debated the matter in the chamber. The Executive has achieved the remarkable  commercial advertisement for Scotland of a higher business rate poundage than the rest of the UK. Businesses in Scotland pay around 9 per cent more in business rate than businesses of equivalent rateable value in England. Not just startling but downright alarming was the Local Government Committee report that was released on Wednesday last, which endorsed reinstating the right of local councils to set business rates and held out the prospect of increased council tax bills for hard-pressed payers of council tax. My colleague Mr Harding, who serves on that committee, rejected the committee's proposals in their entirety, as did the business community and the business media in Scotland. The media not only gave an unprecedented mauling to the press launch of the report and to the actual report, but asked what kind of committee takes 18 months to come up with such negative proposals. Throw into the cauldron the mass of regulation and red tape with which business in Scotland daily struggles and the now completely discredited Executive improving regulation in Scotland unit—IRIS—and one can understand why the business community feels that, where its interests are concerned, it is being sold a pup by the Executive.

I am sorry, but I want to proceed with this. If the business community, which is being sold a pup, looks at the minister's amendment it will find only pap, which articulates more eloquently than I can precisely what the problem is. Does the situation have to be like this? It does not. My party sends some short, sharp messages to the Executive: it should restore uniform business rate; it should abolish IRIS or give it a meaningful purpose in considering the repeal of existing regulation; it should persuade the Chancellor of the Exchequer to abolish the aggregates tax; it should devise a transport strategy whose immediate priority is the improvement of the main arterial routes in Scotland which, in their current condition, delay, obstruct and frustrate business; and it should have a fundamental review of the role and function of the enterprise network, with the sole objective of creating a network that is concerned exclusively with promoting enterprise and improving growth and competitiveness in all sectors of the Scottish economy. If there is any feature of the political process post-devolution that has provoked, irritated and angered the business community, it is the universally perceived fact that the Scottish Executive and the enterprise network occupy an  overheated orchid house, engaged in mutual self-admiration, mutual self-congratulation and perpetual self-direction while, outside in the cold, the business community looks on with detached dismay. In the unhealthily close atmosphere between the Scottish Executive and the enterprise networks, there is an irreconcilable conflict of interest. The enterprise network cannot be a credible co-ordinator between the Scottish Executive and the business community while it is the delivery arm for numerous Scottish Executive strategies and programmes. The apparent visibility and ability to access the Scottish political process is, for the business sector, a sterile prospect. Government meddling and interference in the enterprise process does not improve business start-ups, grow gross domestic product or create jobs; neither does distracting the core function of the enterprise network with ancillary activity such as volume training and social engineering. However, a successful enterprise economy will do more for universal opportunity and real social inclusion than any other factor. The confidence of the business community has to be re-engaged. That will happen only if the business community is working not only with a Scottish Executive that displays a greater understanding of the flexibility and space that business needs to survive and prosper, but with a lean and demonstrably effective enterprise network that is not tied to the apron strings of the minister but has an entrepreneurial dynamism and a mind of its own. I move, That the Parliament notes with concern the relatively poor performance of the Scottish economy compared to that of the UK economy as a whole; believes that public funding of enterprise programmes should be focused on infrastructure improvements which benefit all businesses; further notes the damaging effects of the higher business rate poundage in Scotland compared with the rest of the UK, and supports the reintroduction of a uniform business rate across the UK and calls for a fundamental review of the role and functions of the enterprise network, both with the objective of improving growth and competitiveness in the Scottish economy.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to introduce equine passports as is proposed in England and Wales. (S1O-4895)

I thank the minister for his response. I just hope that MSPs will not have to countersign the applications. In the interests of minimising bureaucracy and the costs of enforcing the scheme, does the Executive intend to look at the situation in Ireland, where, although every horse has documentation, not all of them require passports?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is satisfied with the availability of special school support for deaf children. (S1O-4848)

In the light of her response, would the minister be disappointed to learn that Renfrewshire Council has made a decision to close Gateside School for the deaf, a facility that has existed for nearly 40 years, without engaging in the full consultation procedures?

My speech will be fairly brief—not because it is unprepared because the motion is slightly different from the one that I had anticipated, but because I have a fairly severe head cold and my voice may give out.  Perhaps unusually, I find myself not entirely at one with Colin Campbell's motion, but my difference of opinion is fairly minimal. The motion states: "That the Parliament ... considers that all local authorities, MSPs and key agencies should work together to implement a regeneration programme". I rather hoped that that was already happening in Scotland. Work is being done by the enterprise networks and by some very good local authorities. I say to Duncan McNeil that Inverclyde Council and Renfrewshire Council deserve their share of praise for responding to extremely challenging situations. Mr Macdonald will confirm that the enterprise networks and local authorities receive the biggest chunk of the Scottish Executive's budget. Local authorities receive about £6.2 billion. The Scottish Enterprise network, along with Highlands and Islands Enterprise, also receives a very considerable sum of money. If that is not working, what are the enterprise networks and local authorities being paid to do? To be honest, such a generalisation would be a little harsh on both the enterprise networks and local authorities. I have not been diffident in being critical of the enterprise network. My principal concern is not that the enterprise companies do not have a job to do, but that I have not been able to perceive that they are doing that job to best effect. A valid question remains to be asked about that, given the resources that the enterprise network receives. Clearly, there are some areas of extremely good practice. I would like to think that that good practice would be replicated throughout Scotland. That would be the best way of contributing towards a regeneration programme. Mr Campbell referred to the involvement of MSPs in regeneration. There are none so precious as those who belong to the same club, but if we were to ask the public what they think about the involvement of MSPs, the response might be problematic. MSPs have a role to play. Clearly we must be conduits of information, instruments for raising the profile of areas and authors of new ideas, suggestions and proposals. However, to be honest, the main hope for regeneration is to find sustainable enterprise, because that is the best way of bringing new life to areas. Both Colin Campbell and Duncan McNeil acknowledged that. I was pleased to see—indeed, I lodged a motion referring to it—that last week business a.m. contained what can only be described as a glowing tribute to Renfrewshire Council and Inverclyde Council for their attempts to bring about regeneration in extremely challenging circumstances. Although we all applaud the concept of regeneration, I think that that is best achieved by solutions and proposals that are flexible. There was all-party agreement to a report  by the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee on the impact at local level of business development services. That report stated that the best provisions are those that are locally tailored. That was the rationale for the suggestion that local fora be created. Much is already happening. The one aspect of the motion that makes me slightly uneasy—Mr Macdonald will probably share my unease—is the statement that "the Scottish Executive should provide resources". I believe that the resources that are being provided are generous. I did not notice Mr McNeil calling on Mr Macdonald to increase those resources. The challenge is to ensure that the resources that are currently on offer are being used to best effect. While in no sense dismissing Mr Campbell's motion, I find myself unable to be entirely on all fours with the sentiments of part of it.

Yes.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I make it clear to Mr Campbell that I will certainly not go to the wire on the issue, but I understood that the members' business debate was on the Inverclyde economy. Has there been some confusion?

I am grateful to Mr Fitzpatrick for allowing me to make a point of information. A letter that I received from the Scotch Whisky Association said: "The Treasury announced in November that it is considering applying strip stamps to spirits". That seems to be more than a woolly, ephemeral, putative proposal. There seems to be real apprehension in the mind of the Scotch Whisky Association. Does the association not know what it is talking about?

rose—

This may seem depressingly basic and worryingly tedious, but my motion for debate is on a document that was produced by the Scottish Executive. If the document is not competent to the devolved Parliament, what is the Executive doing wasting resources and public money by producing the damn thing?

I would be immensely interested to learn just what reduction in taxation the Scottish National Party would propose.

Will the minister give way?

The minister will be aware that strip stamps were introduced in the USA, Greece and Ecuador, and have been abolished because they did not work. The minister will also be aware that three European countries intended to introduce strip stamps, but did not proceed with the measure because of doubts about their efficacy. One country in which they still operate is Hungary, where they have not succeeded in eradicating illicit transactions.

I apologise for my precipitate arrival. It is a great pleasure to take part in a debate such as this morning's. I may say that I am a dame who likes a dram and so it is good to start the morning with something as agreeable as a debate on whisky, or uisge beatha. Whisky is good for the economy, good for tourism, good to consume and good for Scotland. I was intrigued by the historical account contained in the Scotch Whisky Association's "The History of Scotch Whisky". It notes: "The earliest documented record of distilling in Scotland occurs as long ago as 1494, when an entry in the Exchequer Rolls listed 'Eight bolls of malt to Friar John Cor wherewith to make aqua vitae'". Presumably, the biblical instruction to "take a little wine for thy stomach's sake" had been enthusiastically improved upon by the monks of 15 th century Scotland, to mean "Take a little dram to stay alive." Distilling seems to have been almost the exclusive province of that early church presence—happy days indeed. Communion must have been a lively affair.  I will turn to more modren times. The Scotch Whisky Association notes: "Scotch Whisky, in particular blended whisky, has gone from strength to strength. It has survived USA prohibition, wars and revolutions, economic depressions and recessions". I seem to remember that it got me through the 1997 general election results. The association goes on to say that whisky maintains "its position today as the premier international spirit of choice, extending its reach to more than 200 countries throughout the world." It was heartening that recognition was given to the importance of the whisky industry in the early days of the Parliament, with the production of a joint document by the Scottish Executive and the Scotch Whisky Association, aptly if perhaps optimistically entitled "A Toast to the Future: working together for Scotch whisky". I could not help noticing that it was subscribed by the Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning, Wendy Alexander, and by the Minister for Environment and Rural Development, Ross Finnie. Ms Alexander's signature makes it look as though she could do with a dram, while Mr Finnie's signature makes it look as though he should perhaps lay off them. "A Toast to the Future" is a good document. I quote: "Scotch Whisky is the best selling international spirit in the world, and that doesn't happen by accident". That is absolutely right. The document continues: "The Scottish Executive is well aware that the whisky industry does not operate in a vacuum. The decisions made by government can and do impact on the business community." That, too, is absolutely right. The document notes that the whisky industry is a major employer, "providing direct employment to more than 11,000 people" and "generating indirect employment for a further 30,000 people." It goes on: "The Whisky industry ... Supports 1 in every 54 Scottish jobs ... Accounts for 5% of all manufacturing jobs ... Spends £1 billion a year, buying goods and services from local suppliers".

Mrs Ewing will find that, in comparison with other fiscal regimes, the Conservative Government did no more than continue a practice that was already established. Interestingly, it was a Conservative party in Government that, in 1996, took the remarkable step of reducing duty, a step that was greatly welcomed by the whisky industry. Perhaps more important, the Conservative Government made its view on tax strip stamps extremely clear, which was also welcomed by the whisky industry. The document notes: "Every year exports account for 90% of Scotch Whisky sales ... and in terms of added value, this makes it Scotland's number one export industry." As a product and as a contributor to the economy, they do not come much more precious than that. Are there any bits of grit in this amber nectar? Yes, there are. There is regulation and restricted access to many global markets: "Of the 200 countries that currently import Scotch, some 130 operate some form of barrier to trade ... there were 25 export markets with excise structures that discriminate specifically against whisky." Indeed, China has "a 65% tariff on imports of Scotch whisky." In Europe—I mention this particularly for Mrs Ewing—duty rates illustrate an institutional prejudice against spirits. That is, of course, not only unwelcome for our industry; it encourages smuggling. I say to those of us who love the golden tincture: do not be dismayed, because help is at hand. I refer again to "A Toast to the Future". The Executive states: "The Scottish Executive has pledged to support Scottish manufacturers where EU and UK policies have an effect on the competitiveness of Scottish industry and will take steps to ensure that the regulatory burden is kept to a sensible minimum." The document further states: "The Scottish Executive and the Scotch Whisky industry are committed to standing together to fight for more open markets around the world ... The Scottish Executive will continue to support the Scotch Whisky industry's case for genuine tax harmonisation in Europe." Perhaps most intriguingly of all, the document states: "The Scottish Executive supports the industry's case for a review of the tax regime in the UK with the aim of achieving a fair outcome for the Scotch Whisky industry."

Will Dr Ewing forgive me? I have some points that I wish to expand upon. All those comments in "A Toast to the Future" are immensely reassuring. The minister will, no doubt, update the chamber and, more important, the industry on those pledges and commitments. They are significant, they are certainly relevant and they are important. That makes two matters all the more remarkable. First, I pose the question: why has the Executive lodged an amendment to delete my motion, which did nothing more than applaud the document, observe the statements made in it and call on the Executive to demonstrate how it is getting on with the implementation of the commitments and pledges? I must conclude—gloomily—that there is nothing to report. Secondly, the haste with which the matter of tax strip stamps was removed by the Executive suggests to me that strip stamps are to be the blow that will be delivered by the Chancellor of the Exchequer's fist to this showpiece Scottish industry, over the heads of the impotent and supine Scottish Executive. Tax strip stamps do not work.

No. The matter is perfectly clear, at least to parties such as mine—it is perhaps remarkable in itself that we seem to have embraced devolution with greater understanding than has the Labour party. We believe that our mission is to work with our colleagues in Westminster, as part of a United Kingdom partnership, and to bring influence to bear whenever we can, based on the knowledge and expertise that we garner in this devolved Parliament. I only wish that the Executive had the courage, and perhaps the intelligence, to do likewise. Strip stamps pose a huge potential problem. They will increase costs to the whisky industry; they will slow down production; they will create chronic cash flow problems; and they will reduce competitiveness. The issue is bigger than whisky, however, and the minister alluded inadvertently to it. The business community is losing confidence in the Scottish Executive. That should perhaps give me comfort, but it does not, because it suggests to me that the stature of the Parliament in the business community is being impugned, and I do not like  that one little bit. My question is this: does the Scottish Executive have the muscle to fight for Scottish interests? The document opens with the statement: "Scotch Whisky is the best selling international spirit in the world and that doesn't happen by accident". If the Scottish Executive cannot put its money where its mouth is, there is an accident waiting to happen. The only sad feature is that the casualties will be greater than the Scottish whisky industry. I will not comment specifically on Mr Ewing's amendment, other than to say that the points raised in it were articulated by Mrs Ewing and I have already responded to them. I am debating not reserved matters, but an entirely devolved issue—this document, produced by the Scottish Executive. My lament is that it remains a document with very little meaningful representation of the life of the industry in Scotland. I move, That the Parliament notes the publication of A Toast to the Future - working together for Scotch Whisky and the Scottish Executive's pledge to "support Scottish manufacturers where EU and UK policies have an effect on the competitiveness of Scottish Industry" and "take steps to ensure that the regulatory burden is kept to a sensible minimum"; further notes that Her Majesty's Government is considering applying tax stamps throughout the UK, a measure described by the Scotch Whisky Association as being "by far the greatest threat that the industry currently faces", and calls upon the Executive to demonstrate its stated commitment to the industry, to implement its stated pledge and, accordingly, to make representations to Her Majesty's Government against the introduction of tax stamps.

Does the minister consider it important, in the allocation of resources to our higher education institutions, to try to match the existing deficiency of skills in the economic sector? Would she consider using funding to address the need to provide those courses at university level and improve co-ordination between universities and schools to answer the point that was rightly made by Mr Adam, that there is a lack of awareness among school pupils and a need for universities to be proactive in addressing that?

Will the minister clarify that such participation will not be mandatory?

Instead of being obsessed by matters that are currently peripheral, might be specious and might turn out to be completely irrelevant, would not the Executive be better employed in addressing the actual problems that confront us—a flagging Scottish economy, escalating job losses and the Executive's wilful neglect of our rural and more remote communities?

As the SNP has provided no specification, will Mr Ingram clarify what the phrase "business taxation regime" means? I would like to know what that involves.

It has been a matter—

It has been a matter of concern to the Conservatives in the Scottish Parliament that debates on the Scottish economy are too few and that statements by the Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning in response to job crises are too infrequent. It is for that reason that the Conservatives wish to signal to the business community in Scotland that we consider the Scottish economy to be a priority, not withstanding the obscurity that seems to enshroud that topic in the list of priorities that were delivered to the Parliament yesterday by the First Minister. Two needs are overdue. One is to signal to the business community in Scotland that the Executive has some sense of commitment to the economy and some idea about how to address current, cogent problems. The other is to try to illustrate to the business community that devolution can be a catalyst for a healthy economy, a dynamic for facilitating growth and investment and an instrument whereby some of the more pressing problems that affect business can be identified and addressed. The needs are overdue because the factual backdrop to the debate is depressing. Last year, in excess of 20,000 jobs were lost to the Scottish economy. Labour has delivered to Scotland a higher business rate poundage than there is in England. The consequence of that is that Scottish business is paying 9 per cent more than its English counterpart. From 1997, business start-ups have been in steady decline. I wish that I could share the minister's optimism about start-ups over the past year but, with respect, the evidence on which to found that optimism seems insufficient. Economic growth in Scotland lags alarmingly behind that of the rest of the United Kingdom. No member of the Scottish Parliament can afford to  feel uninterested in, remote from or complacent about that background. Unless that is addressed, the Scottish Executive's list of priorities that was launched yesterday will sound even more unconvincing and the stature of the Scottish Parliament will be diminished further. Another disturbing dimension of the backdrop to the debate is the burden of red tape and regulation that strangles Scottish business. Those words tend to be uttered with a regularity that may make them sound like platitudes. Indeed, to people who are uninterested and uninvolved in business and who feel remote from it, they may sound tedious and boring. For the benefit of such an audience, let me illustrate what red tape and regulation mean. For a small business with 10 to 14 employees, it means spending 31 hours a month complying with Government regulations and paperwork. For a business employing more than 50 employees, it means spending approximately 43 and a half hours a month complying with Government regulations and paperwork. It goes without saying that while such a burden is unwelcome to business of any size, it is particularly oppressive on medium-sized and small enterprises. Larger concerns can probably afford to fund the resource to cope with red tape alone, and many larger organisations do just that. While it is a sterile use of resource, benefiting neither the work force nor the generation of economic growth, at least the larger concern can manage the problem. However, that is not an option for medium-sized and smaller businesses, which account for nearly 90 per cent of the business community as a whole. It is therefore no surprise to find in a Federation of Small Businesses survey that 83 per cent of small businesses were unhappy at the level of legislation encroaching on their firms and that red tape is annually cited as one of the biggest barriers to business growth in Scotland. Something has to be done about it—to do so is not beyond the wit of man. In fairness to the Scottish Executive, the creation of the improving regulation in Scotland unit—the IRIS unit—was an encouraging innovation. My Conservative colleagues and I welcomed the creation of that unit. Indeed, the initial omens were positive. The Executive described the IRIS unit as equipped to take speedy action and outward looking, and said that the unit would take on board the concerns of the Scottish business community, put a searchlight on business regulation and be serious about tackling unwanted burdens on business. In answer to a parliamentary question, the minister confirmed: "The Improving Regulation in Scotland (IRIS) Unit can make the most telling contribution by ensuring that the Scottish Executive takes fully into account the need for all regulations to be proportionate and fit for purpose."—  [ Official Report , Written Answers , 11 October 2001; p 280.] We all waited with excitement and anticipation for the newly created shining knight of IRIS to gallop forth on a white horse with sharpened blade to start slashing his—or, in this politically correct age, her—way through the jungle of stifling red tape that cocoons our business community. My first encounter with IRIS was not encouraging. It suggested that the horse was limping, the knight had become saddle-sore and the sword had been handed over to the theatrical props department. I make that comment because I was invited to and, with anticipation, attended a seminar organised by IRIS. On arriving, I found that there was a generous representation of civil servants and an audience of few people whom I recognised. When I perused the attendance list I found that the audience comprised multiple representations from some local authorities, representation from trade or business organisations and associations and, from what I could see, hardly anyone from business. The attendance complement seemed to number between 50 and 60 people, and when I inquired about the composition of the audience, I ascertained that approximately three people were in business in their own right. It was no surprise, therefore, to read the editor's comment in the December 2001 issue of Business in Scotland . He said: "The IRIS seminars on red tape went largely unnoticed by business people, those who did attend as individual businesses were few and far between and came away with little hope that the Scottish Executive could do more than sympathise."

No, I do not share that view at all. In fact, when someone from the Scottish National Party benches talks about radical proposals my heart trembles, fear rapidly mounts in my gorge and I wait with horror for the day that might dawn if the SNP ever got its hands on government.

Let me deal with Mr Wilson's point. As Mr Wilson rightly acknowledged, during the Conservatives' time in government in Scotland the economy in Scotland was transformed from a Victorian and decaying economy into a new  platform-based economy that has proved to be the founding stone for such growth as the Executive might seek to lay claim to. In so far as IRIS is concerned, I was prepared to be charitable. I thought that perhaps the radical, biting edge of IRIS to look objectively at regulation had not had an opportunity to show itself. However, the evidence is discouraging. IRIS seems to think that it is there either to be a propaganda machine for the Labour party and to find virtue in regulation or to be more or less passive. If that is the role that has been determined for IRIS, I suggest that it should be rechristened the inert, risible, impotent stagnation unit, because it will have no hope of cutting through even one thread of a very small strand of red tape, far less of tackling the jungle. In fact, I suggest that it should be rechristened GRAB—get rid of additional burdens unit—and then we might get somewhere. The unit should go out to Scottish business over the next six months, prepare a short leet of the most oppressive regulations that are time consuming and costly for business to administer. It should then return to the Scottish Executive and the Parliament for a debate on what action should be taken here and in partnership with our colleagues in Westminster to reduce that intolerable burden.

I am running short of time. There is an example that we should look at. In Ontario, Canada, a determined Government gave teeth to the body charged with reducing red tape, to very good effect. As far as the unfairness of business rate poundage is concerned, the advice of the Conservatives is quite simply to remove it. It is a deterrent to potential investors and a poor advertisement. I am comforted by the tone of part of the SNP amendment, which seems to take on board that suggestion. The Executive's amendment seems to offer business about as much comfort as bailing out a boat with a jagged hole in the side. It seems neither to understand the current problems nor to propose any instructive or constructive approach to addressing them. Had the amendment called for a moratorium on the imposition and application of the aggregates tax, that might have been a different matter, but I suppose pigs might fly. I sometimes like the cut of Andrew Wilson's jib, but not always. I sometimes like the tone of his words, but not always. Although his amendment contains elements that I think would elicit support from my party, he will have to elaborate  considerably in his speech before we are sufficiently reassured to feel minded to support it. I move, That the Parliament notes with grave concern that in excess of 20,000 jobs were lost throughout the Scottish economy in 2001 and that the Scottish economy has failed to perform as well as the UK economy; further notes that the higher business rate poundage in Scotland relative to England is having a damaging effect on the competitiveness of Scotland's economy, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to restore as a matter of urgency a business rate poundage uniform with the rest of the UK as part of a sustained effort to reduce burdens of tax and regulation, which are hindering the creation of jobs and prosperity in Scotland, and demonstrate to the business community a commitment to restoring growth and competitiveness to the Scottish economy.

Would not it be appropriate to ensure that, to facilitate the continued operation of ILAs, rigorous investigation is made of the allegations of fraud? Is the First Minister not apprehensive that, as the ILAs were constructed by primary legislation in this Parliament, there is a danger—I think—of legal challenge to the Executive for failing to provide ILAs to applicants?

The First Minister used many words in his speech this afternoon. Indeed, he used some words many times. Two of his phrases were  "what must be done for Scotland" and "Listening, reflecting and acting". The difficulty is that, when the First Minister asks of himself and his colleagues what must be done for Scotland and urges himself and them to listen, reflect and act, the outcome seems very different from the expectations of the people of Scotland. The motion could have been—indeed, for all that I know, it was—in the Labour party's 1999 manifesto. The surprise is not what it expresses, which frankly seems to be the minimal aspiration of any political party, but that, after two years and seven months of a Labour-Liberal Democrat coalition Executive, it requires to be re-expressed. If we examine that period of two years and seven months, the need for re-expression of those priorities can be explained. The reality, I fear, is somewhat disparate from the aspiration. Take health, for example. More people are waiting for treatment, people are waiting longer and fewer patients are being seen. Indeed, Mr Rumbles referred to those matters in his speech and constantly reminds the chamber of the paucity of dentists in the north-east. Take education. The First Minister referred to the problems of literacy and numeracy in our schools. Indeed, many of our higher and further education institutions are devoting precious resources to remedial instruction, which suggests that there is a sad and alarming deficiency in our education system. Many of our businesses find that, in taking on new employees, they have to provide basic education. Take the economy. In 2001 alone, we lost more than 20,000 jobs in Scotland. Our economic growth is lagging badly behind that in the rest of the UK and Scottish firms are paying 9 per cent more in business rates than their English counterparts. The motion is not about an innovatory, dynamic new year vision for Scotland. It is reheated Christmas turkey. Quite simply, the motion is an astonishing Executive admission of failure, confusion and complacency: failure to address problems that the Executive has presided over, confusion about what to do about those problems and complacency about the continuing deterioration of our public services. It is a sorry reflection of the Parliament that the Executive has to come before it and, two years and seven months down the line, seek to justify what it has been doing during that period. The forthcoming parliamentary and legislative schedule for the Executive contains matters such as the land reform proposals, for which I have met little interest or enthusiasm among the people of  Scotland. There may be interest in those matters in selected pockets, but there is a universal concern that that is not what the people of Scotland thought that the Parliament would be worrying itself about. The same sort of cynicism extends to the Protection of Wild Mammals (Scotland) Bill. What I find disquieting about the motion is not that it lays out a radical vision for the next 18 months and innovatory proposals that could excite the people of Scotland and hopefully engender a renewed interest in and affection for the Parliament, but that it is a sad reflection of what has failed and has not been done and what has been cobbled together in a desperate attempt to try to put that right.

I shall spare you the pain, Presiding Officer.

I thank the minister for the advance copy of her statement and I associate myself and my colleagues with Mr Wilson's expression of deep concern about the plight that confronts NEC employees. We hope for their sakes that some measure of hope and assistance can be offered. In her statement, the minister observed that 2001 has been an incredibly hard year for West Lothian. However, 2001 has been an incredibly hard year for the electronics sector in Scotland. We have lost nearly 8,000 jobs and 3,700 jobs have been cancelled or postponed. NEC says that the plant has been mothballed; however, there is surely a danger that the electronics industry is being blackballed. What future does the minister see for the electronics industry in Scotland and the retention of skills associated with it? More specifically, the minister mentioned that almost three quarters of former Motorola workers have already gone on to employment and/or training. I think that members will want to know what proportion of the three quarters are actually in work.

To ask the Scottish Executive how many people have participated in the new deal self-employment programme since the new deal's inception. (S1O-4163)

I thank the minister for that response. Figures released today show that that is a relatively small proportion. Is the minister aware that, for applicants to the new deal self-employment programme, restrictions apply to the procuring of new funding to maintain the continuance of their business? Does the minister agree that it might be sensible to allow that restriction to be lifted, so that new-start businesses might have a better chance of success?

Only the most gullible or naive would seek to rationalise the proposed ministerial  appointments because, as is now popularly understood, they have nothing to do with a game plan for Scotland and everything to do with a power game within the Labour party. What is truly remarkable about the proposed junior ministers is that, unbelievably, they are better known than the principal ministers. What is even more strange is that, when one analyses what these junior ministerial appointments comprise, they show some curious deficiencies in the First Minister's analytical powers. My comments on the new incumbents are not personal in any way—[MEMBERS: But?]—but if one considers Dr Richard Simpson, who I have heard make many useful contributions on health matters, one would think that he might be a suitable appointment for a health portfolio minister; but he goes to the Justice Department. If one considers Mr Hugh Henry, who comes from that noted area of lawlessness in Scotland—Renfrewshire Council chamber—and is deemed to be an expert in all matters relative to law, one might think that he would be a useful addition to the Justice Department, but, unbelievably, he goes to the Health Department. I have a little bit of information for the First Minister: if he had seen Mr Henry's supermarket trolley he would have good reason to reconsider that appointment. I listened with interest to the First Minister's blandishment of Mrs Murray. In my judgment, the only reason Mrs Murray knows anything about tourism is because David Mundell convinced her that she had to know something about it. It was my impression that Mrs Mulligan was a competent convener of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, but instead of being given anything to do with education, she has been dispatched to the health department. In short, the junior ministerial appointments have nothing to do with ability or suitability, but everything to do with being the right cronies in the right place for the right First Minister at the right time. I engage in a smile—the Conservatives can afford to smile because the First Minister's appointments revealed two things. First, they reveal that the Labour party in the Parliament is riddled with fissures and divisions and is absolutely raddled with rivalries and competitions. That is the uneasy backdrop against which the First Minister seeks to apply the government of matters that are devolved to Scotland. Secondly—Mr McConnell might not have had this intention in mind when he made the ministerial appointments—the First Minister has given a heightened sense of purpose and a heightened ozone and energy content to the Conservative group. In the First Minister's appointments we see the peeled-back and unreconstructed face of socialism in Scotland. Implicit within that is the  ideology and dogma that atrophied activity in this country 20 and 30 years ago. We are about to see a return to that, which is why I oppose the appointment of the deputy ministers.

Atlantic Telecom went into administration on 12 October. I would like the minister to inform the chamber when her department first had discussions with the administrators about the potential problem. Why has BT been singled out as providing the only possible prospect of rescue? It might be appropriate to consider a consortium of rescuers. Surely there is scope for the negotiation of some acceptable interim custodial arrangement to enable the provision of an essential service to continue.

On the activities of existing quarries, does that Executive have any substantive data about the number of complaints registered against quarry operators in Scotland?

Will the minister give way?

On behalf of members, I welcome the representatives of the British Aggregates Association and the quarrying industry in Scotland, who are in the public gallery. Local economies do not come much more fragile than those that support the rural and more remote parts of Scotland. Fuel tax, transportation costs and fewer economic levers combine to make those economies less tough and robust and more vulnerable than economies elsewhere. Many of those remote and rural areas depend on tourism and agriculture, but 2001 has been a bleak black year for those sectors. The foot-and-mouth epidemic was particularly devastating in south-west Scotland and the Borders; it directly killed off some businesses and was a body blow for the rest. Tourism was a casualty and although the Scottish Executive's measures were welcome, there are continuing concerns over whether help is going directly to where it is needed. I do not doubt that the terrorist atrocities of 11 September have had a further effect on tourism, which is the industry that many people in rural and remote Scotland hope might be the life-blood of their survival. Today's edition of The Scotsman states that Sir Walter Scott's home in the Borders underwent "a disastrous decline in visitor numbers during the 2001 season" as a result of foot-and-mouth disease and the terrorist attacks in the United States. Against that sombre and depressing backdrop, something lurks that sends a chill through those areas—the aggregates tax, which comes into force in April 2002. The tax will pound Scottish quarries, the majority of which are in rural and remote parts of Scotland. The tax is meant to help the environment by reducing demand for quarried aggregates and by encouraging aggregate  consumers to recycle existing materials. However, the result will be the opposite—in my judgment, it is a tax on the environment. The aggregates levy masquerades as an environmental measure that is aimed at promoting sustainable development, but it has no environmental justification. It assumes that Scotland has adequate materials for recycling, but there are serious concerns about the basis for that assumption. The aggregates that are produced in Scotland are needed and the tax will make them too expensive to buy. The tax will not benefit responsible operators; it will clobber them and it will not reward operators that work to high environmental standards. There are more anomalies. Aggregates that are dug out of the ground for export will not be subject to the tax, but aggregates for use in this country will be. Opencast coal mining will be exempt from the tax, despite the fact that it is regarded by some people as being environmentally damaging. Ironically, the aggregates tax will damage the environment, because many small quarrying companies will undoubtedly be forced to close. That will inevitably force companies to transport aggregates over longer distances as the number of supply quarries decreases. That can only exacerbate the harm that is caused to the environment. The economic argument against the tax is even more conclusive. Scotland has 224 quarries; many are hubs of economic activity in rural communities. The livelihoods of about 1,500 employees depend upon a thriving aggregates market. Quarries are also indirectly responsible for many other sources of employment, such as engineering, fabrication and plant hire. It is vital that the aggregates levy is viewed in that context. There is an economic argument—I am sure that it will be stated by the minister—that the resultant redistribution of the tax will create a neutral effect. It will not. In Scotland, which is far more vulnerable to the implications of the imposition of this tax than any other part of the United Kingdom, essential sectors of activity within our rural remote areas will decrease—some might close and all will suffer—and there will not be a net benefit left for those areas. The redistribution element of the tax is, in my opinion, morally highly questionable. The revenue is simply to be returned in a universal random distribution of national insurance contributions, which reaffirms the view that this is not an environmental measure, but yet another stealth tax. Not only will the tax have devastating implications for rural employment, it will increase the cost of essential investment in our wider economic infrastructure. I submit that Scotland is  more vulnerable in that respect than are other areas of the United Kingdom, because we have very long stretches of roads infrastructure in sparsely populated areas. Investment in areas such as the improvement of our roads and our rail networks will have to be increased to pay for such a tax. The much more probable consequence, of course, is that investment will either be curtailed or, in some cases, cease all together. I submit that our rural and remoter economies, which are already battered—nobody can dispute that—will not cope with the aggregates tax. In Northern Ireland, attempts are being made to exempt Northern Ireland from the application of the tax. A very strong argument exists for Scotland's seeking to do likewise. I hope that that is something on which the minister will be prepared to comment. I take pleasure in commending the motion in my name and I look forward to the speeches of other members, who I hope will be able to use more detailed instances to support the arguments that have so concerned me.

I am grateful to the minister for confirming that under a Conservative Government a healthy rate of economic progress emerged in Scotland. The sad feature is that it is now in dubious hands, in the form of the Scottish Executive and its counterparts at Westminster. Can the minister confirm that in view of recent worrying developments in the Scottish economy, she is in dialogue with her counterpart at Westminster, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, and with his colleague, the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry? Is that dialogue seeking a reduction in the oppressive taxation regime that affects Scotland, and does that dialogue have any relevance to the oppressive burden of regulation that currently dogs Scottish business?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. May members infer from your comments that, if you or one of your deputies rules a question to be out of order, you will immediately rule any attempt to respond to that question to be similarly out of order and require the minister so responding to resume his seat immediately?

Are data available that would give us a Scottish gross domestic product comparator with research funding?

rose—

In defence of Professor Walker, I ask whether the problem could have been the student.

I declare an interest, in that I am a member of the court of the University of Strathclyde—at least I am at the moment. I make this speech as deputy convener of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee. Every cloud has a silver lining. The inquiry was brought about by, if not a crisis, certainly an attack of chronic indigestion in the higher education sector. This has perhaps been the first opportunity in more than a decade for a parliament to consider closely the future direction and funding of higher education in Scotland. It was interesting and challenging to be a member of the committee involved in this inquiry. I emphasise two points to the minister about teaching funding. First, paragraph 100 of the committee's report recommends "that the Minister establish an independent review body from outwith SHEFC with a remit to examine the costs of teaching, taking into account UK comparators across all subjects". That may sound like an unremarkable paragraph, but the tang—for some I expect it will be the sting—is in the independence element and also the recommendation that the review of teaching costs take place on a UK-wide scale. In my judgment, it would be unacceptable for SHEFC to undertake that review, as such a review would have no credibility. Examining teaching costs is sensitive, but it is vital. The sector deserves a reassurance of independence and objectivity in such a review. If one were to keep it in-house within the higher education sector, I envisage difficulties emerging. I have read the response from Universities Scotland to the inquiry report; it is clearly shy about an independent inquiry. It thinks that that would be an unfortunate slap in the face to SHEFC. Finer feelings on this issue are not  of particular significance. What matters is that we are talking about significant sums of public money and the need for reassurance that they are being effectively and properly distributed. I see from the response from the University Council of Modern Languages that Professor Millan applauds the idea of an independent review. Those two responses show the conflict that exists and the need to take this review outside the sector. If I get a tang from that part of the report, what really whets my appetite is the issue of research funding. Research activity is the lifeblood of universities. It brings staff of high calibre to our institutions and maintains them there. That in turn is what attracts good students and helps our universities to maintain the highest academic performance. It is worth considering current funding sources for research income in Scotland. It has been made clear in the debate that SHEFC accounts for approximately a third of that. The rest comes in varying proportions from research councils, UK-based charities, UK Government bodies, UK industry, the European Union, overseas and other sources. It is significant to pay attention to where those funds come from. Doing so allows one to make a great deal of sense of paragraph 135 of the report, which is the recommendation on how we might approach funding of research in Scotland in the future. One of the most constructive suggestions by the committee is that the minister should establish a research and development strategy for Scotland, not only because that seems to marry well with the science strategy that she announced in August, but because it offers the opportunity for a focused and well-informed approach to the concept of research in Scotland. Research should not be viewed piecemeal according to what institutions are trying to do. We should take a strategic overview and focus on the areas in which funding should be sought. I emphasise to the minister that if the strategy is devised and is good, sound and has credibility it is vital that the funding issue be sensibly addressed. What I like about paragraph 135 is that it is a sensible effort to devise a structure whereby funding may be properly and adequately considered. I am not by nature diffident, but on this matter I have an overweening desire to be bold. I call on the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning to be bold with me. I am putting my committee hat to the back of my head and donning my Goldie bunnet. The report is a good architect's plan for the future; it lays the foundations. However, we must be ambitious for the future, not for reasons of introspective self-indulgence—not a charge that I would care to have levelled at me or that I would  care to see levelled at any university senate. We must have ambitions and aspirations for our universities, for our economy and for Scotland. When we consider what is happening elsewhere, there are reasons for concern and disquiet. As has been said, it is clear that in Europe certain countries are making significant increases in research funding. In the United States some individual university departments enjoy funding at a level that would make some of our institutions salivate. I urge the minister to pay close attention to the recommendations in paragraphs 100 and 135. Dangers are lurking if we do not do so. One of the dangers is that our universities will face academic impoverishment. The other is less visible and far more insidious. It is that south of the border many people have no understanding of devolution and many people in the academic community are frightened to entrust their professional careers to a system that is unknown to them. The way to rebut that is to make a clarion call for the best possible approach to research in Scotland that the Parliament is capable of devising. I make no apology for being the siren to make that clarion call.

I apologise to the minister for being slightly late for her speech. I regret that. I should declare two interests. I am a board member of the Prince's Scottish Youth Business Trust. I am also an  ambassador for the girl guides—which may be a remarkably brave move for the girl guides. Those two areas of activity represent spheres of operation in Scotland in which a huge mass of voluntary activity takes place to very good effect. Perhaps it is always invidious to select individual areas of activity but, as other speakers have so eloquently indicated, the voluntary activity that takes place in Scotland is the backbone of much of our community and society. In debates such as today's and in company such as this, it is tempting to ask, "What can politicians do?" Perhaps the more important question is, "What should politicians not try to do?" I recognise that the Scottish compact with the voluntary sector is a genuine attempt to identify the respective roles of the Government and the voluntary sector and to explore the mutual effort that may exist between those two agencies. However, although the compact contains much that I believe to be good, it reflects the extent to which politicians expect to be involved. Therein lies the rub. It seems to me that people who engage in voluntary activity do so because they want to do it. They have a personal commitment, a conviction and an interest. They want to help. They certainly do not see themselves as Government agents or deliverers of Government policy. I suggest that that distinction is important. Where public money is used, it is right that Government takes a proper interest in what that money is funding, but in my judgment Government should not have a prescriptive role or instruct a charity or other voluntary sector organisation how to spend money. The distinction is a fine one, but it is vital. I was heartened that the minister said that she is committed to encouraging more volunteers to take part in Scottish life. That is a worthy sentiment, which I certainly applaud. However, people will not sign up if they think that they will become invisible, indirect agents of the Government. They will be resentful—that has to be avoided at all costs. The first question that such people will ask is whether they are being used to provide services on the cheap. Many others in the chamber who are involved in voluntary activity would echo me when I say that that is a patronising and insulting charge, but it is an understandable reaction from people who look at the spread of expenditure and say, "Why am I doing this? Does the Government provide the money to me to do this only because it is a cheap way of delivering policy?" I support the view that the voluntary sector should be as flexible and as autonomous as possible, so that it can do what it thinks it ought to do, in the best manner that it can. That is the most  effective way of allowing the voluntary sector to operate. It is impossible to consider the issue merely in the context of Scotland; we have to consider the economic regime in the United Kingdom. Where the Government can help is by making some of the financial hurdles less challenging for the voluntary sector. Many parts of the voluntary sector pay VAT—many in the chamber would ask whether that is necessary. Is there not some mechanism whereby VAT is recoverable by those payers? When the Conservatives were in power, they introduced gift aid and payroll tax. Those may sound like innocent, unimportant initiatives, but I think that they now represent the most common mechanism whereby funds are donated to the voluntary sector. That is indicative of a fine distinction: it is one thing for the Government to have a laudable intent about what should be going on and to be prepared to make money available to assist with doing it, but it is quite another for the Government to want to become involved indirectly in the discharge of that task. It is essential that, in our efforts to improve life for the voluntary sector in Scotland, we recognise that important distinction.

I know that we live in an egalitarian age, but would the minister consider it a useful, practical application of the project to encourage more men to let go of their seats in favour of women? [ Laughter. ]

Would the member be kind enough to give the chamber one instance of such a failure?

rose—

Those measures are encouraging and worth while. However, there is a deeper, more sinister issue involved: many children, from an early age, are displaying no understanding of right and wrong. That may be an axiom that has previously been stated, but is it not the case that we need to examine our education system to ensure that children receive some instruction in our schools on the basic rights and wrongs of life and on the need to have a regard for civic responsibility, however simply those concepts can be explained to them?

Will the member give way?

I, too, welcome the extent to which events have moved on from this time last year. However, I remain concerned about one aspect of the SQA. I echo the minister's view that there should be stability for the SQA—that is extremely important for the morale of staff—but stability can induce atrophy. I am aware that one of the most helpful, if embarrassing, indicators of the extent of last year's deficiencies was the independent report that was procured by the Executive. Would it be appropriate for the current regime to consider the appointment of an independent auditor to examine existing management practices and procedures? All is not well at the SQA. I am engaged in the case of a young constituent who is unable to secure his place at the University of Glasgow because, allegedly, his results were never sent from the SQA to that university. Accidents can happen in any organisation, but if the public's confidence is to be maintained, it is important that some evidence is made available to show that the current regime is as good as it can be, pending what might happen in future. The involvement of an external assessment procedure to help the SQA could be instrumental in attaining that objective.

Surely it is the case that what we have in part 2 is not a civil situation; what we have are preliminary activities that are the prelude to criminal prosecution. Is it not the case that to try to preserve a façade of ministerial involvement is merely to place a fig leaf over what will—and should—remain the fundamental and primary responsibility of the Lord Advocate?

I am sorry, Presiding Officer—the siren voice had lulled me into torpor. It is my pleasure to wind up on behalf of the committee. Alex Neil, who took over as convener in the course of the inquiry, has asked that I extend thanks to all committee members and to the clerking staff for some very impressive and diligent work. In particular, I thank Ian Ritchie, who is with us this morning and who was invaluable as an adviser to the committee. Yesterday, I was perhaps somewhat strident and grudging in my comments on the legislative programme. Today, however, I have pleasure in saying that I think that the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee's report is an exemplar of what devolution can do. It represents a good piece of work by members from all political parties, who have been looking at issues and focusing on a topic of vital significance to Scotland, and who have come up with a very constructive report. The report is evidence-based, and I do not think that the significance of that should be overlooked. It was interesting to note that, when we summarised our recommendations, various issues fell out of the report. They included strategy, broadband, the digital divide, competitiveness with regard to an interconnector, skills issues, business support, culture and e-government. None of those things is in any way unimportant.  The real touchstone of what we were doing was ignited when we decided to have an interface with the business community. As Alex Neil said, that was achieved last week. Facts are chiels that winna ding and the business community was very quick to tell us that. Alex Neil was absolutely right, because the only thing arising from the report that the business community wanted to speak to us about, direct our attention towards, and emphasise to us the need for action upon was broadband, broadband and broadband. I would like to indicate briefly how that message was delivered by giving quotations from the business persons present. One said, "The new economy is more than making an old economy go faster. It is about the dynamics of skill that put us at the centre of the world." Others said, "Connectivity is the key to the future," and, "There is a danger of analysis paralysis—let us execute on priorities." Nick Kuenssberg said, "Broadband is like a new transport and communications infrastructure. It means pace. Pace is vital. We are talking about a 28-day year." Those quotations put into context exactly what the nub of the report is about and exactly what the business community's message is. If we are to make meaningful progress, rather than just sitting back and talking about it and creating more words, we must come up with something, in conjunction with the Executive, that is workable, manageable and swiftly provided and which can take us on our next quantum leap forward. The message of my winding-up speech is very simple. The primary, principal focus of everything that the report has produced is the provision of broadband. If I may say so, the Executive strategy's reference to speed, pace and the need for swift progress, which is being articulated by the business community, makes that strategy seem worthy. In many respects, it is worthy, and it is detailed. However, the business community would argue that it is plodding. I return to what members of the business community had to say. I crave your indulgence for the use of language, Presiding Officer, but I am going to give you a quotation. The best conclusion that I can give is a quotation from Mike Hambly, who said, "There is a precedent in Scotland for delivery of essential innovatory facilities to all. Let's bloody do it."

Although I accept what the minister says about the security of maintenance that users of the bridge enjoy, does the minister accept that, on examination of the figures, it is impossible to anticipate a time when operating revenues will not be generously in excess of running liabilities?

I am indebted to Fiona McLeod for one thing. When crossing the Erskine bridge, I have often wondered about the tiresome people who require little bits of paper, who hold up everyone else in the queue and stop people like me who just want to pay and get on with getting on with it. Of course, I should have expected no less from the SNP, because paying and getting on with it is certainly not germane to its political programme. The SNP's whole political ethos is formulated around paying nothing, expecting services to be maintained and then producing a huge and horrific tax bill to those who are unfortunate enough to be earning to cover everything else that has not been rationally charged for. I have to say that Mr Adams—[ Interruption. ] I beg his pardon—Mr Ingram. I think he put me in mind of the Addams family. [ Laughter. ] Mr Ingram's amendment is the height of political hypocrisy. Quite simply, the Scottish National Party has seen in this unhappy and regrettable situation an opportunity for political point scoring—a fact that is obvious from the comments that have been made by SNP members in the debate. However, far be it from me to waste time on the Scottish National Party. I want to focus on two important issues. I said earlier that I remembered the days of the Erskine ferry. I also remember the vagaries of that transport system, which were perhaps on a par with the quaint vagaries of the administrative and legal advice that is available to the minister's department. Locally, there was nothing but universal pleasure when it was announced that the bridge would be constructed and there was certainly no general antipathy towards paying tolls. For those of us who had paid fares on the Erskine ferry or who were confronted with the prospect of the fuel charges of using the Clyde tunnel, tolls  seemed a sensible and equitable way in which to fund improvements in transport facilities in that part of the Clyde estuary. I return to the point I made about the obvious discrepancy in the basis for charging on what I described as the three older toll bridges. As the minister and her colleague have failed to make it clear to the chamber that there is any justification for that discrepancy, I am left to conclude that she is not only unable to justify it, but that she may be planning to announce extremely bad news for the users of the Forth and Tay bridges. I ask the minister to clarify her position. Does she accept that there is a discrepancy that, for as long as it continues, makes the charging unfair? Does she intend to address the discrepancy by increasing the charges on the Forth and Tay bridges?

I am grateful to the minister, but I think that what she has proclaimed, in her usual coy manner, is bad news for the users of the Forth road bridge of an increased tolling regime in the near future. The SPICe research note—a helpful backdrop to the debate—informs us that the lifespan of the Erskine bridge is 121 years. Although my general impression is that the local communities that the bridge serves are not antipathetic to the tolls—it is not a pleasure for them to pay them, but they accept that that is a better prospect than the alternatives—there is an obligation, for the benefit of those communities, to provide greater transparency about where the moneys are going. I conclude by returning to Mr Tosh's comment about a notional sinking fund. There is a strong argument that there should now be an actual sinking fund. Given the lifespan of the bridge, the local people, who pay the bulk of the tolls and create the majority of the surpluses, are entitled to know what has been set aside to cover the projected costs of maintenance, depreciation and administration of the bridge. They should be told in clearer terms exactly what is happening to the money. The people in the local communities are  owed no less than that.

The situation would be more fully explained if the minister indicated that the return journey on the Erskine bridge is £1.20—most people who cross the bridge come back. Many people in the west of Scotland are concerned that that is at variance with the prevailing toll structures on the Forth and Tay bridges.

I echo the sentiments of my colleague Murray Tosh—this has been a regrettable omission on the part of the Executive and it should be addressed urgently. I say that with some personal angst, because I have paid so much in tolls since the Erskine bridge was constructed that I feel I now own a sizeable chunk of it. However, the urgency now is to rectify a very unfortunate situation. I have two points to make in my summing-up. First, the matter is a demonstration of grave managerial omission in the administration of the department. I urge the minister to inquire whether some form of formal audit has been put in place to ascertain—particularly with the benefit that we have nowadays of information technology—that check dates have been entered in the diary to ensure that if any such recurring orders must be reinstated it is done so timeously. Secondly, although I endorse the need to address this as emergency legislation, I have a vestigial and lingering shred of sympathy with Mr Quinan's presentation. I choose my words carefully. It has struck me for some time that, although I have no objection to paying the tolls on the Erskine bridge, there is an anomaly in that the Erskine bridge is the only one of the older toll bridges—including the Forth and Tay bridges—that is tolled in both directions. A return journey on the bridge is more expensive than a return journey on the Forth or Tay bridges. If I have a slight concern about the matter being dealt with as emergency legislation it is this: it seems to me to preclude the opportunity to address that issue, which is significant to the people of the west of Scotland who might justifiably inquire, "Why are we being subjected to a more oppressive toll regime than that prevailing in the east of Scotland?" I would be grateful if the minister were able to comment on that aspect.

I was intrigued by Karen Gillon's remark that the Tories do not want to consider anything. It is perhaps just as well for the people of Scotland that the Tories were prepared to consider something such as care for the elderly. Had the  Conservatives and the Scottish National Party not made their views crystal clear in the chamber, we would not even have heard of a community care and health bill—it would not have been part of the programme. Therefore, I say to Karen Gillon thank goodness for the Opposition, because it is the only leavening presence in the chamber. It is the only presence to test this dogmatic Executive with its preconceived ideas of what it wants to impose on the people of Scotland. If I sounded harsh when I spoke about the legislative programme earlier—I was careful to say that exceptions existed—I say also that elements of the programme are valuable and good, as David McLetchie said. I hope that they will improve the quality of life for people in Scotland. If I sounded harsh about the rest of the programme, it was because I felt frustrated. I sense that that frustration is not restricted to me because, as we know to our concern and disquiet, the Parliament is still on probation in Scotland. That may be painful and difficult for many to accept but, from speaking to people from all over Scotland, I get the impression that the Parliament does not smell of roses. The test before the Executive is not to show that the Parliament can be the equivalent of a confetti-production machine. As David McLetchie said, the number of bills produced and the number of acts passed are not measures of adequacy, relevance or value. The test is what matters to the people of Scotland. What are the issues that most affect them? What do we hear at surgeries, in correspondence and in our various meetings throughout Scotland from all members of the public who can or could vote for members of the Parliament? What perplexes them? I think that I know the answers. Those people are concerned that more people are waiting for operations and health care. More people wonder whether the best education is being offered to their children or whether they have a decent choice about how their children are educated. The business community is concerned about a potential lack of competitiveness. Many of our major investors are concerned about an increasing skills deficiency and skills gap. The Parliament should face up to those matters. It would have an opportunity to come through with flying colours if it were courageous enough and were given the time to consider such issues carefully and if it were prepared to be radical and ambitious, if not adventurous, in how it addressed them. I said that I was concerned about a practical consequence of the legislative programme, which is that our committees will be bogged down by the programme and will then be debarred from proper reflective thought on meaningful and worthwhile improvements in their subject areas.  My concern is that, although the legislative programme is in part extremely good—my party will support elements of it—the rest of it is sterile territory. It will neither set the heather on fire nor excite the people of Scotland. Most disturbingly, it will not invite the people of Scotland to give the Parliament a thumbs-up.

Mrs Godman has said that we want to engender greater interest in the political process—particularly in local government, which is of great importance to the people of Scotland. Could it not be argued that combining local government elections with the Scottish parliamentary elections will damp down interest in the former? Might it not deprive local authority candidates of an opportunity fully to explain their platforms and what they seek to do? Might it not deprive the public of an opportunity to see local government in its own right and to assess candidates on their own merits?

Is the First Minister concerned that what he proclaims to be a radical charter or programme of government reads more like a charter for dreary municipal officialdom, with certain honourable exceptions? Is not he concerned that the parliamentary committees will be bogged down with tedious review work instead of getting into the nitty-gritty of providing radical ideas for the betterment of Scotland?

I have pleasure in opening the debate on the motion in my name. I thank colleagues for supporting the motion and for being present. In particular, I thank the Scottish Parliament information centre for a helpful research note. I welcome to the public gallery sufferers of endometriosis, their families and their friends. It is good to have them here with us. I have a broad political point to make for the last debate before the recess. It is a point in support and defence of our Parliament. By our Parliament, I mean not just the Parliament of the MSPs, but the Parliament of our visitors in the gallery and of people beyond. The point is that, this evening, we are debating in Edinburgh the condition endometriosis. Before 29 May 2001, I could not have told you what that was. I had never heard of it. I do not suffer from it. However, on 29 May I received an e-mail from two constituents—a husband and wife—that detailed the condition. It sounded deeply unpleasant, is clearly not well known and apparently affects 1.4 per cent of women of child-bearing age in Scotland. The age group of women between 25 and 44 is particularly susceptible. I wondered about lodging a parliamentary question, but then I thought, "No. Lodge a motion for debate and find out whether more MSPs can be involved, whether we can address points to the minister and perhaps open up the debate." Here we are, less than a month later, doing just that. Without a Scottish Parliament, that would have been impossible. I hope that our visitors, whatever their political beliefs, feel involved, noticed and relevant. I also hope that they realise that they have triggered the accessibility, accountability and responsiveness that the Parliament is intended to demonstrate. That seems a good footnote for the end of our second year.  The dictionary definition of endometriosis is: "A condition in which tissue more or less perfectly resembling the uterine mucous membrane (the endometrium) and containing typical endometrial granular and stromal elements occurs aberrantly in various locations in the pelvic cavity." We may not feel much the wiser after that. The reality of the condition for many women of child-bearing age is pain, possible bleeding, acute discomfort before and during menstruation, and in some instances symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome, lethargy and even infertility. All that is accompanied by all the embarrassment and discomfiture that such an unpleasant condition induces. The only compensation for getting on a bit is that the condition will usually disappear with the menopause. The only certain diagnosis is by a laparoscopy or, occasionally, by a laparotomy, which is a major operation and a very intrusive piece of surgery. The treatment for the condition—treatment, not cure—is principally either hormonal or surgical, but complementary medicine can also play a role. I realise that many members want to speak, and it is not for me to outline the details of the condition and its many facets and forms. I am sure that other members will be able to give much more competent and personal contributions in that respect. I will set out what it is important for this debate to achieve. I would welcome the minister's comments on how we bring a focus to tackling endometriosis in Scotland. I have ascertained—largely by e-mail, but I have spoken to one of them—from general practitioners that there is an awareness of the condition but that there is an acceptance that it is a difficult one. I suggest to the minister that we consider some of the issues involved. That would raise public awareness of this unpleasant disease and, I hope, serve as a constructive influence in trying to widen the debate and assist with a more strategic attitude towards how we deal with it. One question that springs to mind is whether we can assist GPs with training. Could we formulate guidelines, to aid diagnosis? That might help many women who know that they are suffering, but who have no idea what is affecting them. Perhaps we could instigate a specialist referral procedure. Could we perhaps build on the work of the health department's chief scientist office, which has already done excellent work in Scotland and has a database on the condition? We could perhaps also develop a national framework for the treatment of the disease in Scotland. I have a message to women in Scotland: do not be put off going to the doctor because of shyness,  self-consciousness or embarrassment. Help can be provided, and the most important thing is for that help to be obtained when it is needed. Many of the unpleasant, debilitating and painful consequences of the condition can be alleviated to some extent. I hope that by having this debate this evening we will make our contribution to the broadening of awareness and to a more informed debate about the disease: let us hope that the Parliament can be the instrument for delivering more help to those who are afflicted by it.

If there is no target—I share Andrew Wilson's concern, because there ought to be one—does the minister consider it germane to his ambitions for the economy to comment on the recent report by the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee on the new economy and its impact on Scotland? What aspects of that report in particular does he consider helpful?

Can the minister say how the £10 million to assist farming and tourism that he has just announced will relate to the £10 million previously allocated to the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning? How much of that money has been allocated and how will the Minister for Finance and Local Government avoid confusion in the allocation of the additional money?

Yesterday, I had occasion to address the Finance Committee convener in the street. The exchange was brief. I said to him, "If you were a squirrel, my dog would chase you up a tree." He took that in good spirit. I am now overcome with contrition: I had not realised that in his late teens he was subjected to such a searing experience as admission to the accountancy profession. Accountancy's loss is our gain. His champagne-style delivery was a welcome and sparkling innovation in what has tended to be the leaden tedium of finance debates. The Finance Committee is to be commended for its constructive report on stage 1 of the budget process. As Donald Gorrie rightly said, positive comments can be made about that process. The annual expenditure report is a better document than last year's equivalent, "Investing in You". This year, subject committees were able to undertake a review of departmental activity, which was virtually impossible last year, owing to the deficiencies of "Investing in You". This year, an effort was made to increase the provision of disaggregated information, but it is still not sufficient. Progress is being made too slowly. It is only right to record that there was a helpful ministerial and departmental response to the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee's requests for information. I endorse David Davidson's comment that the Finance Committee report should be used as a template for how the Executive deals with the budget process. Those are the positives, but there are a considerable number of negatives that must also be highlighted. There is a lack of standardisation in departments' presentation of information and a shortage of specific information about departmental costs, which is unacceptable in a devolved Scotland. There is no mechanism to achieve outcome budgeting: what is spent means little unless it is known what is got and when. The budgets for health and enterprise are a prime example of that dilemma. The lack of performance comparators in those budgets means that there is no transparency and that it is not possible to compare costs between departments or quangos or local authorities. For example, are the administration costs in the department of enterprise and lifelong learning higher than those of the department of health? If they are, should they be? I do not know the answer, but the Parliament is entitled to ask such analytical  questions and, under the devolution structure, the people of Scotland are entitled to answers. Donald Gorrie made a useful point about whether it is more expensive to repair a pothole in one local authority area than in another. It is right that that information should be available. The people of Scotland should have some basis on which to judge how well their money is being spent. Another material omission in the annual expenditure report is its lack of information about sources of income. A much fuller picture of how expenditure is being set against the money that is available would be obtained if the annual expenditure report included information about whether the income came from last year's budget, from comprehensive spending reviews, from UK budget consequentials, from Barnett consequentials, from end-year flexibility or from the reserves. That would greatly assist us because we could determine whether we are talking about new spend or recycled money. That would assist us in identifying what items and elements of money are devoted to the provision of particular services or delivery of particular policies. In short, I welcome the Finance Committee's report. The committee is to be congratulated on a constructive piece of work, but there is still a long way to go. Huge deficiencies still exist. Until they are addressed, the budget process will still be lamentably deficient.

Just for illustration, will Alex Neil tell me which parish council in Scotland has power to borrow money?

I thought that parish councils could not be found in Scotland.

Does Mr Gorrie think that it would be helpful if the Accounts Commission were encouraged to be more analytical in the consideration of local authority expenditure, which, as Mr Gorrie will be aware, is the responsibility of the Accounts Commission rather than Audit Scotland?

The European commissioner for competition, Mario Monti, recently expressed concern about possible objections to operators' sharing mast sites. What will be the practical implications for Scotland if that opposition persists?

The minister may consider that he was gagged back in January, but it seems to have induced a state of taciturnity. The statement, which we welcome, was anticipated at least six weeks ago, but a general election intervened. When I read the statement and the accompanying documentation, I could see why the minister might have been diffident. I reckon that the proposals sent a chill through the spines of  certain Labour fiefdoms throughout Scotland. I derive great comfort from that, which is why I say to the minister—on behalf of the Conservative party in this Parliament—that I welcome the statement and the initiatives that are being taken. We have all acknowledged, in particular during the inquiry into the governance of the Scottish Qualifications Authority last year, that after devolution nothing was going to be the same for quangos in their relationship with Government. That brings me to my questions, of which one is general and two are specific. The minister said, during his statement: "we are redefining the relationship between the Executive and quangos to ensure that they work, where appropriate, to the Executive's agenda." That may be boldly adventurous or it may be downright sinister. It suggests—I await the minister's response with interest—that, whether intentionally or not, we are moving, where the activities of quangos are concerned, to a new relationship between the process of government and the responsibility of ministers to the people of Scotland. In general terms, I want to ask the minister this: if, henceforth, a disaster occurs in the public arena that emanates from a quango, can this Parliament and the Scottish public expect a minister to take responsibility for it? Secondly, on the more specific aspects of the abolition and review that are proposed in the statement, I presume that some quantification has been made of the possible saving of resources. The statement mentions many abolitions, several reviews and unifications and one or two creations. I presume that, at the end of the day, we will satisfy one of the nine criteria, which is better value for money. Will the minister confirm to the chamber the exact cost saving of this initiative to the people of Scotland? My final question relates to the composition of boards of quangos and the Ethical Standards in Public Life etc (Scotland) Act 2000. The minister will be aware that, particularly in the context of boards of management for further education colleges, the act has already given rise to a practical difficulty. Many able and good members of local communities who serve on those boards are proving reluctant to continue their period of service because of what some regard as the oppressive inquisitiveness of the act, which seems to require disclosure of information at a level of detail that frankly is beyond the understanding of most sensible people. If the current effect of the act is to remove good and able people from the areas of activity where we need them, will the minister satisfy the chamber by reassuring us that the act is not a deterrent, but is instead beneficial and encouraging?

He had better make it good, Presiding Officer.

I also thank Cathy Jamieson for securing the debate and I welcome the opportunity to contribute to it. I want to make it clear to Cathy that I do not disagree with her, although I will perhaps identify slight distinctions of emphasis. As a Conservative, I entirely endorse Cathy's reference to the trade union movement. There is no doubt that the movement has played a significant role in the promotion of adult learning. However, it is also important to remember—and, to be fair, Cathy referred to this and commended everyone—that adult learners week is a collaborative initiative between education providers, training providers, broadcasters and industry. It is important that partnership elements are remembered. Collective contribution enriches the outcome for all those who participate. I would welcome the minister's comments on one or two matters. If the trade union movement is involved, that is great. Its involvement gives people who are seeking adult learning a vehicle—or a pair of legs—to seek it. However, many people are boxed into environments or circumstances in which there are real impediments to and difficulties in accessing adult learning. I understand that adult learners week was co-ordinated by Community Learning Scotland to develop increased participation in education and training, particularly for those who do not have easy access because of class, gender, age, race, language, culture, learning difficulty, disability barriers or insufficient financial resources. It might be instructive for Parliament and helpful to the relevant committees to ascertain from Community Learning Scotland how it got on with adult learners week. Would it be able to give us a report on participation? Were areas identified where access was not utilised fully? Were there reasons for that? Does Community Learning Scotland have a positive report on the response to the week? Cathy Jamieson mentioned the possible  impediments that might deter people from participating. People might be embarrassed or nervous about their basic literacy or numeracy, or feel that they do not want to make fools of themselves by even saying that they might be interested in a subject. That is of critical importance. I suspect that Community Learning Scotland could comment on that and give us some guidance. In conclusion, I endorse the motion. Some very useful lessons are to be learned from the week. If the minister could procure further information from Community Learning Scotland, we would all be enriched.

To ask the Scottish Executive how many local authorities currently operate systems involving fixed penalties for people dropping litter. (S1O-3555)

I thank the minister for her reply, which may explain much. The Scottish Executive overlooks much, but not even it can be blind to the unlicensed public tip that many of the streets and open spaces in the villages and towns of Scotland constitute. Is it reasonable to expect the people of  Scotland to continue to paddle through abandoned food containers, half-eaten dinners and other miscellaneous debris? Is that the best advertisement for Scotland that we can offer potential visitors? If not, what will the minister do about it?

Does the minister accept that in certain quarters of Scotland there is a regrettable, almost laddish, culture that pays scant respect to the well-being of women? Does he believe that that ought to be raised at schools, where people should be trained or taught to believe in mutual respect for one another, in the hope of developing better-rounded citizens who take a responsible attitude?

To ask the Scottish Executive what provision exists within the primary and secondary curricula for the teaching of technological studies. (S1O-3540)

The minister's reply slightly eases my troubled mind in one respect and troubles it further in another. Is the minister concerned to learn that in an educational authority the size of Glasgow City Council, where there are 27 secondary schools, it is alleged that technological studies is available as a subject choice in only three schools? Given the current skills gap in Scotland, is not that a deeply disquieting picture? Will the minister confirm that he is prepared to examine this issue with a degree of urgency?

Does the First Minister accept that young people are concerned? Whatever he may choose to call the graduate endowment, it is seen by many potential undergraduates as a tax. What would he say to young people who say that they are deterred from the prospect of going into higher education because they still see a charge at the end? I have encountered instances of their concern in recent weeks.

I declare an interest as a member of the court of the University of Strathclyde. In response to the minister's last point, the Conservatives do not intend to privatise the university sector, as institutions that are already autonomous cannot be privatised. We merely address our minds to funding and it would be refreshing were the Executive and the Government prepared to do so themselves. Is the minister aware of the work being carried out by the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee on the current allocations of funding by SHEFC? Can she assure us that no precipitate announcements or initiatives will be made pending the outcome of the committee's inquiry?

I shall restrict my response to a verbal punch. The Conservatives in Scotland spent more on education than the Executive—a painful fact for the minister to acknowledge. Is the minister satisfied not only that pupil attainment is increasing, but with what pupils are attaining? Is he satisfied that that matches the needs of the outside world?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether any impact assessment has been or will be carried out to quantify possible job losses in the quarrying industry in Scotland if a flat rate tax of £1.60 per tonne on all aggregates extracted in Scotland is introduced from April 2002. (S1O-3419)

I am somewhat disappointed by the minister's response. Given the responsibilities of her portfolio, it is difficult to explain why she is not concerned about possible job losses. I appreciate that the Scottish Executive is more conversant with holes that it digs for itself than  with holes that are dug by other people, but even allowing for that positive experience, is not the minister concerned that a recent survey produced by the Quarry Products Association showed that in the remoter areas of Scotland, where quarrying is significant, it is anticipated that the tax may involve the loss of 1,600 direct jobs and 1,000 related jobs? Surely that is relevant to the minister's area of responsibility.

Does the minister accept, after listening to  the view of Electronics Scotland, that there is now a void between the need and the provision of skills in Scotland? Does the minister acknowledge that that is an area of profound concern in our schooling, not just because of the fact that we may not have adequately trained or skilled teachers to provide the skills that are so desperately needed, but because there may be an attitude problem on the part of parents and their contemporaries in advising youngsters that a successful career may lie ahead in technological areas? How does the minister propose to address those factors?

The minister will accept that, in her constituency and that of Mr Henry, millions of pounds of public money have been spent in recent years. Does she acknowledge that the communities of Dumfries and Galloway, which have received a mere £800,000, would give their eye teeth to get their hands on even a proportion of what has been made available to those urban communities?

I know that the minister was rendered mute in his previous attempt to address the chamber on the matter of quangos, and I understand his being a little coy about coming forward with his report. However, I am slightly disappointed that that report is not to be made available until June, because I think that we all expect some fairly radical proposals in it. Is the reason for his coyness something other than the general election?

Will the minister take an intervention?

I thank the minister for giving way and I appreciate the candour and clarity of her enthusiasm for the importance of petrol revenue taxes to the exchequer. If that money is so essential to the exchequer, will the minister concede that it would be more honest to increase income tax than to punish and pulverise a section of the community?

Although I welcome the opportunity to contribute to the debate—to that extent I am grateful to the SNP for bringing the matter to the Parliament—the terms of the motion are such that I find myself in the surprising position of feeling more bountiful than Mr MacAskill. Mr MacAskill and the SNP are not usually trammelled by budgetary constraints, whereas members of the Conservative party are frequently challenged as being among the most niggardly politicians in the United Kingdom. If that means that we are prudent in looking at the economy, that we are pragmatic in our attempts to apply help where help is needed, and that we make reasonable and manageable savings to achieve that end, I am proud to stand up and advance that cause. The facts, which may be unpalatable to the Labour party, make chilling reading. In May 1997, the average cost of petrol was 59p a litre, of which 45.7p was tax. Under Labour, that tax has climbed to 61p, which represents an increase of 34 per cent. By any standards, that is a cold and unwelcome message to the motorist. Indeed, Mr Brown must seem to the motorist like a wolf padding round looking for victims. His attitude to the motorist seems to say, "I'll huff and I'll puff and—eventually—I'll blow your house down." Perversely, if the motorists of Scotland turn for comfort from the threat and rapacious instincts of the wolf to the Scottish National Party, which masquerades as a good fairy, they will be somewhat surprised to find that, instead of Cinderella, they are presented with the two ugly sisters. The help that is offered in Mr MacAskill's motion is surprisingly limited—hence the Conservative amendment. I will go back to the history of the price of petrol in Scotland over the past four years. There has been a deliberate and wilful attempt—

The first thing to point out to Mr Lyon, for whom numeracy is not a strong suit, is that if one takes a time span of 18 years, one can  expect to see a rise in tax. The depressing factor is that if we take a time span of four years under Labour, we see a dramatic increase in taxation over that short period which transcends anything that was done under the Conservatives—not that I expect Mr Lyon's numeracy to be improved by that elementary instruction. I return to what the Labour party has done while it has been in power. In his first budget, Gordon Brown pledged not to increase taxes, but promptly increased the fuel duty escalator by 20 per cent. He held another budget in his first year, piling a double whammy of increased fuel taxes on to the motorist. Then, perhaps more devastatingly for those trying to make a living out of haulage, in his third budget, he increased tax on diesel by 12 per cent above inflation. In manageable housekeeping terms, the average household finds that petrol has overtaken the mortgage and food as the single most expensive item of expenditure in the household budget. Currently, people pay £350 a year more for their petrol than they did in 1997. The difficulty is that either the chancellor is unable to understand what the rapacious effect of those tax increases has been on the motorists or, understanding that, is totally obdurate and reluctant to do anything about it.

I am sorry; I do not have much time. The cosmetic legerdemain that Mr Brown applied in the budget defied belief by promising a carrot until the election is over and then promptly withdrawing it. It is undoubtedly the case that in our remoter communities, particularly—as Mr MacAskill has said—those that have been affected by the ravages of foot-and-mouth disease, there is a crisis for the motorist and the haulage industry.

I am sorry; I am pushed for time. Presiding Officer, I am not sure what my time allocation is.

In that case, I will take Mr Rumbles's intervention.

I think that Mr Rumbles will find that there was minimal reduction in fuel tax in that period. That is not unexpected, for the simple reason that fuel in Britain was then among the  cheapest in Europe. Britain has now become the country with the second-highest fuel prices. Of course, Mr Rumbles conveniently overlooks the Kyoto agreement, for which all parties have pledged support. That commitment means that there was a need to apply some level of taxation to try to reduce consumption. The Conservatives always acknowledged that the fuel duty escalator would have a cut-off point and were prepared to apply that cut-off point. That is unlike Mr Brown, who, in lupine fashion, pursued his wolfish instincts and continued to ravage the motorist.

I will make progress with the text of my speech. Motorists find themselves in an impossible situation. In many places, particularly in remoter areas such as island communities, the car is not a luxury, but a necessity. Motorists find that they are penalised for relying on their motor cars for essential transport. That is unacceptable. Motorists in that beleaguered position must be offered some form of constructive help—certainly something more tangible than has been evident from any quarter of the Treasury. The Scottish nationalists may masquerade to the people of Scotland as the good fairy, but if one analyses what they seek to do, one will find less comfort than they would like everybody to believe. Mr MacAskill has had to peg his purported help to the Scottish people at 10p per gallon. The motion offers to reduce fuel tax by 10p per gallon, but the motorist would like, and needs, much more than that. The Conservative party is committed to a cut of 3p per litre, which is 13.6p per gallon, because it acknowledges that there are pressing needs that must be addressed and it can see how costed help can be provided to a particularly desperate sector of an overtaxed community. The reason why the SNP has to peg the help that it offers is the fundamental problem with its finances. The speeches of individual SNP members have been revealing to everyone who has witnessed them in the chamber during this Parliament. Almost without exception, those speeches have included uncosted spend commitments. A tally of everything that has been pledged by individual members of the SNP would reach a budgetary level that promises unacceptable expenditure cuts or impossible tax increases.

I thank Mrs Ewing for the opportunity to explain that aspect of our policy. The Conservative party has said that there clearly are areas in which public expenditure can be reduced without unacceptable consequences for public activity. It has also said that it is perfectly possible to reduce the level of taxation, which is now regarded by most economic commentators as being unacceptably high, and in so doing stimulate and nourish further growth and increase the revenue that is gathered by the exchequer. The SNP does not address this fundamental shortfall: on the basis of recent figures, all the income that Scotland generates is £28.2 billion, but we currently expend £33.1 billion. The Scottish nationalists do not explain anywhere from where they will produce the missing £4.9 billion. That is the hole in the side of the ship that sinks it. It is perfectly clear that, while the Scottish National Party purports to offer help to the motorist—to whom its motion seeks to give some form of tangible support—the underlying frailty of its economic arguments and calculations defeats that party's aspiration to offer more extensive help. That is why I lodged my amendment. My amendment seeks to give tangible help to the Scottish motorist, not just by offering a cut in fuel tax, but by making some constructive suggestions as to how real help might be given in the more remote and island communities to motorists who desperately need it. I move amendment S1M-1866.1, to leave out from "calls on" to end and insert: "calls upon the Scottish Executive to make representations to the Chancellor of the Exchequer to reduce fuel tax by at least three pence per litre (13.6 pence per gallon) and to investigate a derogation of Vehicle Excise Duty for island registered private cars and the extension of such a derogation to designated remote communities in Scotland, identified on a postcode basis."

Will Mr McNeil give way?

For a debate on a subject as serious as skills, the Scottish Executive's motion is disquietingly bland and complacent. As is so often the case with the Scottish Executive, the words of its self-indulgent, self-congratulatory motion are a world away from what is happening in the business community in Scotland. Indeed, if one considers the text of the motion, it is about as exciting as inquiring whether someone takes milk and sugar in their tea. The Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning's speech sought to liven up the motion a little, but in a sense the content disclosed the underlying problem. If I counted correctly, nine particular initiatives and entities were mentioned, all of which seek to address the problem of skills. Out in the business community, influential members of that community are expressing real concerns about the fact that there is a skills shortage. That skills shortage is not currently being addressed. There is a concern that the skills that are being provided are not relevant to the needs of the business community and that, as Mr MacAskill indicated, the delivery of skills provision is variable throughout Scotland. Indeed, in some places, such provision operates on an apparently haphazard basis, with no audit of the final outcome to ascertain how many individuals have demonstrably benefited from the attempts to provide them with and improve their skills. That skills gap is threatening the future of Scottish business. Unless those deficiencies are addressed urgently, the Scottish Executive might as well ask Scottish business to run a car on a tank full of water. What are the facts? Let me quote directly from business, from a meeting with Electronics Scotland, which I attended yesterday with some of my colleagues from the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee. The meeting was held at the Sun Microsystems plant in Linlithgow. We were given a clear and direct message. The three big issues confronting the electronics industry and presenting challenges over the next decade are skills, business climate and e-commerce. I will comment on the latter two issues briefly before turning to skills. Business climate was mentioned in the context of representing the realities of taxation and regulation. Those are not imaginary political myths, used by nefarious politicians to cause embarrassment to opponents, but the oppressive and repressive stifling realities for many businesses in Scotland today. The comment on e-commerce was equally disconcerting. Although we  may pride ourselves on being ahead of the game in Scotland and congratulate ourselves on having done a great deal to advance the awareness and implementation of e-commerce, the reality is that many of our international competitors are far more proactive in the use of e-commerce. They regard it quite simply as a tool of business, just as our predecessors regarded the broker market and the trading centre. For our international competitors, e-commerce is a means to go out and negotiate, carry out options, seek business and offer deals. In Scotland, we seem to be far less active in that respect. Let me turn to skills, in particular to the views that were relayed by the influential group of people with whom we met yesterday. The message is stark: Scotland is not producing people with the right skills for the electronics industry. It is anticipated that over the next five years, that industry will need 5,000 engineers per annum. The current university output is somewhere between 2,000 and 4,000. It is clear that not enough youngsters of school age are being made aware of electronics technology when at school, partially because it comes under the general heading of engineering, which still has a spanners-and-oily-cloth image, and partially because of a bias on the part of parents in relation to engineering. It seems clear that if we are to make sensible progress towards increasing the provision of youngsters with the necessary technical skills to enter industry, particularly the electronics industry, there has to be a change of attitude at primary and secondary school level. It would make a lot of sense if technology, and not computing—the two should not be confused—became part of the core curriculum as early as secondary 1 and secondary 2, because it is clear that if we plant the appropriate seeds we will get the right crop, and if we do not, we will not. The reason for my amendment is not merely to address the blandness and nakedness of the motion, it is to point out where another area of deficiency is to be found. Not only is there a need to address the gaping void in the current provision of skills for business, but a hard look has to be taken at what currently masquerades under the banner of the provision of skills, be that by way of new deal, skillseekers, apprenticeships or whatever. Indeed, whatever spin the Executive may care to put on new deal in Scotland, the facts are unimpressive. The Employment Service research report ESR33, published in December 1999, found that in the first year of new deal for young people, approximately 50 per cent of individuals leaving unemployment via new deal would have left unemployment anyway. Also of concern, as the report pointed out, is that of the people who left  new deal for young people, a proportion rejoined the claimant count, so the current estimate is that as few as 40 per cent of youngsters may have been helped. That finding may be coupled with the April NDYP figures, which show that 27 per cent of jobs gained by new deal leavers do not last longer than 13 weeks. It is estimated that new deal for 18 to 24-year-olds has cost around £20,000 per job. In any debate about skills, perhaps the most depressing feature is that only 10 per cent of new deal participants complete their training courses and leave with a qualification. To suggest that new deal is an effective skills provider is frankly nonsense. If the response is that it is not meant to be a skills provider, the question has to be asked, what does it exist for, and is it a justifiable use of such extensive sums of public money? On the matter of apprenticeships in general, not just modern apprenticeships, to return to the meeting with Electronics Scotland, I must ask the minister why one of the businessmen who was present at that meeting should express total scepticism about the effectiveness of the apprenticeship system? Analysis shows that only 50 per cent of apprentices actually pass. That is on the back of variable provision throughout Scotland as to the available funding for people who are seeking apprenticeships. Clearly, that is a totally haphazard and random way to approach the provision of skills, and is an area that I suggest the Scottish Executive, in conjunction with the enterprise network, should urgently investigate. Indeed, if one examines the projected increase in the provision of apprenticeships in terms of the enterprise and lifelong learning budget, as recently disclosed, the demand becomes ever more clamant. The amendment in my name is an attempt to address the manifest deficiencies of the motion as it is currently framed. I move amendment S1M-1857.2, to leave out from "endorses" to end and insert: "recognises that investment in skills is the key to Scotland's future business success and calls upon the Scottish Executive to ensure that the skills being provided are relevant to the needs of Scottish business and that the delivery of skills provision is monitored to ensure maximum effectiveness in skills enhancement."

I would like to place on record the profound concern of the Scottish Conservatives at the announcement by Motorola of the closure at Bathgate. We accept that it is grievous news for the local community. If I may continue with the point raised by Mr MacAskill, can the minister clarify whether the regional selective assistance grant will be paid direct to the Exchequer in Westminster or to the Executive? I am not sure, from the minister's comments in response to Mr MacAskill's question, whether that money will be exclusively deployed to West Lothian. I would be grateful for clarification of that. The minister, in her statement, mentioned one-to-one counselling and the possible role of the consultative forum. It is very important, if the work force at Motorola is to have a positive prospect of re-employment, that clear guidance is given as to  how reskilling and retraining is to be provided. Where is it going to be provided and on what time scale?

Yesterday, the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning said in the chamber that there was a possibility that, from the £5 million that has been allocated to visitscotland to try to improve the current situation, area tourist boards might receive a rebate of their subscriptions. That would alleviate conditions, but informed estimates suggest that the cost of doing that could amount to £4 million. Is the minister suggesting that only £1 million from the package will remain for the purposes to which Mr Raffan alluded?

Will the member take an intervention?

If any speech encapsulated the bill, it was that of Mr Lyon. If I may, I will pick upon his quaint utterance of "hyperbowl". That is not a term with which I am familiar, but it seems redolent of a big, gaping receptacle. In the context of his contribution to the debate, that seems wholly appropriate. It was clear from his speech that ignorance is indeed bliss, because the Tories did not abolish grants or introduce tuition fees—Labour did. I say to Mrs Livingstone—who seems to have deserted the chamber—that no Scottish student paid tuition fees under 18 years of Tory government, and a grant was given to any Scottish student whose income circumstances required it. Let us have no hypocrisy from the Liberal Democrat benches. The bill has always seemed to me to be strange: what its authors seek to present it as is not what, on analysis, it is. If the bill is to taken seriously as a credible attempt to abolish tuition fees, where within it is the phrase "abolition of tuition fees"?

Certainly.

The bill may, in the perception of Liberal Democrats, have nothing to do with tuition fees, but in the perception of everyone else—with the exception of Mrs Radcliffe's Labour colleagues—the bill has everything to do with tuition fees. With the fondness for verbal usage  that the Liberal Democrats are so keen on, the bill is an attempt to use vocabulary to create a postgraduate tuition fee by any other name. No one outside the chamber who has half a brain—

No—I have already taken Nora Radcliffe's intervention. No one outside the chamber will accept for one moment that the bill supports the abolition of tuition fees in any way. It is a patent instrument for the maintenance of tuition fees, switching them from an up-front charge for people going to university to a deferred charge for people who have left university. Perhaps there is nothing particularly surprising about the bill. If we are to be bluntly honest about the approach of the Labour party, it never wanted to abolish tuition fees—good heavens, the Labour party introduced them, so why on earth would it seek to abolish them?

Very well.

As I made clear, no student in Scotland suffered under the Conservative Government as students have suffered under the Labour Government, or as they will suffer under the bill's proposals. The bill is both hypocritical and duplicitous. The hypocrisy is that the Labour element in the chamber does not want to abolish tuition fees—no one believes for one moment that it does. However, it had to satisfy an electoral compact with the Liberal Democrats, who were on record before the Scottish Parliament elections as telling everyone who wanted to listen that they wished to abolish tuition fees. It is amusing and, I am sure, almost distressing to the public and our audience outwith the Parliament to see the braying—some might say asinine—discomfiture of the Liberal Democrats when they are forced to try to defend the indefensible. Quite simply, in the partnership agreement that accompanies the unholy electoral alliance that is the Executive coalition, the Liberal Democrats said, "You've got to do something that looks like abolition of tuition fees." The Labour element of that coalition, which was not interested in the slightest in the abolition of tuition fees, said, "Leave it to us—we'll mesmerise you with a  document that will say everything but 'get rid of tuition fees'." That is the patent nonsense with which we are now confronted.

No. I am sorry, but I do not have a lot of time. The bill contains a proposal that is patently a charge on our students. Although members of the coalition parties might not want to accept the evidence, all the evidence that was taken made it crystal clear that the imposition of a deferred charge, tax or fee—members can call it what they will—on our graduates is a deterrent, and to seek repayment at a £10,000 threshold is penal. Some would say, and the Conservative party has argued, that it is a tax. In principle, the Conservative party is unable to accept the bill, as it is patently dishonest. Section 1 does not do what it sets out to do—on the contrary, it maintains a provision for Scottish higher and further education that we, and to their credit, members of the Scottish National Party, are opposed to. Once upon a time, the Liberal Democrats were also opposed to it. Unlike the Liberal Democrats, Conservatives will not betray their commitment to the electorate; we will honour and abide by it.

I am not going to enter into a debate on comparative grossness; I think that I would come off poorly. If Mr Henry were to read my amendment, he would find that I am trying to achieve the opposite effect of Mr MacAskill's uncosted spend commitment. My amendment makes it clear that our spend commitments are contained and quantifiable.

Mr MacAskill's buccaneering language and swaggering demeanour come as no surprise to the chamber. However, when I read his motion, I felt that in some respects it did not go far enough, which surprised me. His analysis of the problem that confronts Scotland is inadequate and the remedy that he proposes is unfocused. That is why I felt it appropriate to lodge an amendment in my name, which I hope encompasses the Conservative party's concerns. Tourism employs about 180,000 people throughout Scotland and injects approximately £2.5 billion into the Scottish economy annually. Tourism is a giant in the Scottish economy. The sector provides about one in every 15 Scottish jobs, compared with one in 18 jobs in the UK as a whole. That demonstrates the significance of the industry to Scotland. However, in recent years, the giant has been, far from striding forward and going  from strength to strength, visibly limping. With the foot-and-mouth outbreak in Scotland, that giant has been brought to its knees with its head bloodied. Something has to be done. The crisis in Dumfries and Galloway, with all the appalling consequences for those who are caught up in it, should not by cack-handed incompetence and crass confusion be translated into and represented as a national disaster for Scotland. The Scottish Executive and the relevant tourist agencies have been the instruments of that confusion, either by generating it themselves or by allowing to go unchecked and uncorrected the deeply damaging images and misinformation about Scotland that are presented by other countries worldwide. Before we lecture other countries, we have to get our house in order. Two things have to be done immediately. We should acknowledge publicly where the heart of the problem is—Dumfries and Galloway—and designate that as a crisis area. Urgent and emergency help should be focused on business in that area by establishing a moratorium, by which I mean a deferral, not a cancellation, of liability. There should be a moratorium on liability for business rates and council tax where the business is run from the personal dwelling house of the business owner and a moratorium on liability for payment of national taxes.

I disagree with Mr Ewing. My amendment is different from the SNP motion in that it is a little more responsible. I am trying to further the debate on how we focus help where it is needed now. We need to be utterly blunt on where the problem area in Scotland is. We should provide a moratorium on the liability for business rates and a moratorium on the liability for payment of national taxes such as value added tax, the employer's element of pay as you earn, national insurance contributions, income tax and, as appropriate, corporation tax. If we provide for the establishment of a hardship loans scheme to address the cash-flow problem that faces many essentially sound businesses in that designated crisis area, the provision of interest-free funding will, in my opinion, go a long way towards arresting the imminent closure of many  businesses that are now in their death-throes. Having identified where the heart of the problem is in Scotland, we must take action to market robustly and vigorously the positive scene in the rest of Scotland, where tourism can safely be encouraged and visitors and holidaymakers be made welcome.

I am short of time and there are still two or three points that I wish to make. Only by being totally frank about a very difficult situation in part of Scotland can we convincingly become positive about the many opportunities that exist for the remainder of Scotland. For tourism in general, and for the businesses in the crisis area, the time for words, initiatives, statements and declarations is over. If the giant that tourism is to our economy is not immediately revived with the recuperative measures that I have mentioned, it will not rise again. Indeed, it will not be present in any recognisable form. I find myself uneasy with the Executive amendment, which seems unfocused and imprecise in what it seeks to do. I appreciate that some flesh was put on the Executive's plans in the minister's press statement this morning, which was made in response to the parliamentary question lodged by Dr Elaine Murray. However, although I am glad that we have £13.5 million to address the problems, my concern is that the help that is necessary in Dumfries and Galloway is unlikely to be provided quickly or in a focused manner by the enterprise network. To give visitscotland £5 million at this stage is not the best way of providing immediate help to the ailing businesses that are confronting such great problems. The aspect of the statement that I welcome is the increased provision for rates relief, which is why I phrased the amendment as I did. I move amendment S1M-1797.1, to leave out from "on the tourism industry" to end and insert: "in Scotland on the tourism industry and businesses within the affected areas; believes that conflicting information about the disease, both at home and abroad, further jeopardises Scottish tourism; further believes that more must be done to secure the future of the tourism industry, and therefore calls upon the Scottish Executive to implement the following recovery plan for tourism and businesses within the affected areas: (i) immediate action to enable and ensure efficient crisis management, including a public information campaign through the press and broadcast media to make people aware of what can and cannot be done during the crisis, (ii) a moratorium on liability for business rates and council tax, (iii) a moratorium to be sought by the Scottish Executive from HM Treasury on liability for payment of national taxes, (iv) the establishment of a designated crisis area within the local authority area of Dumfries and Galloway to which the foregoing moratoria would apply, (v) the establishment of a hardship loan scheme to address the problem of cash flow  facing many essentially sound businesses in the designated crisis area and (vi) a robust recovery strategy to be implemented by the Scottish Executive and relative agencies to market Scotland as a world class tourist destination."

The minister will be aware of the evidence taken by the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee yesterday on the SHEFC review of teaching and research funding. Does she share the concern expressed by Universities Scotland that the proposals are not based on evidence? Does she accept as significant the opinion offered by Universities Scotland that implementation of the proposals should be deferred until full consideration can be given to them and consultation conducted on them, given that the deadline is 31 March?

With reference to Mr Brown's remarks, I own up to being inquisitive, I do not own up to being left wing and I think that the jury is out on the busybody bit. Having said that, however, I welcome the draft bill, as does my party. Mr McLetchie's opening speech indicated that. We embrace the principles of the draft bill and are glad to see it. It is important to bear in mind the backdrop against which the draft bill is being published. In his opening remarks, the Deputy First Minister articulated the principles behind the draft bill, but I think that the backdrop should not be forgotten. That backdrop is the important one of the time-honoured and tested delicate balance that has always been struck among the three pillars of the constitution: the executive, the legislature and the judiciary. The great constitutional law cases that any law student is familiar with have always sought to protect the individual against the weight of the state, and that protection is currently available under existing law. The greatest test of balance has perhaps been on the issue of individual right against national security or material prejudice if information were disclosed. At the levels of national and devolved government, there are important issues to be borne in mind, but there is also a need not to reinvent the wheel and to be cognisant of the  strong virtues of existing law. Having said that, the draft bill addresses significant issues. There is a need to facilitate access to public information and there have been some shabby and furtive instances of wilful and unsustainable refusal to disclose information, as Mr McLetchie said. If those deficiencies are to be found in government, they are certainly to be found in local government and in other public agencies. Non-disclosure in those cases is probably more to do with discomfiture and indolence than with genuine issues of essential confidentiality or material prejudice. Any opening up of those dank and unlit corridors is welcome. In so far as the draft bill proceeds to address those areas, its provisions are to be commended. The intended statute will be meaningless if the Scottish Executive is not prepared to lead by example, and the record to date is not impressive. At present, without any change to the law, voluminous disclosure can be effected, but the Scottish Executive has made little use of that facility. Contrary to the impression created by some persons in this chamber about the Conservative Government, the record shows that it made demonstrable progress in practising disclosure of information. In this respect, the Scottish Executive has been at best coy, at worst covert. I therefore support Mr McLetchie's amendment, because it seems to me that allowing the Scottish Executive to make Cabinet meeting minutes available is indeed a meaningful start. On general disclosure, it is desirable that the Scottish Executive and the First Minister, who are publicly accountable, should perhaps have the predominant role over an unelected commissioner. Having articulated that reservation, that is why the Conservatives feel unable to support the amendment in the name of Roseanna Cunningham. My party welcomes the bill and endorses its principles. We think that there will have to be rigorous debate at committee level to ensure that existing law is not overlooked and that its best virtues are recognised. We also think that there will be areas in which there has to be considerable debate about how we maintain a delicate balance. I am acutely aware that today is a good day for the very many people in Scotland who have felt frustrated, deprived of rightful information and impeded and blocked at every turn. In my professional life I have acted for many such people. Today's draft bill shows that, at last, a door is opening through which they will be able to walk.

Pauline McNeill touches on an interesting issue, which I suspect will become more prominent as the debate unfolds. That issue is the delicate balance between the institutions of our constitution, which are traditionally the executive, the legislature and the judiciary. With regard to GCHQ, by any argument there was an issue of national security. I have not met anybody outwith the trade union movement who disputes that assessment. I make the point merely to illustrate to Pauline McNeill that there are broader issues to be considered.

My contribution will be brief, because I have concerns about three areas. I am grateful to George Lyon for securing the debate; maintenance of essential services to our island and remote communities is vital. All members will agree that, in that respect, Scotland is an individual and very distinctive part of the European Union—the Scottish Executive has the competence to articulate that point forcefully. However, as my colleague Mr Tosh mentioned, concomitant with that is the prickly, ticklish and somewhat controversial issue of value for money. I  have already pointed out the inconsistency—indeed, the lack of rationale—in relation to the inability to get transparent operating costs from Caledonian MacBrayne on its individual routes. The company might be hoist with that petard, because such aspects might become more painfully apparent during the competitive tendering process. In recognition of the need to provide such essential services to the island communities, it might be beneficial to have greater transparency about the actual cost, to try to establish the actual need. Proper accounting could be viewed, as could what the crossing pattern of costs and subsidies might be. That would be done with a view not to ceasing the service, but to providing everyone—including the customers in the communities—with best value for money. I will conclude by alluding to the points that were raised by Professor Kay. On many of the extended and remote routes in question, any separation between vessel owner and operator might make it difficult to procure relief vessels when there are breakdowns. The operator might not necessarily be geographically proximate to Scotland. Professor Kay outlined some genuine concerns; it would be appropriate for the minister to allay some of our apprehensions in that respect.

I thank the minister for the courtesy of allowing me to clarify the position. It is perfectly clear that most informed commentators regard the much-touted figure of £16 billion as entirely speculative and a malicious invention of the Labour party. That is borne out by respected commentators such as Evan Davis of BBC's "Newsnight", who said: "The Tories are telling the truth and only by wilfully misreading the Conservatives' spending plans can you call it £16 billion." The figure that has been costed is £8 billion. It is no wonder that the minister is unhappy and reluctant to hear comment on the subject, because heading the tally of that £8 billion is a £1.8 billion reduction in the costs of government. That will raise a cheer from the voters. Reducing fraud by £1 billion— [Interruption.]

I am unable to continue, but I hope that I have managed to destabilise some of the minister's bile and vitriol. [Interruption.]

I begin not with figures but with words. I see from the proposed change to the motion that the budget bill will "be passed". I suggest that that wording is defective. If the motion is agreed to, it will be a statement of laudable future intent, but it does not seem to me to convey immediate effect, although I presume that the Executive's desire is to pass the bill today. While I am not here to help the Executive, I submit that a better-phrased motion would read "that the Parliament agrees to pass" the bill.

Presiding Officer, I lob those thoughts to you for your consideration.  The background to the budget process and the final stage of the bill still bears repeating. That process was inadequate because there was insufficient disaggregation, which meant that the Parliament's committees were unable to do their intended or proper job of scrutinising thoroughly proposed expenditure in each area of activity. That seems to me to be a serious criticism of the whole budget process. I hope that it will be addressed in the future. The bill seems to be deficient because of that initial inadequacy. As the minister said, we are dealing with £18.4 billion of public money, which has been made possible only on the back of high taxation—tax on marriages, tax on mortgages, tax on petrol, tax on pensions, tax on business and a higher rate poundage in Scotland than in England. The public are entitled to know what the budget is about. The public are entitled to ask what they have in exchange for the tax take. As far as we can gather, they have 180,000 on the waiting list for the waiting list, and fewer police than they had in 1997. In addition, crime has gone up, prisons are closing and tuition fees are becoming a graduate tax to be repaid when graduates' earnings reach £10,000. It seems to me that that is a dismal message for the public and that aspects of the budget process and the bill deserve serious criticism. If the public were acutely aware of the specific content of the bill, they would be deeply concerned. Without adequate disaggregation, what can we tell about the bill? Not a lot—but we can tell that the Executive's administration budget is to increase by 6 per cent. I say to the minister that I do not find that an especially attractive area of proposed expenditure. It is a sorry message for the people of Scotland to hear. Do they want to hear that expenditure on the Executive is going up to £213 million? As my friend Mr David Davidson said, the Conservatives do not intend to stand in the way of the bill, but that is not to say that we do not have serious reservations about the process that has accompanied it.

Given that one of the priorities of visitscotland ought to be to encourage people from other countries to visit this country, is the minister concerned about the damage that might have been done to Scotland's stature by the precipitate cancellation of the visit by the Irish Prime Minister?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether the current procedure for certifying the cause of death prior to the disposal of mortal remains by cremation is adequate. (S1O-2903)

I thank the minister for her helpful reply. The minister will know that, in the case of sudden deaths, cremation cannot proceed without the issue of form E1 by the procurator fiscal. Is she aware that a practice has arisen in Paisley whereby the fiscal, unable to secure toxicology reports timeously, is issuing certificates stating the cause of death to be, and I quote one instance, "Unascertained, awaiting toxicology"? Does the minister accept that that is totally unacceptable as an implement of the statutory procedures? Will she undertake to inquire into the matter forthwith?

A debate entitled "Strategy for Enterprise" sounds hopeful, but the beguiling title is somewhat misleading when we read the motion, which "notes the publication of A Smart, Successful Scotland: Ambitions for the Enterprise Networks ". Although ambitions for the enterprise networks are laudable and are certainly supported by the Conservatives, they are not the whole story. The Conservative party not only established Scottish Enterprise, Highlands and Islands Enterprise and the local enterprise companies, but, in 1999, was the first political party in Scotland to call for a radical review of the whole enterprise network. The First Minister, who was then the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, derided that call. However, within days of rejecting that call, Mr McLeish had executed a U-turn, supporting a radical reappraisal of the enterprise network—perhaps that was when he began flexing his U-turn muscles in preparation for the future. The further grand language of the motion suggests that the document is the "first ever comprehensive policy statement of what government expects from the networks". That is a rather extravagant claim. As I indicated, it was a Conservative Government that set up the enterprise network and gave clear direction as to why the Scottish Development Agency was obsolete, how the new enterprise network was to operate and what it was intended to achieve. To put matters into perspective, the minister is not quite the innovatrix and the motion is not quite the innovation that the Executive would have us believe. A strategy for enterprise—worthy though a radical reassessment of the enterprise network may be—is not and never can be the sole consideration for what contributes to a strong enterprise economy. That is why my colleague David Davidson lodged the Conservative amendment. Before an enterprise network can address  anything, either collectively or through its component parts, certain ground rules must be in place. First, there must be a stable economy with a low taxation regime. I remind the minister that, since 1997, the tax burden has risen from 35.2 per cent of national income to 37.4 per cent in 2000. Since 1997, the business rate poundage has been 45.6 in Scotland and 41.2 in England. Secondly, there must be a climate in which entrepreneurs can focus on business and not be distracted by, oppressed by, and in many cases overwhelmed by, the infuriating and irksome bureaucracy that currently clogs up our factories and offices. I remind the minister of the comment of Mr Jeremy Peat of the Royal Bank of Scotland, who called for "a bonfire of regulations".

There are many irksome regulations affecting business, some of which are unnecessary administrative burdens that could be removed. If Mr Rumbles is asking specifically about the sort of obligations that are currently making life difficult for business, examples would be compliance with the working time directive and many aspects of current employment legislation, which could be made a great deal simpler without in any way prejudicing the security of employees. If Mr Rumbles cares to go out of his constituency and speak to businesses, he will find no shortage of contributions on the bureaucracy that should be reduced.

I am sorry, but I am conscious of time, and I have tried to deal with the intervention. The other essential ingredient for a good enterprise climate and economy is a working roads infrastructure. As the minister said, there is also a need for a leading-edge communications infrastructure. Finally—and this is extremely important—there is a need for an educational system that produces youngsters with a standard of education that makes them employable. It is a matter of regret to me that many business people lament the standard of product from many of our schools and regret that they must spend time in their businesses effectively re-educating those youngsters. Unless those essential ingredients are in the  mixing bowl, the enterprise network throughout Scotland can sit slouched in a chair with its legs on the desk. I will be pleased to hear the minister's comments on my points in winding up. I would not wish to appear negatively dissident about the document that states the ambitions for the networks. There are challenges, which it is right to identify, and they must be focused upon. Minister, in relation to communications infrastructure, the business community is feeling inhibited. It is clear that there is a huge customer procurement power in the public sector. Co-ordinating and harnessing that asset as a purchasing influence could have a dramatic effect on provision. I would welcome the minister's comments on that. In conclusion, there are fundamental issues that must be addressed before the enterprise network, or any aspect of it, has a chance to operate. If those issues are not addressed, the aspirations that are expressed in the document will remain just that. I move amendment S1M-1610.2, to leave out from "the first" to end and insert: "calls upon the Scottish Executive to play its part in stimulating enterprise in Scotland by reducing the bureaucracy which is currently stifling entrepreneurship and discouraging employment, and further calls upon the Executive to take a lead in facilitating the provision of a communications and roads infrastructure which will assist Scotland's business to develop."

The interesting part of "Working together for Scotland" is the aptly named flyleaf. It bears the photographs of the ministerial team. Anyone can write words: in the document there are a great many words, but whether anyone pays attention to them depends on who is uttering them and what their track record is. In this case, a picture speaks a thousand words. The photographs on the flyleaf show a reflective and somewhat uneasy Jim Wallace. Perhaps he is pondering rising crime or the cut in police numbers since 1997. Perhaps he is pondering the proposed closure of four prisons. I see a pugilistic Ross Finnie—no doubt explaining that the Rural Development Committee has it wrong when it has the temerity to suggest that there is an economic crisis in our rural communities. Fergus Ewing was right to tell the chamber of a sheep farmer's weekly earnings of £5.76. Alex Johnstone was right to raise inquiries about the apparent omission of beef exports from the document. An open-mouthed Wendy Alexander is clearly asking the questions, "Is a graduate tax not the same as a  tuition fee?" and, "Why have we not abolished tuition fees?" It seems to me that Susan Deacon's quizzical expression is because she is stung by the fact that we have 2,000 more people waiting for hospital treatment than in 1997 and by the crisis in many accident and emergency departments—or perhaps because the Executive's handling of the Sutherland report was one of the most dismal advertisements for the Parliament since its inception.

I am happy to take an intervention from Mr Rumbles rather than some sedentary insolence.

At times, I wonder what world the Liberal Democrats live in—certainly I wonder among what people they move. I have spent the week since last Thursday meeting people who have said to me—it is a deeply disquieting consequence of the absolute muddle that took place then—"Parliament is a shambles, don't any of you know what you are doing?" I have endeavoured to explain that two parties knew what they were doing, one party had no idea what it was doing and another party was engaging in a shameless con. I am glad that Mr Rumbles has raised the point, because it bears further expansion. If anyone in this chamber desires to play a collective part in the promotion of the Parliament as an instrument for the good administration of devolved government in Scotland, it is high time the coalition Executive tried to represent a position that does not bamboozle, confuse, dismay and at times infuriate the Scottish public but rather—

I have taken an intervention from Mr Rumbles, which I am dealing with. But rather tried to strike a position and indicate to the Scottish public that it knows what it is doing and does not have to clarify its position through hastily convened press conferences with the First Minister. The First Minister's photograph on the flyleaf is most engaging. He seems to have acquired a lump of cotton wool in the general direction of his brain sector. I can only assume that that led to the confusion last week when what the Executive had  agreed on personal care of the elderly was entirely obscure. If I look further, I see an uneasy, reflective and, I think, slightly disturbed representation of Mr Galbraith. As he presided over the Scottish Qualifications Authority shambles, as he ultimately had to explain to the Parliament how that shambles had arisen and as he was partially relieved of his ministerial responsibilities because of his supervision of that shambles, that Mr Galbraith looks reflective is no wonder. That one of the messages that the Parliament has given to the public in the course of the past year has been a deeply disturbing position on the SQA is also no wonder. If I look further, I see Angus MacKay clearly looking taken aback. That is probably because he had been told that his ministerial statement was not to be heard because the Executive had decided to leak it to the media in advance. If the programme for government is really expected to have any credibility with the Scottish people, they are entitled to look at the photographs, reflect on what they represent and consider the Executive's track record so far. I hesitate to say that I do not think that their vote will be one of confidence. So far, we have had a sorry display instead of good, firm and sensible government. There is nothing—or very little—in the document to suggest that the Executive's resolve to do better will be implemented.

That is an utter distortion of what was said. The member may be unaware that a significant  number of financial products currently on the market aim to help people who are budgeting for old age. That is in addition to, and without prejudice to, the desire of this Parliament, including my party in the Parliament, to support the provision of universal free personal care to our elderly.

My contribution to the debate will be fairly brief. The Conservative party welcomes the minister's motion for two reasons. Outworking is a matter of concern throughout the United Kingdom and, if a bill has already been introduced in Westminster, it seems eminently sensible to allow Westminster to proceed with it. That would avoid duplication of parliamentary activity by this chamber—I believe that all members welcome the bill—and, I hope, the disadvantage of cross-border disparities arising if separate legislation were to be considered by the Scottish Parliament. However, one or two technical issues arise that merit consideration. First, the practices that the bill strikes at, while nefarious and profoundly undesirable, may to some extent already be covered by criminal law in Scotland. That significant aspect should be borne in mind. Secondly, I hope that the bill will be scrutinised by the Scottish Executive justice department so that technical input can be made to Westminster. That is competent and perfectly possible, so I disagree with Ms Marwick on that point. There are instances of genuine commercial activity in which one individual negotiates with another for the provision of goods or services and in which the pre-payment of some initial deposit is involved. It is important that the Westminster bill should attempt to distinguish between the sort of activity that this chamber would—unanimously, I am sure—condemn as unacceptable and the genuine individual commercial activity that can legitimately take place between individuals. It would not be desirable if the bill struck at that kind of legitimate activity.

On first encounter, the Education (Graduate Endowment and Student Support) (Scotland) (No 2) Bill has a certain perfume about it—the perfume of a fragrant rose. However, on analysis, the petals wither, the smell becomes rank and we are left with some ugly, sharp thorns. The first thorn is the question of what is a tuition fee. Labour should know because it introduced tuition fees, but let me assist. A tuition fee is a charge that falls on someone who attends university. Labour chose to introduce that charge and to apply it before the student had even got through the doors. That was the crude arrival of the tuition fee. The Conservatives, the Scottish nationalists and, interestingly, the Liberal Democrats thought that it was a bad thing because it was an undergraduate tax by any other name. The Conservatives, Scottish nationalists and Liberal Democrats called for the abolition of tuition fees. If there had been no tuition fees—or undergraduate tax—there would be no graduate endowment bill and no debate today. We are debating the subject today because the Liberal Democrats said to their Labour colleagues, "Get rid of tuition fees." Labour, with its characteristic legendary sleight of hand, said to the Liberal Democrats, "Fear not—we are abolishing tuition fees, because we are bringing forward the graduate endowment bill." The Liberal Democrats, with equally legendary gullible compliance said, "Great. We will support you." This afternoon, Nicol Stephen said, "We abolish tuition fees." I wrote down the words that Mr Stephen uttered.

The genesis of the bill—I will come to this presently—is the need for Labour to achieve some form of electoral compact with the party that Nora Radcliffe represents and to try to dress that up as an abolition of tuition fees—which it is patently not.  This afternoon the minister said, "We abolish tuition fees," yet this bill takes an undergraduate charge, pre-degree, and tacks it on at the end, post-degree. By any definition that is a rear-end tuition fee, a deferred tuition fee or—in other words—a graduate tax. As it is repayable at £10,000, it is a punitive tax. It is penal, deterrent and manifestly prejudicial and inimical to our students. Robin Harper raised a valid point—which came up in evidence before the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee—about the lower earning capacities of certain of our graduate professions; there may be a real inability to contemplate repayment at that level. What will that do to the future support and sourcing of young people to meet vital needs in the Scottish economy? The truth is that in the bill, we have a penal tax. It is a thorn, which pricks and draws blood. That is why, in principle, the Conservatives cannot support the bill; it would be patent dishonesty to do so. The fragrances that have been used to market the bill are the ancillary provisions for mature students and disabled students, relief from council tax and the widening of access. Those provisions are commendable in their own right, but they are secondary. They do not constitute the primary principle of the bill, which is a sly tax. As Mr McLetchie has pointed out, it is a sly tax of dubious technical competence. That sums up the Conservatives' fundamental problem with the bill. What it proposes is not what it purports to propose; it masquerades as something else and it is unsupportable in principle.

rose—

The budget document hardly leaves one flushed with excitement. Mr Smith's speech was the most stimulating to my fluttering heart that I have heard all afternoon—I have never listened to such unadulterated hogwash in my life. If Mr Smith has the brass neck to accuse the Conservatives of cuts, he should explain to the coalition partners and the rest of the Scottish Parliament why less is being spent on education now than was being spent under the Conservatives three years ago. Budgets boil down to three components: what have we got, what do we decide to spend it on and do we get value for the spend? Straddling those three premises is the budget process. One of the virtues of the Parliament is its committee structure. Today, I will quote not Greek tragedy, Mr Gorrie, but the words of Robert Burns: "Humid seal of soft affection, Tenderest pledge of future bliss, Dearest tie of young connexion Love's first snow-drop, virgin kiss!"  The minister should not take this personally, but the virgin kiss that the committees are seeking from him is disaggregation—that would indeed be virgin. Will the Deputy Minister for Finance and Local Government confirm whether more detailed figures are to be disclosed before stage 2? Without that information, the budget process is defective. To turn to the question of what to spend the money on, there are concerns. Quite simply, they are that waiting times for the ill are up; the number of police officers is down since 1997; the level of crime is up; prisons have been closed; students are worse off; and there is no provision for the modest spend that is necessary to implement Sutherland's recommendation for universal personal care. There has to be a strong suspicion that those concerns are not being robustly addressed in the budget. On value for money, £18 billion is a very great deal, particularly when it is produced by the public and the taxpayer. David Davidson was absolutely right: the Executive can jaw away about inputs and outputs, but it is outcome, performance and efficiency that have to be the determinants of value for money. While Mr Davidson has affirmed the position of the Conservative group—that we shall not vote against the budget—that should not be construed as complacency at or pleasure in what it has to offer.

I thought that, as a member of one of the coalition parties, Mr Lyon would know that the experts on cuts are in the Executive. As I understand it, my party, which he accuses of cutting, increased police numbers in Scotland, and the coalition Executive has managed to reduce police numbers in Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Executive when the Minister for Health and Community Care last met representatives of Argyll and Clyde Health Board and what issues were discussed. (S1O-2814)

Babies—not a matter with which I am intimately familiar, minister, but none the less an important component of our society—were, I had hoped, going to feature in the minister's answer, because the minister should be aware that the maternity facility in Inverclyde royal hospital is threatened with closure because of a review that is being undertaken by Argyll and Clyde Acute Hospitals NHS Trust. Will the minister confirm two points? Is it desirable that the review should take place when something called the national maternity services framework is floating around? Does the minister seriously consider that it is reasonable or practical to require pregnant mothers in Inverclyde to make their way from the precipitous terrain of that area to the lofty heights of the Royal Alexandra hospital in Paisley? Is that an undisclosed national Executive plan to induce labour at no expense to the national health service?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

It is on an identical point. Suffice it to say that I, too, was greatly concerned about what I saw in the press this morning. I am not given to being pernickety; I hope that I do not have a reputation for being tiresome for the sake of being tiresome. It is not for me to chastise the minister—perhaps it is as well for him that it is not—but it is for you, Presiding Officer, to determine how to deal with conduct that, in my opinion, deeply damages the institution of the Parliament and its integrity, authority and stature. It is for you to determine how to deal with persons who are guilty of conduct that insolently and dismissively questions and impugns the authority of this institution.

I suppose that it was always going to be difficult to bring a sparkle to such a debate. However, I must congratulate Mike Watson on a very competent presentation, even though he made the Rev I M Jolly look positively jaunty. Any consideration of the budget process must examine the whole concept of that process. I was particularly struck by stage 1, which I found very healthy, and welcomed the public engagement, even though I detected some cynicism from those who participated. I was once asked whether anyone would pay a blind bit of attention to a word that was said. I also welcomed the committee involvement at stage 1 and felt that there was a very constructive dialogue between the minister and the committees. Everyone, including the public, expected stage 2 of the process to shine a light on areas that had  not previously been illuminated. Although I had hoped that that would happen, there seems to be darkness pretty much all around. That is not the fault of the Finance Committee. In noting this report, we should acknowledge the deficiencies of the budget process and, by doing so, put a torch in the minister's hand and tell him where to point it. The whole process takes place against the backdrop of UK spending reviews. The fact that those reviews are undertaken every two years means that our stage 1 and stage 2 processes are out of kilter. The Executive must urgently address that issue and introduce proposals for a better dovetailing of the two processes. The second area of concern is the absence of level III figures for consideration by subject committees, the technical word for which is disaggregation. I am concerned that, without sufficient disaggregation, the budget process will lurch towards disintegration. If it turns out that the Local Government Committee, the Rural Affairs Committee, the Transport and the Environment Committee and the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee were all unable to comment specifically on the budget proposals through lack of information, the budget process is hitting the buffers. I listened with interest to Fiona Hyslop's comments about the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee, which has concluded: "The Committee has serious concerns about the lack of availability of detail of the Level III figures. This meant that it was extremely difficult for the Committee to form an opinion as to whether proposed expenditure and Executive policy commitments concurred. . . The Committee believes that this represents a piecemeal approach that does not provide an overall picture of the budget, does not allow scrutiny of how the latest spending figures have been changed as a result of the consultation 'Investing in You' and does not assist in the delivery of transparency of Government." That very neatly encapsulates the difficulties. The next area of specific concern is the impact of RAB on budgets, as it will vary tremendously between departments. It is particularly relevant to health, transport and environment budgets. The department responsible for the environment has large capital expenditure programmes and the Transport and the Environment Committee reported that the general information in "Making a Difference for Scotland" was inadequate as the document did not explain the implication of the new system for specific spending lines. Indeed, the Health and Community Care Committee has encountered similar problems. The situation raises the issue of capital charges—which has already been alluded to in the debate—and poses the question of whether they should be  split from service purchases. I think that they should, as that clarity would go a long way towards focusing minds and clearing the vision of those who are involved in these essential areas of activity. The fourth matter of concern is the Scottish reserve, to which reference has been made. It is essential that we know what rules apply to the Scottish reserve: what money goes into it and in what circumstances departments can seek to access that money. It is vital that such information is provided. Additionally, cross-cutting initiatives that involve various departments are a notorious source of obscurity, and can screen what ought to be a clear accounting process. It is vital that there is transparency when various departments are involved in budgeting activities. I have no clue how much time I have left, but I have come to the end of my speech. I said that I would help the minister to shine a torch, but I feel that I have lit him up like a Christmas tree. I hope that he is fully enlightened.

As acting convener for the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee for most of the inquiry meetings, I want to take this opportunity to thank my committee colleagues; Simon Watkins and the clerking staff for a tremendous job; and of course all the witnesses who so willingly appeared before us at short notice. The fact that the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee's remit was to examine the issue of governance has already been mentioned. That remit led us to consider the process of wider management of the SQA from the ministers through departmental civil servants, the chair and the board to the chief executive. What emerged from our inquiry was a series of vacuums. The ministers and department were in one vacuum, and there was a separate, hermetically sealed SQA in which two vacuums  existed, one at board level and the other in the rest of the organisation. Quite simply, a volcano was erupting in the SQA which the board and chief executive did not know about. That is why in paragraph 37 on page 8 of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee report, the committee concluded that the problem was not a deficiency of governance but "a failure of management", which—to anyone who has been in business—was on a scale beyond comprehension. The committee therefore concluded that the board had been negligent. The board should have had a hunger for information and explanation, and there should have been an unrelenting insistence on answers being provided by reaching down to all operational levels to find out what was going wrong and where it was happening. After all, the SQA had agreed a corporate plan that, although perhaps unrealistically onerous, had been signed off by ministers. Both board and ministers can be criticised for not having a clearer overview of the strains that the plan would impose on the organisation. As a result, the committee focused on several essential issues such as an absence of a proper performance management network within the executive departments; an absence of an effective risk assessment process in the SQA; an absence of clarity about the role of SQA board members; and an absence of a lean, robust board structure with clarity about its role. I welcome Mr McConnell's initiative in taking steps in connection with the SQA board. The committee's specific recommendations address those points of concern, as do its suggestions for a better operational model. I very much hope that the minister will be minded to consider the committee's proposals and suggest that they be rigorously and positively pursued. Three broad consequences flow from the report, the first of which relates to devolution. The arrival of the Parliament has changed for ever the relationship between NDPBs and Government. When things go wrong in Scotland, people will look first to this Parliament to put them right. The Executive must recognise—and, to be fair, has recognised—that that element needs to be considered. Indeed, further action might be necessary to regulate or determine how we deal with the relationship between NDPBs and the Parliament from now on. Secondly, the improvements recommended in the report should certainly be pursued vigorously. Most important, the reports from the two committees should not be regarded as the end of the matter—they have to be the new beginning. That is essential for public confidence. This Parliament must hold a magnifying glass over the  SQA and take on board the alarming and very real concerns expressed by Professor John Ward, to devise a structure that will allow the Executive to report to the Parliament regularly in the forthcoming year about what is happening in the SQA.

As someone who has been part of a small business, I ask Alex Neil to explain to the people whom he seeks to protect which of the following options is preferable. In the absence of an enforceable system of diligence, which is what the amendment he supports would achieve, is it preferable that the people whom he seeks to protect are denied the supply of goods and services on credit and that to procure such supplies by payment of cash they resort to moneylenders, or that if they are given goods and services on credit, the ultimate remedy to the  creditor is sequestration?

Today's debate on the framework for economic development in Scotland is welcome and worth while. Not only does it give us an opportunity to debate the merits of the framework; it allows us to analyse the strengths and weaknesses of differing approaches to running the economy. All parties support the idea of a framework of some kind or another and, to that end, we support the principles of the motion. There is much to commend the framework and our amendment recognises that. We welcome the notion of a framework and cautiously welcome the proposals. The reason why our support is given with a qualification is that, with respect, the Conservative party thinks that it understands the needs of the Scottish economy and I think that the business community would acknowledge that the Executive has still to prove that it understands that. Supporting the framework is, in principle, simple, as it offers a reasonably sensible strategy for improving our economy, promotes a strong vision and offers strategic guidance for economic policy and the attainment of economic development throughout Scotland. The framework is aimed at eliminating duplication and ensuring value for money and is proactive in that it aims to enhance our knowledge of the Scottish economy. Naturally, we support all of that. However, our amendment makes two pleas: that the framework document should be rigorously reviewed; and that it should put the needs of the economy first. In business speak, we want measurement, priorities and response. That is what my party is about. We want businesses to flourish and our amendment proves that. We want the Executive to militate against the prospect of the framework becoming a vacuous and meaningless series of soundbites. That  danger is obvious. I welcome the minister's indication of support for the amendment. We want a document in which economic review stands out from technical mumbo jumbo. Strategies, frameworks and visions are all fine as long as there is substance behind the verbosity. We want the Executive to put the needs of the economy first. Our vision is one of individuals being given back their freedom and not one of the Government taking it away. Conservatives would allow people to develop for themselves, as that is the only positive way in which to run an economy. Our record on that is proven. It may be unpalatable to record history, but the economy was revolutionised under a Conservative Government, which introduced privatisation and deregulation, giving us the modern economy that we are now debating. Many of the statistics on which the minister based her argument came into being not just within the past three years; they were there many years before, under a Conservative Government. We presided over an economy in which 90 per cent of the population benefited from a growth in wealth, and in which the remaining 10 per cent had no loss in income. The Economist of 25 November 1999 is my authority for that view. The number of Scottish companies in the FTSE 100 index has more than doubled over the past decade; the number in the FTSE 250 has risen sixfold. That is because we believed in empowering companies to develop for themselves, instead of telling them how to do it. Two signal examples are Scottish and Southern Energy and Scottish Power. Both those companies would not be where they are now if the Conservative party had not rolled back the frontiers of the state. We empowered individuals to think for themselves, but we were belittled by our political opponents for having the courage to take that view. Our framework for economic development is very simple: to put the economy first and to cut red tape and bureaucracy. We also have to concentrate on a low-tax agenda. The party of the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning and her coalition Executive purport to support that view. In fact, the burden of taxation has increased from 35.2 per cent to 37.3 per cent under Labour. Business rates are higher in Scotland than they are in England. The Executive's plans for the Scottish economy are flawed. The framework needs a stronger focus on business and a greater emphasis on scrutiny. The Conservative party is determined that what is essentially a good proposition, a proper framework for economic development, perhaps a sacred cow for the Scottish economy in the future, should not  become its Trojan horse. That is why we lodged our amendment, which it is my pleasure to move. I move amendment S1M-1405.1, to insert at end: "but emphasises the importance of monitoring such activity in order that a meaningful response can be made to any negative outcome or trend."

I do not wish to be a Jeremiah. However, more than £5 billion of taxpayers' money has been poured into the UK-wide new deal. According to the Financial Times on 10 November, 80 per cent of the jobs that it created would have existed anyway. Is that not a matter of concern?

I declare an interest as a member of the  court of the University of Strathclyde. Will the minister assure us that in allocating the sum to which she referred, fairness will be exercised in respect of the institutions, some of which already operate highly successful summer schools? Those institutions should not suffer prejudice. The minister's second point made it clear that she is very sensitive to the fact that certain people regard her announcement as favouritism towards some institutions. Can she explain why her colleague, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, has seen fit to favour only certain institutions in Scotland with his recently advertised scheme?

From the minister's response, it appears that there can be no accurate analysis of where the funds are going. Am I correct in assuming that the figures do not take into account activity in the voluntary or charitable sector? Is not it a cause for concern that the Parliament has no coherent strategic overview of what we are doing to cope with the drug abuse problem?

On a point of order. That was news to my ears— [Interruption.]

Where would that money come from?

I understand the essence of the minister's argument. However, if he accepts that the valuation of property throughout the UK will by implication be a variable factor, is not it absolutely desirable to have the rate poundage as the constant factor?

I welcome Mr Wilson's comments, which strike at the heart of a difficult problem for business. However, is not his argument a reason for supporting an urgent return to the uniform business rate, followed by a genuine attempt to lower the prevailing level?

I welcome Mr MacKay and his colleagues to the front bench for this debate. I relish the prospect of exchange with Mr MacKay, but the prospect of the wrath of his mother is another matter altogether. I declare an interest relating to this debate. I am a partner in a business in Glasgow that pays business rates. Today's motion, in the name of Kenneth Gibson, seems, at first glance, to exhibit certain hallmarks of economic sense, which came as a slight surprise to me. However, I have to say that it is a matter of some disquiet for me that, when I meet members of the business community, although they acknowledge the individual and personal charms of certain SNP members, they declare a more or less unanimous apprehension about the tax implications of an independent Scotland. Any debate on business must acknowledge those concerns about taxation, which is what business rates essentially are. Mr Gibson's motion offers an accurate diagnosis of the plight of small business and enterprise. It  advocates a reduction of the burdens placed on business and it identifies the fact that the present Administration is failing the Scottish economy. Unfortunately, a closer analysis of the motion reveals that it is somewhat disingenuous, as it would create, almost paradoxically, more problems than it would solve. I accept that Mr Gibson's diagnosis may be right, but his prescription is flawed. Of course the Conservatives support the idea of lowering the burdens on small businesses and we also support reductions in the national rate poundage. However, that cannot be financed at a cost to other business and enterprise, as those other businesses may not be wealthier or healthier ones.

I shall give way in a moment. Conversely, premises that would attract a rates discount under any rebate scheme based on rateable value may in turn contain a perfectly lucrative and healthy business. That is why the Conservatives' amendment—

I shall give way in a moment. The Conservative group has lodged its amendment because we genuinely believe that what is needed for the health of business as a whole is a uniform business rate, which has disappeared under the Labour Government, and a reinstatement of a level playing field for Scotland. I give way to Mr Paterson.

I am surprised at Mr Paterson's analysis. Having been in business, as he has been, I was frequently told by commercial clients that they could obtain premises at far less cost in the populated industrial areas of England than they could in Glasgow or Edinburgh. That is why, when faced with the strictures that emanated principally from Labour-controlled local authorities to squeeze out more taxation for their spending by applying pressure to the business community, I was relieved—as someone who was in business and was suffering from that process—when the Conservative Government introduced a uniform business rate system.

I would like to proceed further, as I do not have a lot of time. We are a party that supports enterprise for all. We want all sectors of industry to benefit from a reduction in costs. We want business to prosper. That is precisely why we introduced the uniform business rate and why we continue to seek parity across the board. We oppose Labour's removal of the uniform business rate and continue to support its reintroduction. It is completely unacceptable financial discrimination against Scotland to have one business rate poundage for England, at 41.6p, and a higher one for Scotland, at 45.8p. The Conservatives want Scotland to be promoted, not priced out. I share the view of the Scottish Council for Development and Industry, to which Mr Ewing referred, which said in December that the removal of the UBR would make Scotland a less attractive location for large businesses in the UK. The Scottish Executive's cack-handed, blundering handling of the issue reflects an Administration that has, at best, no natural understanding of business and, at worst, an instinctive antipathy towards it.

I am running out of time. With a Conservative Administration, this debate would not be taking place. What is wrong with the motion? In theory, it is fine, but in reality it is distorted. The only sector that would pay for business cuts is business itself, which would prove disastrous for our already fragile economy. The measure would stifle growth and would place a disincentive on firms brave enough to develop. Businesses need to be treated fairly and entrepreneurs and wealth creators should be rewarded instead of punished. That is the view of business, minister, and not just my personal assessment. Douglas Millar of Glasgow Chamber of Commerce said yesterday that he wanted to see "a level playing field for all businesses instead of a system of business rates relief which stifles growth and enterprise." Support for small business can come only in the form of support for all business. Relief and emancipation can be delivered only in a wider context, although to be fair, it is to the SNP's credit that it is joining us in voicing concerns on behalf of business and industry, however deficient I consider the remedy that the SNP offers to be. We need a reduction in rates. The only coherent remedy is to let businesses grow, rather than to prevent, stifle and punish their development. The reinstatement of the uniform business rate would offer such a remedy.  The Scottish Conservatives urge the Parliament to support our amendment, which proposes the reintroduction of the uniform business rate and seeks to take strenuous steps to lower the level of business rates. I move amendment S1M-1301.2, to leave out from "permanent" to end and insert: "uniform business rate be re-instated and that efforts be made to reduce the level of uniform business rate, thereby diminishing the financial burden on all business and stimulating business activity in Scotland."

This afternoon's debate has been significant and helpful but, predictably, it brought out some of the more alluring thespian attributes of the SNP. Among the histrionics, it is important to consider some of the basic facts. The issue is important. What is it reasonable to expect any Government, of whatever party, to produce by way of information in the public domain? The Conservatives are broadly sympathetic to the Executive's motion—I concede that there are areas of activity where confidentiality must be maintained. That confidentiality might be necessary to preserve the political neutrality of the civil service, or it may simply be a good commonsense way of ensuring that a civil servant gives a minister the best and most candid advice that he can.

I thank Mr Home Robertson for making the point better than I could make it. It is perhaps a matter of regret that he is not still a minister. I would like to turn to what has been described as the nuclear option. The SNP has attached huge significance to section 23 of the Scotland Act 1998. The opening speech from the Executive commented on that. I do not wish—as a lawyer—to bore the chamber, but it is obvious from reading section 23 that one would reach the stage of invoking it only if one was faced by a recalcitrant, obdurate and secretive Executive that would not volunteer information willingly. If that were the case—here is the irony—there would not be a hell of a lot in section 23 to give comfort. No measure would be implemented unless one had the support of a majority in Parliament, which is clearly unlikely if that majority is the very agency that was obdurate about not producing information. We must be clear about the limited practical significance of section 23. In my opinion, the ministerial code of practice offers more hope. The only difficulty is that it has  no legal standing—a fact that we should perhaps question. The code of practice is advisory, but undoubtedly persuasive. Within that code, there are some extremely important presumptions which, in the interests of Parliament, I hope the Executive is prepared to honour. I hope that the Executive, in the pursuit of good government, is prepared to breathe life into its recommendations and to accept a presumption of disclosure, which should be denied only for exceptional reasons. I am concerned by the repeated intervention of party political interests. My colleague Mr McLetchie was right to lodge his amendment because, although we accept the spirit of what the Executive seeks to do, we feel that some important issues arise. In any consideration of a matter as sensitive as this, the public must be reassured that party politics is not getting in the way of good and open government. There might have to be a restatement of the code of practice to put it into a more meaningful form. As has rightly been said, phrases such as "public interest" must be defined. The sensible way to defuse an undesirable party political influence is to send the matter to the Procedures Committee, the Standards Committee or perhaps to both, and for those committees to have a sensible and rational debate on how best to make progress. The Conservatives accept that the Executive is willing to consider the issue of disclosure of information, but we must do that consistently and in a way that makes clear the principles and—equally important—clarifies what rules will attach to any departure from those principles.

They say that the proof of the pudding is in the eating—at first sight, the junior ministerial pudding looks a tad indigestible. I suspect that the principal difficulty that confronts the four proposed new junior ministers may be making their mark outwith the chamber, in the perception of the Scottish public. In what I hope is a mood of characteristic bountiful magnanimity, I have one or two tips for them. If Mr Wilson, in his new role as Deputy Minister for Sport and Culture, can lift the game from wisecracking jokes in the chamber about football to something meaningful on the national football pitch for Scotland, I might be prepared to have another look at that pudding. If Mr Chisholm can explain to a constituent of mine why he cannot get a flu jag despite the fact that he is a priority health case, his performance too might bear serious consideration. The most onerous task of all lies with Mr Tavish Scott, who must perform the most delicate balancing act imaginable. He will either achieve that with distinction or be labelled the biggest toady of all time. I do not envy his role. Ms Curran, I believe, is the proclaimed crusader of women, and I extend all good fortune to her in that pursuit. I just ask that, in effecting that pursuit, she does not antagonise the entire male populace  of the chamber, nor their counterparts outside. In making those suggestions, which I hope are constructive, I am greatly disturbed by what we do not have, such as a second deputy for the enterprise and lifelong learning portfolio. I find it incomprehensible and astonishing that a portfolio of such significance—happily, that significance has been recognised outwith the Parliament, and has been commented on in relation to the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee—no longer has two deputy ministers, but one. While I listened to the First Minister's warm words on the motion to appoint ministers, I thought that the proof of the pudding is definitely in the eating. I wish the appointees well, but I am not holding my breath.

It would be appropriate to point out that careful consideration was given to the pension aspects of the privatisation process. My colleague, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, stated that "the principal conditions in each sale relate to property clawbacks, employee pensions"—[ Official Report, House of Commons , 2 December 1991; Vol 200, c 45W.], and various other ancillary matters. He also said that it would "be for the privatised companies in due course to establish pensions arrangements for their employees."—[ Official Report, House of Commons , 20 February 1989; Vol 147, c 725.] I do not think that it is helpful to look at such a long intervening gap and say that the fault lies entirely with the Conservative Government, simply because the Conservatives were in office when privatisation took place.

Presiding Officer, I extend my thanks to two gentlemen in this chamber. Indeed, I include a third gentleman in my thanks—Mr Dennis Canavan. I welcome this debate and we are all grateful to him for providing us with this opportunity to comment on what by any consideration is a highly unsatisfactory state of affairs. It seems extraordinary that, seven years down the road from the privatisation of the Scottish Bus Group, both actual and deferred pensioners are being denied very necessary benefit. It is clear that the situation is down to bureaucratic constipation. However, if there has been a stoppage of the bowel in Edinburgh, there has also been a stoppage of the bowel in Westminster, because it is perfectly clear from the Transport (Scotland) Act 1989 that the Secretary of State for Scotland has the power to make provisions in the absence of administration being determined by the pension fund administrators. I have a very brief suggestion. It is absolutely unacceptable that the pensioners should be subjected to any further delay. They are looking for money in some form. Heaven knows, they should surely have received that money long before now. Is there any reason why there cannot be an interim distribution of the pension fund and the surplus? Surely to goodness the Scottish Executive and the pension fund administrators can between them knock heads together and agree some form of interim arrangement to benefit  pensioners. At their stage in life, seven years is no doubt a very long time; with all the financial needs and challenges that confront them nowadays, they would welcome any immediate and swift attempt to alleviate the current difficulties. Quite simply, this delay cannot continue. It is incomprehensible to everyone in this chamber and intolerable for the pensioners. It behoves the minister to take whatever action she can in conjunction with—or, if necessary, in isolation from—the pension administrators to unlock this impasse and, preferably before Christmas, bring a little cheer to the people who have had the courage to come to the Parliament.

Will Tavish Scott give way?

Will Mr Scott give way?

It is popularly accepted that, by 1997, the United Kingdom's environmental obligations under the Kyoto agreement had been met. That is why the Conservatives were prepared to cease the application of the fuel escalator, and voted to that effect in the House of Commons.

Will the member give way?

I have a point of information for Mr Lyon. Fuel prices arose some time during the 1890s when the motor car was invented.

I, too, welcome the opportunity to debate again the implications of current levels of fuel tax in Scotland. Gordon Brown is a latter-day Fagin. He is not just picking a pocket or two, he is raiding every sporran in the land. He is probably the first Scot to take the breeks off a Highlandman. The truth about fuel prices in Scotland is not just chilling but squalid. Britain has one of the cheapest pre-tax petrol rates in the European Union. Once tax is slapped on, Scotland has the highest fuel prices in Europe: 10p a litre more than in France and 30p a litre more than in Germany. How did that come about? In May 1997 the average price of petrol was 59p a litre; now it is 86p. That is an increase of 44 per cent. In May 1997 the tax element was 45.7p a litre; now it is 61p. That is an increase of a mind-boggling 34 per cent. Chancellor Gordon Brown pledged in 1997 not to increase taxes. In a series of budgets, however, he has done exactly the opposite and imposed rates of 12 per cent above inflation on diesel. In the most recent budget, he promised that fuel tax would be put up by the rate of inflation, but that led to a very tricky little manoeuvre. For the purposes of that increase, inflation was measured at 3.3 per cent; however, when pensions were put up by the rate of inflation, inflation was measured not at 3.3 per cent but at 1.1 per cent—hence the insolence of the additional 75p a week.

With some basic arithmetic, Mr Rumbles would notice that the Conservatives were in power for 18 years rather than three years. What the Labour Government and his unseemly pals, the Labour Executive, have achieved is truly remarkable. It seems that it is all right to slap tax on the petrol-buying motorists but still give pensioners a raw deal. If you are a Scottish farmer, fisherman or haulier, heaven help you. If you are an elderly widow living in Blair Atholl, Inveraray or Arran, heaven help you. If you are a family in the central belt and need a car to take the children to school or the parents to work, heaven help you. If that were not bad enough, the same Labour Government, and the same Labour Executive that is supported by Mr Rumbles's party, propose to pile on the agony with workplace parking charges and road user levies. No wonder that the motorist in Scotland feels betrayed, abandoned and helpless. Can anything be done? Of course it can, and the Conservatives have said that they will do it—a vital and meaningful, but prudent, cut of 3p a litre. For the rest of this year, that would cost the United Kingdom £525 million. That is a fraction of the £5 billion revenue that the chancellor is getting this year alone over and above his own forecasts.

It was, indeed, a Conservative chancellor, as Mr Crawford knows. A Labour chancellor would have had no alternative and a Scottish nationalist chancellor, heaven help us, would have had no alternative either, because that ruling was in line with the European dictate at the time. The VAT on fuel has been a fraction of the fiscal policy of this Labour Government.

I am sorry, Mr Stone, but I am running out of time. Why would a cut of 3p a litre be more significant in Scotland than anywhere else? Our geography makes the car essential and the public transport alternative is very limited. In the Highlands and Islands, for example, average incomes are less than 80 per cent of the Scottish average. Car and other transport users cover distances that are almost double the Scottish average. A total of 65  per cent of the people live more than one hour's drive from a major centre, as compared to 10 per cent nationally. Average fuel costs are between 10 per cent and 20 per cent higher. Our 3p cut would pack a punch with people and business. Current price levels are roasting business. The road haulage industry is in crisis.

I am sorry, Mr Stone. Our vehicle excise duty is 11 times that of France. We have the highest-taxed diesel in Europe. Tourism should be our flagship industry, but the flag is pretty limp and the ship is certainly low in the water. A study published last July by the Forum of Private Business found that the cost of fuel is destroying rural tourism where businesses depend on tourists travelling by bus or car. Petrol prices ranked higher than the weak euro as a factor in that. It is indeed desirable that this subject is debated. I hope that a resounding message is going via the junior minister to his colleagues in the Scottish Executive. It is clear that what happened in the blockades of last month will undoubtedly happen again—it will happen again in the middle of winter, when neither Scotland nor the rest of the United Kingdom is well disposed to cope. I hope that the junior minister has something comforting to say to the Parliament about his consultations with his colleagues at Westminster. Unless the Scottish Executive's colleagues in government at Westminster are prepared to make some concession on fuel prices, the future for the United Kingdom is extremely bleak, and the future for Scotland is the bleakest of all. As for the Scottish nationalists' motion, although I am glad that it was lodged and that we have an opportunity for debate, the Presiding Officer will forgive my cynicism when I point out that the authors of that motion belong to a party that is committed to a high-tax, high-risk regime. It has become perfectly clear in debates in this Parliament that the Scottish nationalists, especially in the form of Mr MacAskill, have a love of making serial commitments with uncosted implications. I fear that their vision is a chimera—a fanciful dream to dazzle—but not a prudent, workable solution. That is why the Conservatives lodged an amendment. I will deal briefly with Liberal Democrat amendment. In so far as the Liberal Democrats know what they are doing—which, in itself, is remarkable—they too are committed to high taxation. They would put 5p on a litre. Moreover, there would be an uncosted deficit if they removed the tax disc from cars with an engine capacity below a certain level—by their own calculations, they will not replace that lost revenue. That means  more fuel tax for the road user. Perhaps Mr Ian Jenkins has revealed his party's position more patently than anyone else. He said: "The Liberal Democrats favour environmental taxes and agree with the principle that the polluter pays".— [ Official Report , 22 June 2000; Vol 7, c 670.]  One cannot drive a motor vehicle without polluting. I therefore conclude that Mr Jenkins wants the motorist to be taxed again and again. I move amendment S1M-1238.2, to leave out from "is the largest" to end and insert: "has the highest fuel prices in Europe owing to the high levels of taxation levied by Her Majesty's Government; notes that this position is reducing the competitiveness of Scottish business; recognises that the essential car user, particularly in rural Scotland, is suffering and calls upon the Scottish Executive to make representations to Her Majesty's Government in order to reduce taxation in general and fuel tax in particular."

I have listened with interest to the minister's comments. Does he accept that, while certain initiatives in Edinburgh, Glasgow and the central belt are laudable, much of Scotland is crying out for tourists? How will they get to the remoter parts of Scotland while fuel prices are at their current level?

Mr Russell has been speaking for five minutes 56 seconds, and I have heard no indication whatever of what he or his party would do towards the expansion of the creative industries in Scotland. He may disparage my kailyard contribution, but I doubt whether those who are fond of Scottish literature and traditional culture will endorse his comment. They might be very offended by his description of what many people see as a quite legendary contribution to creative industry in its time. The point I was  making was that creative industry is difficult to define and that it has no barriers—it is to do with anything that has a creative spirit within it. His contribution so far has been remarkable for its absence of creativity.

My intervention will be brief, as I wish simply to assist in the debate. During the recent inquiry carried out by the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee into  the new economy—the e-economy—we received direct from the electronic companies the information that keyboard skills were not so much the problem as attitude to business, attitude to enterprise and ability to relate with customers. Those issues are of much more significant concern than the basic ability of many youngsters to operate a keyboard.

We welcome the initiative and accept that it offers an exciting opportunity for Scotland, with a very particular significance for the creative aspect of the Scottish economy. The minister has alluded to the figures involved—the 100,000 employed in the creative industries, a turnover of £5 billion per annum and 4 per cent of Scottish gross domestic product. Those are certainly very important dimensions to take into account. That, coupled with the anticipated growth rates, would lead us all to agree that this is a huge opportunity for Scotland. My slight quandary is on definition, which I think must be addressed. The Scottish Executive's definition of creative industries includes "Design, games, film, new media, publishing, advertising, radio and television, music and architecture". Scottish Enterprise extends that to the arts and cultural industries and Highlands and Islands Enterprise to the traditional arts and music sectors.  For someone who finds the high-tech, multimedia age abrasively challenging and at times downright frightening and who herself may never actually get funky or become a net head, I am immensely admiring of those who embrace such facilities, which have undoubted relevance to the expansion of the creative industries. I hope that something equally important will not be overlooked in this thrusting quest. I return to the definition of the creative industries, at least as I have been best able to identify it. We have a huge and unexploited reserve of culture, arts, literature, music, tradition and history in Scotland. That reserve is unique to our country. If I may, I will follow in the vein that was set by Father George Thompson this afternoon. I will quote from the preface to a cookery book, which states: "The object of this book is not to provide a complete compendium of Scottish Cookery, ancient or modern . . . but rather to preserve the recipes of our old national dishes, many of which, in this age of standardisation, are in danger of falling into an undeserved oblivion." The same preface goes on to say that "the pageant of Scottish History is shadowed in the kitchen." I think that there will be all-party agreement among the women in the chamber that there is a lot of sense in that. Was that preface written last week or last year? No—it was written in 1929 by F Marion McNeill, who was a legendary figure in Scots cuisine long before Gary Rhodes and Gordon Ramsay had ever been heard of and certainly long before Delia Smith was eating lumps out of Anthony Worrall Thomson. The book is part of our heritage—its content is certainly creative. The minister might care to brighten his day with some parlies or auld man's milk, recipes for both of which are included in the book. If he is fearful of trying them, parlies were a kind of gingerbread that was eaten by members of the Scottish Parliament. Auld man's milk sounds a little more hopeful—it is made from cream, rum, whisky, brandy, eggs, nutmeg and lemon zest. My point is that the creative industries have a huge opportunity to re-explore, re-present and bring to a worldwide audience much of our history and culture, which is, as I said, unique to Scotland. We must be careful that in our thrusting quest for the new—which is necessary and desirable—we are ever mindful of what already exists. We must ensure that we use all our facilities and opportunities to advertise, re-present and repromote Scotland's rich creative reserves.

Mr Wilson makes that point with such tedious repetitiveness that I hesitate to waste time on responding to it. As I have said, Mr Monteith expressed his personal view—which is certainly not Conservative party policy. On the contrary, Conservative party policy is to introduce no new or higher taxes. Mr Wilson will not find many businessmen who will disagree with that. On the Executive's initiative, I will emphasise two more points. There are some very bold plans in the document and some admirable ambitions, but it is vital that we track and measure the progress of the initiative.

Perhaps I am a little less grudging than Mr Russell. We are talking about the ambition of trying to reach out to a worldwide market. We are given to understand that the potential for such expansion exists. The document contains a strategy, but it is not for me to defend the Executive's initiative—the Executive must do that. My point is specific. We are talking about significant sums of public money. The intention is to increase the sector by 30 per cent in the next five years and raise exports from the sector to about 50 per cent of total Scottish exports. That is fine as an end objective, but what will we do to monitor progress in the meantime? We must check progress at least annually. Everybody will want to know how the initiative is proceeding on the ground and whether tangible benefits, actual or foreseeable, will become obvious. My final point is raised in my amendment and has been repeatedly made by the Conservative party in this chamber. As I have said frequently to the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, if we speak to business, we find that what is burdening business and the general economy in Scotland is levels of tax, red tape and regulatory burdens. The creative industries will not be immune to those levels and will be subject to exactly the same pressures and problems. I have felt it necessary to lodge my amendment simply to reflect that, without the recognition of those very real difficulties, the other aspirations  will be extremely difficult to implement practically. I have already suggested to Mr McLeish that he should use his audit impact assessment unit in the department of enterprise and lifelong learning to start to investigate the current effect of some regulatory burdens on Scottish industry. I ask Mr Stephen again to consider that suggestion and to consult his colleague Mr McLeish on it. I move amendment S1M-1213.2, to leave out from "notes" to end and insert: "notes that the best way to expand this sector, as with all other sectors of the economy, is to ensure that tax, red tape and regulatory burdens are kept at as low a level as possible; and urges the Scottish Executive to work in close conjunction with Her Majesty's Government in order to reduce such burdens which have increased considerably since May 1997."

Will the minister give way?

We must thank the Liberal Democrats for unrivalled entertainment—if nothing else has happened this afternoon, there has been political posturing that, even by the standards of this chamber, stretches incredulity beyond all limits. We have listened to the Liberal Democrats seriously asking us to accept a situation in which they cosy up to Labour in the Scottish Parliament, while their leader wants to dismantle the very formula that lets them have the financial stability on which the spending plans are pledged. While the Liberal Democrats cosy up to Labour in Scotland, they have a leader who is trying to distance himself from Labour down south. The Liberal Democrats' position is untenable, unconvincing and incomprehensible, and shortly they will prove to be unelectable.

It is clear from Mr Brown's remarks that he aligns himself with Mr Kennedy, rather than with his colleagues in the chamber. That is a manifestation of the increasingly incredible position in which the Scottish Liberal Democrats find themselves. When I first read Mr McConnell's finance statement, I took heart because the first heading was "economic prosperity"—an objective that I applaud. However, when I listened to his remarks, my spirits began to drop. I could not help but notice that the clapping cohorts in the Labour ranks applauded warmly every time that the Minister for Finance mentioned "spend". They cheered him to the skies; such was the fervour that met his concluding remarks, one would have thought that he had just won the Eurovision song contest. I am therefore surprised that Mr McConnell chose to omit any reference to several factors. He chose to omit any reference to Gordon Brown's  alleged threat to require the Scottish Parliament to use its tax-raising powers, or to what is technically a recession in Scotland—not a situation that I welcome. He chose to omit any reference to our productivity level, which is lower than that of the rest of the United Kingdom. Finally, he chose to omit any mention of the inflation risks that are implicit in a spending programme such as the one that he announced this afternoon and certainly such as Mr Brown's comprehensive spending review. Those are not just my empty opinions. The Bank of England has warned that Government spending plans will send inflation higher unless consumer spending is reined in. Furthermore, the July monetary policy committee meeting reported that, given the likely increases in public spending over the next two years, private sector spending needs to slow further if inflation targets are to be met. I do not pretend to be an economic genius; however, those frank warnings must be taken on board, since they suggest that there must be a very cautious approach to the sort of financial programme that the Parliament might consider. Although we welcome sincerely the spend objectives that the Minister for Finance has embraced, we must ask whether, given the rather alarming criteria to which I referred but to which the minister made no reference, those objectives are accompanied by the necessary prudence that Scotland is entitled to expect. It seems clear that there are some alarming omissions in the areas of expenditure that Mr McConnell has outlined. One of those areas, which have been alluded to in the debate, is the non-implementation of the Sutherland commission's recommendations. Mr McConnell could promise our elderly people everything under the sun, but he would hit the button if he pledged to implement Sutherland. Furthermore, the current allocation to transport is £18 million. That is not what business needs. We are becoming uncompetitive and are experiencing problems in moving goods and services. Our haulage companies are finding it difficult to operate. The Minister for Finance's statement offers little comfort on that matter. In short, although this budget statement might be laudable in intent, its implementation is potentially alarming. The Conservatives would pursue a much more prudent approach that would provide services against a responsible backdrop of what national income can sustain.

rose—

Will Mr Raffan give way?

I am very grateful to Mr Raffan for giving way.

Even allowing for his normally excitable demeanour—

Does Mr Raffan accept the fairly basic economic principle that inflation is created if expenditure is increased beyond the natural income growth of the capacity of the economy? Does he consider that, in that event, inflation is desirable? Is he aware of warnings that have been sounded by institutions such as the Bank of England about the Executive's and the Government's proposed spending plans? Does that worry Mr Raffan, or is that just another irritant to his monologue?

In strict analysis, I understand the distinction that the member tries to make. However, if he goes out to the Royal Mile, he will not find anyone who can distinguish between the Parliament and the Executive.

The Scottish jury are still out on the image of this Parliament, and who can blame them? The first year may have been exciting for us but, let us be honest, it has not been particularly impressive for the wider public outside the chamber. There is little doubt in my mind that issues such as section 28, the expense of Holyrood, the Lord Advocate abandoning his job to become a judge, the obsession with abolishing fox hunting and the Scottish Qualifications Authority's fiasco with exam results have been a poor advertisement for the integrity and focus of this Parliament. This Parliament's image needs a facelift. The legislative programme attempts a makeover, but the odd dash of lipstick and flash of mascara that it offers do not address the wrinkles and blemishes that the Scottish people still think disfigure this institution. Have the people confidence in the Executive's priorities? They are entitled to look at this legislative programme and ask what the priority is of the Scottish Executive. Is this an Administration that thinks that wealth generation is not a priority and that spending money is? Is that why wealth generation is listed fourth on the list of objectives on page 1 of the statement? Is that why the first political priority stated on page 2 is a "dramatic increase" in spending? Without wealth generation, spending is difficult. Wealth generation in Scotland is difficult, with a crumbling roads infrastructure, no integrated transport strategy and movement of workers, goods and services now to be obstructed by workplace parking charges and road user charges. What about the legislative programme? Bill Aitken described it as anodyne. He is charitable. Worthy though the water services bill, the bill to strengthen rights under the ECHR, the international criminal court bill and the salmon conservation bill may be, they are hardly electric as far as the people of Scotland are concerned. As for the housing bill, that is fine, but in Glasgow, surely support of community associations would be the best way to nourish local and community endeavour. Would not that be preferable to stifling such initiative with a sprawling urban bureaucracy? On the regulation of care, I know what the  people of Scotland want. Indeed, nobody should be in any doubt having seen those present in the public gallery this afternoon—nothing short of a commitment to Sutherland will do. The image of the Parliament will be tested in year 2. Out there, we can take it that our pensioners and elderly people will be not only looking closely at the Labour Executive, but scrutinising with interest the activities of its Liberal Democrat pals in the coalition. What about the graduate endowment tax? Because it is nothing more than a postponed tuition fee, it is still a deterrent to admissions to higher education. Frankly, seeking repayment on a graduate income of £10,000 per annum is beyond belief. Any student will affirm that. Restricting the award of bursaries to students with a joint parental income of less than £10,000 is obscene—that is less than two minimum wages.

The Deputy First Minister says that we offered them nothing. I do not think that the abolition of tuition fees amounts to nothing. The minister will find that there is not a student in the land who disagrees with me. I whole-heartedly welcome the bill on evidence in sexual offences and hope that it will take into account the climate of apprehension that engulfs a woman who has been the victim of rape or sexual assault. I hope that it might be possible for the bill to be extended to examine stalking. That is where the image of the Parliament might take a rise. In short, the image of the Parliament is still dented—it is still tarnished—and I do not think that this legislative programme does enough to relieve that impression.

I appreciate the First Minister's attempts to reassure the Parliament and Scotland about the next three or four days. However, the boil has simply been lanced; the sepsis is still there and will not go away.  I am concerned by the second last sentence of the First Minister's statement, which says: "It has been an enormously difficult time and there are doubtless lessons to be learned." I am given to understand that we are currently in a period of tacit peace. Apparently, the protesters have indicated their intention to resume difficult circumstances in 60 days' time. Has the First Minister any comment on that in the light of the phrase "lessons to be learned"?

It may be a problem in its own right, but does the minister accept that it must be particularly difficult to have meaningful discussions with the chancellor if she does not have the specific background on the effect of this impost on our Scottish quarrying industry to which my colleague Mr Morgan has referred?

Can the minister confirm whether any of those measures has been, or will be, funded by the reallocated underspend in the health budget?

I speak as someone who, in private practice, was required to act for building societies in repossession work. That is an area of work that is never pleasant, but is unfortunately necessary at times. Does the acting First Minister accept that many of our major lending institutions in Scotland have effective and worthy schemes for consultation with borrowers when difficulties are first detected? When any legislation is considered it is extremely important that the understandable commercial risk that a lending institution may contemplate will not be prejudiced because of apparent difficulties in the enforcement of repossession cases. In other words, we do not want borrowers ultimately to be badly served by undue restriction in the protection of the security subjects.

I welcome the minister's certainty of pronouncement that the talking will stop. Although that is a worthy aspiration, I fear that, as long as we have politicians in Scotland, it is one that will never be implemented in practice. I join John Swinney in thanking the minister for the early copy of his statement. There is much in the statement that is helpful and positive. However, I will share a reservation. The statement is entitled "Statement for launch of the enterprise networks review interim conclusions". I looked for something meaty; something I could grasp. I thought that nuts would be cracked, and kernels would appear. However, the statement falls slightly short of what I had hoped for in identifying the objectives of the announcement. I will draw attention to certain features of the statement and ask three specific questions. The minister said: "The outcome-led approach has to be a top priority. We should be adding value to the economy and getting value for the taxpayer." I support that priority, as it is very important. Will the minister confirm that an outcome-led approach is synonymous with customer-driven requirements? In this case, the customer is the enterprise sector of Scotland—our businesses need to know where they are. Will the minister also confirm that there is not a danger of the whole brave new world of review of the enterprise networks being a mere systematic substitution of one form of bureaucracy for another? It is important that the minister can reassure the business community about that. I listened carefully to what the minister said about structural change. Page 7 of his statement states: "Structural change will be a distraction of management effort from delivery of our vision and strategy. Structural change misses the point. The focus is on customers, not on structures." I agree with that conclusion, but I am slightly less easy with the definition. Later on in the statement, the minister says that he is engaging in structural change of the local enterprise companies. Is it appropriate to have an unacceptable level of the enterprise budget being spent on administration? Of itself, that may not  merit structural change, but it does merit careful examination of what is happening in the provision of enterprise services through our enterprise network. Page 9 mentions the minister's intended treatment of the LECs. The statement says:  "I will remove the anomaly of the LECs' status as companies limited by guarantee." I am, however, unclear what will replace the LECs' structure. There is a need to reassure not only the people employed in our LECs, who in many cases do a very good job at local level, but also local business communities that they are not losing out on an essential point of contact with like minds, and that they will not be confronted with some massive bureaucracy emanating from Bothwell Street. Finally, I am reassured that the minister welcomes certain aspects of the report of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee on business development at local level. The minister embraces, in particular, the concept of local economic forums. However, is it not the case that the whole process would make a lot more sense if we waited until the autumn, so that the minister could give his full response to the report? Then, not only the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, but the business people of Scotland would know how all the bits of the jigsaw fit together. There is a distinct danger that this fragmented approach will lead to a dislocation of effort and, I suspect, an incoherent perception among the business community of what the minister is trying to do, however worthy it may be.

The last time—indeed the only time—I was fit was when I was at school, because I had to play hockey and tennis, and even, on one memorable occasion, run a relay race. Is not it a matter for huge concern that Susan Deacon's colleagues in the Executive are content with such variable provision of sports and athletic activities in our primary and secondary schools?

The fundamental issue is, what quality of legislation do we want to promote within this Parliament for Scotland? This bill does not say anything that any person interested in this scheme would readily understand. In other words, there is nothing in the bill to tell potential applicants or employers how the scheme would work, whether applicants would be eligible or what they might expect from the scheme. Those matters are covered by what are described as illustrative regulations. The committee expressed thanks to the minister for those illustrative regulations at stage 2. Interestingly, they allowed us to make total sense of the bill and enabled a proper debate to take place on how the statutory mechanism might work in practice. I think I speak for all the members of the committee in saying that the provision of the illustrative regulations allowed a meaningful debate to take place in the committee. The gist of amendment 4 is to question whether it is appropriate or desirable that the Parliament should produce primary legislation that does not mean a great deal to anybody. Is it not preferable that regulations such as the illustrative regulations, which appear to be in just about their final form, are incorporated in a schedule, or whatever, so  that everybody knows what the law will be and they are fully debated? The bill provides that the regulations will come into force by negative procedure. It is intended that the bits of paper that make sense of the act will become available only later, by being laid before the Parliament and being "subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution". That means that the regulations could be produced at the height of the holiday period when nobody is around, and that by lying unchallenged they become law. That is an undesirable principle for the Parliament to embrace early in its life. My amendment is intended to reverse the procedure. Ideally, when regulations are as far advanced as these illustrative regulations are, they should be included in the bill before it is passed. If that is not possible and the regulations will have to be introduced subsequently, the clear preference ought to be that they are brought into force by an affirmative procedure, which would require a positive resolution of the Parliament. I move amendment 4.

I have listened with interest to what the minister has to say. I have heard an explanation, but I have not heard a compelling or cogent repudiation of my argument. I consider that my argument still stands unchallenged. The minister has told the Parliament that there is not enough time to allow proper scrutiny of the regulations. I must agree with the comments made by members of other parties: this is not a satisfactory way in which to attend to business in the Scottish Parliament. I am minded to press my amendment. I hope that that will send a message to the business managers of the Executive. It is a fundamental issue and, for the sake of the credibility of the Parliament, it ought not to be overlooked.

I originally raised this amendment, with the support of Nick Johnston, at stage 2 of the bill. In the absence of my head being reduced to the pulped and bloody mass that I expected, I was encouraged to restate it for stage 3 of the bill. There are two important issues. When this bill was debated in committee, it became apparent that the bill would not mean a lot to any external onlooker. If this Parliament is to acquire a reputation for clear and understandable legislation, there is a fundamental issue— [Interruption.]

I feel seized with a slight attack of  schizophrenia; we are minded to support Mr Ewing's amendment, but feel unable to support Fiona McLeod's amendment—unless she takes umbrage that I am expressing a preference for the clean-cut virility of Mr Ewing, as distinct from her own manifest virtues. Let me explain further. Mr Ewing's amendment was debated at stage 2, and I found that debate helpful. My recollection is that in view of the contributions that were made in committee, Mr Ewing revised his amendment slightly, and I now find merit in it. It is clear that the scheme could pose problems for applicants in remoter, rural areas of Scotland. The pilot schemes that are under way in Lochaber and the Scottish Borders may be instructive in that respect. Our support for Mr Ewing's amendment is principally in recognition of those parts of Scotland where problems could exist. It would be unfortunate if an applicant felt prejudiced or deterred from applying simply because distance and remoteness intervened. I do not need to say any more than that we find merit in Mr Ewing's amendment and we are minded to support it. We are sympathetic to Fiona McLeod's amendment, as we were to the previous amendment. The distinction that we draw on her amendment is that the broader costs that she wishes to embrace within the scheme and put in the bill are just that—broader. At this stage, it would be premature to bring those costs into the bill. Having said that, although we are minded to oppose the amendment, I reiterate what I said earlier about the need to monitor the application of the scheme. If it were the case—either by virtue of operation of the pilot schemes or by the accumulation of evidence once the scheme is working—that persons in the classes mentioned in amendment 3 were being prejudiced or deterred from the proper uptake of individual learning accounts, that would be a matter for concern. At that point the issue should be revisited.

We have much sympathy with Ms McLeod's amendment. The difficulty was whether to accept it at this stage or—as was alluded to by the minister—to face the prospect of inflexibility being brought into the bill. One of the features that struck me in committee was the experience of the pilot scheme in Grampian. Clearly, an attempt to introduce a rigid template there had not worked. That was quickly recognised and, quite rightly, the scheme switched to a demand-led approach, with vastly improved marketing, to ensure that the people who could benefit from the scheme were aware of it and could then apply. While there is sympathy for the amendment from Conservative members, I feel that to agree to it would lead to an unacceptable element of inflexibility in the scheme at its embryonic stage. Having said that, I believe that there might be an argument—as Dr Simpson suggested—for monitoring carefully the application of the scheme once it is in operation. Without a shadow of doubt, the scheme is good and worthy. It is an exciting prospect for Scotland, but it will be important to assess, after a due period, just what its practical consequences have been. With some reluctance, Conservative members are unable to support Fiona McLeod's amendment. However, I hope that my comments show that we are far from hostile to the sentiment that it tries to express.

I thank Henry McLeish for the courtesy of making available the statement and the document. The Conservatives, also, welcome the prospect of a debate in the autumn and a conference to discuss this issue further. We welcome the concept of a framework for economic development in Scotland. My principal concern is about what this all adds up to. I must say to the minister that although this document may make the briefcases of businessmen heavier, I am not so sure it will set business hearts beating. I hold that view because from my brief perusal of the framework it is clear that it is a worthy document for its broad generalisations and sense of vision and because it gives some helpful indications of what the minister considers the key policy matters for enterprise in Scotland to be, but it seems somewhat short on specifics and I think that that is what the business community now seeks from the Executive, in particular from the minister. The minister will have to start to pin his enterprise colours to the mast, because I detect that there may be a suspicion in the business community that he will be trammelled or cluttered by the political baggage of colleagues, in the sense that he might be impeded in giving a clear and essential message to enterprise in Scotland as to where he seeks to go, how he expects to get there and what measures he intends to put in place to assess how the journey is going. If this framework is to be a meaningful guide and steer to the business community—that is what is being urgently sought from the minister—I would like the minister to explain how he plans to measure what is happening. Are there targets? Is there focus? What aspects of economic activity in Scotland does the minister feel are critical for the future? In his statement, the minister said about policy statements that the Executive seeks "to focus firmly on the extremely difficult choices that will need to be made on allocating expenditure." If the minister feels that one of the deficiencies in the Scottish economy today is a lack of inventive and innovatory skills and capacities to enable us to beat off challenges from other countries, is not it a matter of concern that 40 per cent of the research and development grants for our higher educational institution are devoted to social sciences? In no way am I knocking social sciences; what I am trying to get at is that if this framework is to be sensible, it must be a cohesive picture and we must ensure that all the integral players, such as the higher education institutions, are tied into  whatever the steer to the business community will be. Clarification on that aspect would be helpful.

Although I am interested in the member's comments, I am slightly confused. She seems to be saying that her colleagues south of the border have got it all wrong because they think the Labour party in Scotland is disowning them.

Is it acceptable that one of those sanctions is the club's expulsion? That plays into the hand of a director or chairman who does not want the club to succeed.

I support Duncan McNeil's motion and echo everything that he said. The reason why I did not feel able to sign the motion was that it did not go far enough. I supported Brian Monteith's motion, which specifically calls on Hugh Scott either to get his act together and help Morton to be once again a prominent force in Scottish football or to get out of the scene altogether and allow the club to be sold to someone else who will have more confidence in it and can take it forward. That is the difference between the two motions. As Duncan McNeil knows, I was accustomed to strutting my sporting stuff in the Battery park in Greenock, but I have never strutted my stuff in Cappielow—who knows, the time may come, although the fans may flee. I have been reading, with great interest, a wonderful book that will be familiar to the fans in the gallery, "Greenock Morton 1874-1999". It is a fascinating history, but it should not become the only remaining trace of that club. Everyone here tonight wants Greenock Morton to go from strength to strength. The current dilemma of the club has illustrated two distinct issues. One is that the club is a priceless asset for the community. The other is that, without some definite control by the SFA or the Scottish Football League, people such as Hugh Scott have unfettered power over small clubs. The message that members are putting across tonight is that the SFA and the league are not simply official figures but have an important role to play as the custodians of football in Scotland. That means that they have to be prepared to take action when chairmen such as Hugh Scott impede the natural growth and development of the club. People who buy football clubs should be allowed to do so. That is not the issue. However, their ownership of the asset should be closely regulated and they should have an obligation to work for the betterment of the club and the community. That might extend into planning law. It is entirely logical that, if the football authorities have a great responsibility for the continuance of our football  clubs, our planning authorities should give greater priority to the planning and zoning of a football ground and make it an almost sacrosanct and protected facility in the area, which would be immune from transference as a normal asset disposal, but could be passed on only if it were to be used for the provision of football in the area. I and the Conservative party are happy to support Duncan McNeil's motion. We are delighted that the fans are here tonight. We hope that the strongest message reaches the minister about the urgency of the issue. As Fiona McLeod said, not just Greenock Morton is affected, but the issue strikes at the heart of the preservation of football clubs throughout Scotland.

In the best traditions of conservatism, I shall attempt to compensate for Mr McNeil's—

I shall attempt to compensate for Mr Neil's expansive loquacity by being relatively brief, as some of the points that I wished to raise have been covered already. I say to the acting First Minister that, while I fully understand his comment that the Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Scotland) Bill will not create powers over and above those that are being enacted at Westminster, none the less the bill has far-reaching implications for Scotland. I am concerned that the Justice and Home Affairs Committee has not been given a greater opportunity to consider the bill in more detail and over a longer time. Issues are emerging which that committee, with its expertise and the facilities available to it, could have expanded upon and clarified. I suggest that such an approach might make for better legislation. I wish to record my general concern about the approach that has been adopted, which is a consequence of the hefty legislative programme that currently prevails. I was slightly concerned about the provisions of section 5 of the bill, which give Scottish ministers the power to designate, by order, those persons within the "relevant public authorities" who are to be entitled to grant authorisations for surveillance. I note the attempt in section 5 to define the phrase "relevant public authorities", but I would be grateful for guidance from the minister as to what he has in mind. For example, is the Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency a public authority for the purposes of the bill? I hope that it is, but, on the other hand, if Historic Scotland is not so designated, I am not overly concerned. We would find it helpful if the minister could give guidance on which authorities that phrase is meant to embrace. I note the reference in the bill to the surveillance commissioner. My attitude is clear: I want the bad lads to be nailed, but I do not want them to be nailed in a climate of zealous, enthusiastic discharge of regulatory powers by our authorities in a way that may contravene the fundamental freedoms of private individuals. I do not wish to shackle our police forces with cumbersome bureaucracy, but, at the same time, I do not want the procedures engaged in by our law enforcement authorities to be rendered nugatory because they contravene the ECHR. Again, a comment from the minister on how he envisages  the role of the surveillance commissioner would be helpful. Does he think that the commissioner is necessary in order to keep us on the right side of the ECHR? What other advice has been made available to him? I have a further, slight concern with section 3(3). Section 3 is concerned with the authorisation of directed surveillance, and section 3(3) states: "An authorisation is necessary on grounds falling within this subsection if it is necessary— (a) for the purpose of preventing or detecting crime or of preventing disorder". That seems to be a wide definition. What disorder is that intended to embrace—public or civil disorder? Reference has been made to subsection (3)(c). The matter of E coli outbreaks, which that subsection is intended to cover, came up in the Justice and Home Affairs Committee. I confess to slight alarm about subsection (3)(d), which allows the authorisation of covert surveillance for any purpose that does not fall within the other subsections. That seems a very broad power and we should receive some guidance from the minister as to what he envisages within the scope of that subsection. We welcome the principles of the bill, which we consider a useful aid to the proper enforcement of law and order and the proper detection of crime. However, some serious concerns must be weighed against the virtues of the bill and I hope that the minister will address those in his winding-up speech.

Does the minister accept that one aspect of secure funding is allowing voluntary organisations to conserve the funding that they receive? Does she realise that adding unreasonable charges to those organisations may be prejudicial to funding? Can she give any interim assurance to voluntary organisations that Scottish Criminal Record Office charges will not represent an unreasonable burden?

I acknowledge that, to some of my colleagues on the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee who are not in my party, I might seem an unlikely ambassador to represent the committee's views. Indeed, I can see the unease almost rising in their gorges as I speak. However, at the risk of being fulsome, I want to echo John Swinney's comments that it was a pleasure to serve on the committee during the inquiry and to realise that all members were willing to focus on issues that were presented to us in evidence. Evidence is a very compelling influence and we all found it refreshing to find out that committee members were prepared to be independently minded. In short, that is the report's strength. It is not so much that there was an unexpected cross-party consensus in identifying the problems as that all committee members were willing to examine the evidence and not dodge the issues raised by it. By way of general background, I should say that the committee's early decision to inquire into the delivery of economic development, post-school vocational education and training and business support services at local level in Scotland, was sound and that the subject was an interesting first choice. Scotland's gross domestic product lags behind the rest of the UK. Scotland has one of the lowest business birth rates in the UK; the service sector is weaker than in the rest of the UK, especially for business services; unemployment levels are still higher in Scotland than in the rest of Britain; and it has one of the lowest levels of research and development and innovation in western Europe. I do not think that any of us can dodge those issues. The essence of the inquiry and the report was not to lose sight of what we need to do in Scotland to improve employment opportunities and, as a result, the quality of life here. There were more specific reasons for our desire to undertake the inquiry. First, we suspected that there was congestion in economic development in Scotland. It was known that there was cynicism in the business community about existing facilities and providers. Furthermore, it was apparent that although significant sums of public money were being expended on provision, there was a widely varying and fluctuating pattern of achievement and performance. The inquiry was therefore timely. It is to the committee's credit that it made its decision and to the Parliament's credit that time has been made  available to debate the report before the recess. The committee would wish to record its appreciation to the Parliament for that. Timely is not a word that I use lightly because—to use that venerable phrase of contract law—time is of the essence in this debate. The challenges that I have described—or, as some might say, the problems that dog Scotland in global competitiveness—are with us and will aggravate and compound difficulties unless they are positively and urgently addressed. I hope that the minister recognises that the report offers a substantive and sensible framework of solution and feels impelled to encourage and promote early implementation of the framework. The minister should feel at ease in doing so because of the committee's impressive modus operandi, which included a reliance on extensive and painstaking evidence; a variety of evidence sources; and the significant contribution of our advisers in assisting with the assessment of evidence and tempering some of the wilder flights of fancy on which the committee might have been disposed to set off. As a result, the report is an authoritative and logical series of conclusions. Although it is voluminous and broad in application, that should not be confused with generalisation and lack of specification. John Swinney was right to say that any attempt to over-prescribe detailed solutions would create rigidity and inflexibility and place a restriction on the autonomy of legitimate local activity. Final conclusion 1 is the pivotal conclusion of the report. "There is congestion within the field of local economic development in Scotland. There is confusion, overlap, duplication and active competition between the many agencies involved." From that conclusion, all else flows. The Scottish Executive must not shirk its responsibility. It must take the lead to simplify the structure and eliminate duplication by penalising publicly funded bodies that do not co-operate in this process. I mention in passing that the Scottish Executive's review of the enterprise network was somewhat premature and would have been more useful if it had followed this report rather than pre-empted it. None the less, I am sure that we all agree that the review of the enterprise network is welcome and I was pleased to hear the minister's comments. The report expands on the obligations of the Executive in final conclusion 6, which says that the Executive should "withdraw from operational programmes and concentrate on strategic guidance, setting targets and measurable outcomes, ensuring value for money in service provision, promoting good practice, reporting and evaluation." With devolution, the role of the Executive in this  area can be strategic, but it must also play the part of a watchdog that is prepared to bite. In final conclusions 9, 10 and 11, we begin to get to the meat of what should be happening at local level, at the heart of which are the local economic forums. I hope that they will be viewed by the business community as a flexible local friend. The sting in the tail of the report comes in final conclusion 10, which says that the forums must devise a strategy that must include "the definition of lead agencies and the unambiguous delineation of their areas of responsibility." It goes on to say that the forums "must also identify the process of eradicating duplication in the provision of services" and that their strategy should "set out clearly the division of labour proposed by the forum, which should aim to ensure value for money and transparency." The final sting is that the report suggests strongly that all of that should be assessed by a joint study by the Auditor General for Scotland and the Accounts Commission via Audit Scotland in 2002. The report has teeth and should not be taken lightly. For that reason, we urge the minister to consider the recommendations it makes. The other conclusions in the report, which deal with small businesses, LECs and tourism, are positive and constructive, as are the Executive's forthcoming document on an economic framework for Scotland—I welcome the minister's comments in that regard—and proposals for lifelong learning. I draw members' attention to the sections of the report that deal with business support services and performance management. They demonstrate that the inquiry produced startling and disturbing evidence of where we were failing to provide the counselling, mentorship and the vital support service that any new business needs. As John Swinney stated, there is profound concern about the calibre of some advisers that are provided to business. The report identifies problems and provides solutions and is about making partnership work not for a supply-driven agenda but for a customer-driven one. That is the feature that came through time and again in the evidence that we took. If we are to deal with the problems that I have outlined, we have to consider the concerns of the business community that were clearly articulated in the business in the chamber event. There is an unhealthy cynicism among business people about the existing structures, which are felt not to work for them but to work for people with a predetermined agenda on the supply side. They are felt to be of varying levels of relevance to the business community.  I suggest that there can be no other impetus or approach to providing business development services locally than what will be good for business, our communities, job creation and a wealthier and more fully employed society. Although the report may be voluminous, and although some may think it generalised, it has a carefully crafted structure. It has drive, clarity, focus and teeth. It is the way forward for business in Scotland and I commend it to the Parliament and the minister. I reiterate the committee's desire for the minister to consider and promote implementation of the recommendations in the report, and I support the motion.

Although I in no way wish to impugn the opinion of Mr Peat, will Mr Lyon concede there are widely varying opinions about the single currency? Does he accept, as I have to do in my meetings with the business community, that there are profound reservations within the exporting business community about being part of the single currency?

In defence of my sex, I must say that I do not think that yesterday's audience was the problem.

Mr McLeish, I failed to hear in that fulsome reply what the satisfactory solution is. That is what we want to know.

In consideration of this debate, I was taken back to the words of Lewis Carroll in "Alice in Wonderland", where the debate was whether "I mean what I say" means the same as "I say what I mean". I am in no doubt that the minister means what he says, but in relation to the bill, neither he  nor anybody else can possibly know whether he is saying what he means. It is just not here. I want to echo the remarks that have been made in the debate that the bill as it stands is so deficient as to be meaningless. For the purposes of the Parliament, this is a bad model of legislation. Were it not for the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, the stalwart efforts of its staff and the conscientious efforts of the members, the debate would be meaningless to most people present. It is desirable that employers, employees and trade unionists are able to understand the bill, to know its content and to make submissions on it, to make qualified, authorised and, it is to be hoped, informed comment, and to improve on and expand the debate. We have all been working in the dark. For that reason, I hope that, in their substance, the illustrative regulations that were produced for the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee and which gave us some kind of torch to look along the path, will reflect closely what the minister ends up with, as the ultimate appendage to the legislation. It is undesirable that those regulations will, effectively, be promulgated during the summer, when there will be no opportunity for scrutiny or review by the chamber or by the committee. Having said that, on this side of the chamber there is enthusiasm for and a welcome of the proposals. They are extremely important. Going back to Marilyn Livingstone's question earlier, when she rightly inquired about Scots achieving a minimum level of literacy and numeracy, individual learning accounts have a particular relevance to the workplace and to the potential recipients of their benefits. On clarity of operation, it is difficult to know, in the current context, whether it will exist. I hope that the minister can reassure us. In the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, we sought from Mr Pignatelli, who was there on behalf of the Scottish university for industry, some confirmation that there would not be confusion in the advisory element. As Mrs Ewing asked, who should people go to? Who should they phone? He sought to reassure the committee that he would endeavour to ensure that there was no confusion and no duplication of effort. However, there are a number of players in the whole operation. There is the recipient, an employer, a provider, and there is, I presume, a facilitator, in the form of SUFI. It is critical, if the scheme is to have credibility, that everybody knows what their role is, that nobody is standing on toes and that the most important person, the recipient, is getting a clear steer as to the path they should follow to achieve whatever they seek  to acquire. The scheme is good and I think it can expand. I hope the measure of its creation will be its ability to sell itself on its credibility. However, it should be monitored and its output should be measured. I hope that there are clear details from the minister on assessing how it operates once it gets under way. We should not lose sight of the most important aspect of all: the recipients should be able to demonstrate that, by becoming recipients of ILAs, they have managed to improve themselves. Some form of accreditation is necessary to establish and demonstrate that to the wider world.

Can the minister tell me who will define what the acceptable minimum level of literacy and numeracy is? Will any consideration be given to the attitude of employers?

I have listened with great interest to the fullness of the deputy minister's response and to Ms Whitefield's comments. Will the deputy minister confirm that he is also aware of the excellent work being done by crime prevention panels, and can he satisfy the chamber that there is no duplication and wastage of precious resources in such a critical fight?

rose—

Will Mr McAveety give way?

Will the minister give way? It is a benign point.

Did Mr McAveety once wear a brown blazer, and was he at the school that used to be in this building? I am interested in what Mr McAveety is saying about housing. Obviously, his arguments are concentrated on the current issue of housing stock transfer. However, does he accept that there is currently a practical problem with the unoccupied commercial square footage in the city centre? There are vast tracts of it. Does he concede that there is another opportunity there, by bringing people back into the city centre? That would not only help address a housing problem, but would address a social problem: for many people, the city centre is not the most attractive place to go at  night.

rose—

Does Ms Sturgeon accept that the problems that she articulates would be very unlikely to be resolved in an independent Scotland with higher taxation? Does she accept that those  problems would be very unlikely to be resolved by her support for taxing workplace car parks and for city entry charges? Does she accept that, notwithstanding all her posturing and all her opprobrium for the Conservatives, her own party's policies do not address one iota of the current difficulties confronting Glasgow?

It is with pleasure that I find myself in this building, because I can remember when it contained objects of great interest—pupils of the High School of Glasgow for boys. The fact that I remember that indicates that I am getting on a bit and, because I am getting on a bit, it means that I have known Glasgow for many years, socially as a student and also as someone who has been in business in this city. I have seen changes, many of which have been enumerated in this debate: low gross domestic product; high unemployment; drugs abuse; extensive poverty; pervasive ill health; manifest social exclusion; and business deaths that exceed business start-ups. The bustle is out of the heart of the city. Anyone who has been in business in this city over the past 30 years can see that. Glasgow has the lowest economic activity rate among those of a working age of any place in Britain. Its population is falling and there are extensive tracts of derelict and vacant land. However, there have been other changes. There has been the regeneration of the Merchant City, and Glasgow is making headway in the tourism sector—the garden festival and Glasgow's year as the city of architecture and design are testament to that. We have hotel facilities that rank with the best in the United Kingdom. With the universities of Glasgow, Strathclyde and Glasgow Caledonian, this city can hold up its head internationally as one of the premier providers of higher education. I declare an interest in that regard, as I sit in the court of Strathclyde University. We also have top-grade international airports in Glasgow and Glasgow Prestwick. Among the negative images are some very positive ones, many of which were created during 18 Tory years. The most positive image—Glasgow's strongest feature—has never changed and never will. It is the beating pulse of Glaswegians, which shows itself, whether in Castlemilk, Easterhouse, Maryhill or Kelvinside, in warmth, humour and resilience. People in Kelvinside have their own way of demonstrating that, but it is still there. I want to use this opportunity to make a plea for Glasgow to the film makers, television drama writers and fiction authors. I ask them, when they create a character who is a villain, a wide boy or a chancer, to use a bit of literary imagination and give him a background other than Glasgow. Although it is appropriate that in this place, on this day, we debate the regeneration of Glasgow, the words of the Executive's motion add up to little and the words of Ms Alexander's speech added up to even less. Braying repeatedly about small minds and small solutions was ill advised from the instigator of the repeal of section 28 and the  proclaimer of what everyone regards as an indecently modest £12 million to address the visible and profound difficulties confronting this city. In the minister's speech the very factors that are impeding development, expansion and job creation in Glasgow were conspicuous by their absence. They include the road traffic tourniquet that the M8 and Kingston bridge become at morning and evening rush hour. Travelling by her ministerial car, Ms Alexander may not be familiar with that, but I faced it for years. Where is the M74 extension? Glasgow's jobs need it, the Glasgow Chamber of Commerce regards it as its No 1 priority, and the business community is screaming for it. Where in the minister's speech were business rates mentioned? I appreciate that she glides around in her ministerial car and seldom has to hoof it like the rest of us, but has she paused to glance at the "For sale" and "To let" signs in the city? Has she observed that the growth industry is charity shops, and does she know why that is? Does she have any understanding of what removal by the Government of uniform business rate means, and does she really think that the imposition of a higher rate poundage for Scotland than for England is the way to encourage the regeneration of Glasgow and the creation of jobs? For existing employees, are the city entry charges and workplace charges proposed by the Government not active deterrents to regeneration? Glasgow City Council leader Charles Gordon certainly thinks so. He said: "We're setting our face against urban road tolls", and he is right to do that. Has the minister given any thought to the thousands of square feet of unoccupied property in the commercial heart of Glasgow? It will never again be occupied by commerce, so why does the Executive not enter into a dialogue with the council about pioneering redevelopment of that space for residential purposes? As regeneration of the Merchant City showed, there is a demand for that. Through such redevelopment, we could reduce commuter pressure on roads, start to reverse depopulation and bring much-needed resources back into the city. The Conservative amendment indicates additional specific measures which, in our opinion, would assist in addressing the challenge of urban regeneration for Glasgow. We propose a minister for Glasgow. That is not a suggestion that we make lightly, but an attempt to ensure that there is co-ordination and focus on what must be a concerted and conjoined effort. We also propose a directly elected provost and a Glasgow parliamentary committee.  This is the biggest conurbation in Scotland. Its problems are more pervasive and, I suspect, more universal than the problems anywhere else in Scotland. Our amendment seems to me to be devolution in action. The words of the song are that "Glasgow belongs to me". However, to make regeneration work requires joint action and not joined-up words in a motion. The challenges that face Glasgow mean that Glasgow belongs to us. The Conservative amendment offers a meaningful and practical approach to that regeneration. I have pleasure in supporting the amendment.

Instead of singling out the Tories for his monopolistic attack on the causes of the demise of industry, will the minister accept that there were other reasons for the demise of industry, such as demarcation, overmanning, inefficiency, lack of competitiveness and the lack of productivity that still blights this country today?

I do not enjoy it because the charge is invariably unfounded, inaccurate and untrue. Mr Gallie has already alluded to what the Tories, in government, tried to achieve. I think we all recognise that, in many significant areas, it was Tory policies that started to address the problems we are discussing today.

Will the member give way?

I am grateful to Margaret Curran for giving way. Could it be that, in proposing a minister for Glasgow, the Tories are giving a remarkable demonstration of adapting to devolution, which the Executive is failing lamentably to do?

Will the member give way?

Does the minister accept that all his words of reassurance seem like so much wringing of hands by Pontius Pilate, given that, if one's manufacturing industry is in the west of Scotland, one is just about stymied by completely inadequate transport links? Furthermore, those who are unfortunate enough to be trying to operate out of the west of Glasgow are in an impossible situation because of what is happening  with the Kingston bridge and the M8.

I suppose a celebratory motion is permissible to commemorate a parliamentary birthday, even if it is loftily entitled "State of the Nation". If the motion is the SNP's birthday cake, I will not be coming round to Alex Salmond's for tea—

Perhaps Mr Salmond will live with that disappointment—but I will not be the only one to find the cake unpalatable. If this debate were to take place in any city, town or village in Scotland, I am certain that the prospect of further constitutional change would stick in the craw, not just because people feel raw and bruised by the nightmare costs scenario of the new Holyrood building, but because there is a deep-seated unease about further constitutional upheaval, particularly when it involves severance from and disruption of the rest of the United Kingdom, where the people of Scotland have family connections, friends and strong business relationships. I kept waiting for Mr Salmond's birthday cake to burst open with some alluringly clad figure called the independence tooth fairy leaping out, brandishing a compelling list of persuasive arguments for independence.

Mr Salmond, I—

All right.

That small sample did not seek independence. That is what I reflect.

I am trying to do that. Mr Salmond says that, in that poll, an allegedly small sample of Conservatives wanted more power; however, more power is not synonymous with independence. As I understand it, independence is the political agenda of his party. If Mr Salmond insists on using my winding-up speech time to advance the arguments that he should have proposed during his lead speech, as I have said previously to gentlemen in my life, je crois que non. Far from hearing from Mr Salmond a persuasive set of arguments for independence, I have heard and seen nothing on that subject. Indeed, a most uncharacteristic and blushing coyness overtook Mr Salmond because, I suspect, he detects from the Scottish people no hunger for independence, no interest in becoming the highest-taxed part of the United Kingdom, no interest in flinging to the four winds the defence of the nation—relying for defence on an unconvincing hotch-potch of half-baked facilities—and no interest in a political agenda that, judging from SNP speeches in this Parliament over the past year, ranges from uncosted and unlimited spending proposals to republican neo-Marxism. The candles on the cake would indeed blow out. While rejecting the independence agenda of the nationalists, Mr McLetchie's amendment rightly judges the performance of the coalition Executive. If this debate were taking place in other parts of Scotland, the question that the people would ask is this: in the first year of the Parliament, did the Executive expect or want a farce over the building of Holyrood, which will cost five times the original estimate; an Executive ministerial team of 20, with perks and salaries four times greater than under the Conservative Administration; a criminal justice system in chaos, with a Lord Advocate who departs the chaos to make himself a judge; a preoccupation with the repeal of section 28; and consideration of issues that are remote to most people in Scotland, such as land reform and fox hunting? By contrast, the Conservatives have in opposition challenged the crisis in the health service, rising crime and falling police numbers, the repeal of section 28, the turbulent problems of indiscipline in schools, and the dislocated and unco-ordinated strategy for dealing with drug abuse in Scotland. Those are the issues that matter to the people of Scotland, which the  Conservatives have been here to speak on and—more than any other party in the Parliament, as Mr McLetchie indicated—vote on. That is why I reject Mr Salmond's motion and support Mr McLetchie's amendment.

Will the member give way?

I shall stop short of asking the First Minister whether he comes here often, but I will say that I am very pleased to see him here this afternoon. I am well aware that there is nothing more invigorating to the First Minister than having the opportunity to be rude to me. I will gladly bear that cross in the interests of restoring him to rude good health as soon as possible. The Conservatives wish Mr Dewar well in what lies ahead of him and hope to see him return as soon as possible. To ask the First Minister when he last met the Prime Minister and what issues they discussed. (S1F-269)

I had rather harboured a private and personal hope that the First Minister might have commended unpaid indefinite paternity leave to the Prime Minister. However, in the absence of such a conversation, did they discuss crime in light of developments north and south of the border? I particularly raise this point because, somewhat disappointingly, crime in Scotland has increased and the number of policemen has gone down since the Conservatives were in power.  As much of the crime in our communities in Scotland arises out of drug abuse and drug addiction, can the First Minister tell the chamber how the newly appointed drugs enforcement officer is getting on? Has he been given any targets to achieve or a measurement output framework within which to operate? It is vital that we know whether we can assess the impact of what the Drugs Enforcement Agency is doing. [Applause.]

The reason for that is that school governors in England have, I believe, a power of consideration of material and of veto, which is not, as I understand it, currently available to school boards in Scotland.

The Conservative party welcomes the bill in principle. It certainly makes a start in the tortuous process of restoring public confidence in our local authorities. That public confidence has been battered and dented by a litany of Labour sleaze and mismanagement in local government. The public have been sickened and angered by instances such as allegations of jobs for the boys in Monklands, direct labour organisation mismanagement in North Lanarkshire Council and East Ayrshire Council and the malaise of apathy surrounding collection of community charge and council tax arrears, which has put a huge and unfair burden on responsible council tax payers across Scotland. Sadly, there is a universal cynicism that certain councils in Scotland operate to serve their own first—a preoccupation that is perceived as a primary obligation before provision of services to anyone else is contemplated. That is a regrettable set of circumstances but one that is being addressed by the bill. It is a matter of regret to me that the atmosphere surrounding local government in Scotland has become a stale and fetid stench. Some means had to be devised to let fresh air blow through it; the bill is a start. We support the principles behind the changes proposed by the Parliament's Local Government Committee—to which tribute has, rightly, been paid—during its consideration of the bill. In particular, the suggestions that it made concerning the creation of a standards commission, with a wide range of meaningful sanctions, represent a positive set of proposals. Those sanctions will be acceptable to the public. Also sensible is the suggestion that the bill should extend to all devolved public bodies, including local enterprise  companies. The Conservative party feels that the role of the standards commission could be achieved by streamlining existing procedures and bodies, without necessarily creating further, new bureaucracy in the form of a separate commission. That is an aspect that we shall consider carefully during stage 2. Much of the content of the bill is good, is needed and is overdue. It is a matter of regret for the Conservative party, therefore, that we find ourselves unable to support the bill. The aspect of the bill that is unacceptable to the party is section 25, which seeks to repeal section 2A of the Local Government Act 1986 or, as it is more familiarly known, section 28. Repealing section 28, if that is what the Executive is hellbent on doing, has no place in this legislation. It is a hastily conceived add-on, which is unconnected to the rest of the bill. If repeal of section 28 is to be pursued by the Executive, it should be the subject of separate legislative proposals and separate debate. The approach has all the hallmarks of a furtive ruse to slip something into the statute book in the hope that no one will really notice. The proposal was, after all, neither a Labour nor a Liberal Democrat manifesto commitment. It was not in the Executive's programme for government; it was not in the partnership agreement; nor was it contained in any statements by ministers on this very bill. Opposition to the repeal of section 28 has already been debated in the chamber, at the instigation of the Conservative party. While we lost the vote to retain that section, there is no doubt that, by being the only party in the chamber to stand up for them, we won the argument decisively as far as the people of Scotland were concerned. The Scottish Conservatives have been resolute in their opposition to repeal. Interestingly, during the Ayr by-election campaign, the Scottish nationalists rather wavered in their position, which had been one of unstinting support for the Executive, which proposed repeal. They decided that they ought to consider statutory guidelines. The party that remained resolute in its beliefs, the Conservative party, happened to win the Ayr by-election.

The proof of the pudding is, as always, in the eating. The pudding that I am enjoying eating at the moment is Mr John Scott— [Laughter.] I use that purely as a figurative expression of speech, of course. In returning a Conservative member, the electorate knew precisely what it was doing. It is for that reason that not only does the Conservative party maintain its objection to the bill being used as a vehicle for repeal, but it maintains its objection to repeal. Although I listened carefully to the minister and noted the particular arguments that she advanced—

The Conservatives' position can be clarified amply and I am sure that Mr Monteith will take advantage of the opportunity to do that in his speech later. My understanding is that our position—as represented by Mr Monteith—has always been that we should maintain our opposition to repeal of section 28 and that we would relax our view only if we were satisfied that acceptable safeguards were being put in place. I am strongly of the view that that is the point that Mr Monteith was advancing when he debated the subject. I return to the seemingly twofold arguments that the Executive has sought to advance in support of repeal of section 28. The reasons that the Executive proffers for repeal of the section are that repeal will stop bullying in schools and that it will facilitate discussion and education about homosexuality in our schools. I am sorry to say to the minister that in the earlier debate on the matter in the chamber, I found those reasons unconvincing and unproven—I still consider that to be the case. The Scottish Executive's anti-bullying website admits that there is no legal bar to preventing teachers from explicitly condemning homophobic bullying, or discussing pupils' concerns about sexuality—a position that my party endorses entirely. The current Scottish Executive development department guidance to local authorities makes it  clear that section 28 will not prevent the objective discussion of homosexuality in the classroom, nor will it prevent the counselling of pupils who are concerned about their sexuality. That is also a position that the Conservatives support entirely. There is no need to repeal a legally enforceable safeguard for our children—that is at the heart of the concerns of so many people in Scotland. When repeal is mentioned in the context of sweeping away protection to replace it with something that is not enforceable, naturally parents become deeply concerned. I know that the minister does not share that view—her view is that we can trust educationists, that we can trust local authorities and that we can trust those who provide information to our schools. Many parents feel that, in the absence of some form of protection, that is not a satisfactory reassurance. There is, therefore, no need for repeal of the section. The arguments that the Executive has advanced are, as I said, not proven. The people of Scotland do not want repeal. According to a recent ICM Research poll, 64 per cent of people do not want it, and a MORI poll in January indicated that 60 per cent of head teachers do not want it.

It is always very difficult to say how often a particular section is used. If such a section exists to give protection, people will usually try to abide by the constraints that it imposes.

The section has been there as a guardian of fundamental right.

I am grateful.

No, thank you. I say to Mr Rumbles that it is clear that when there is statutory protection, it is there for protection—it need not speak for itself because it is there to deter. The evidence from down south is that material was available that, in the absence of  section 28, might have been advanced for circulation—no one has illusions about the nature of that material or the intentions of certain bodies in circulating it.

I am sorry, but I am running over my time and I would prefer to get on with my speech, if Nora Radcliffe will forgive me. According to the consultation paper, the views that the Executive appears to be interested in are, amazingly, those of the British Potato Council and of the Deer Commission for Scotland. Unbelievably, however, the Executive is not interested in the views of school boards.

I am sorry, but I am running out of time—I have been generous in accepting interventions. The Executive's attempt to repeal section 28 and replace it with unenforceable waffle is, frankly, unacceptable to the Scottish Conservatives and to the majority of people in Scotland. Political posturing, political correctness and juggling with parents' emotions must stop. Common sense must prevail. Public opinion matters, and as one eloquent advocate of repeal observed in the House of Commons on 17 May 1994: "It is a sad occasion when the Secretary of State and his junior Ministers totally ignore public opinion. There can be no greater and more sinister development in any democracy than when the gap between the Government and the governed grows so large with no prospect of being bridged".—[ Official Report, House of Commons, 17 May 1994; Vol 243, c 747.] That accurately describes the situation in Scotland today: there is a yawning gulf between the view that the Government insists on advancing and the feelings of the majority of people in Scotland.

No. I hope that the utterer of the words that I quoted, Mr Henry McLeish, will stick to the counsel that he gave in 1994 and will proffer it to his party today. The people of Scotland will be grateful if he does. It is with regret that the Conservative party is unable to support the bill because we perceive that it has a fundamental flaw. We are unable to agree to the repeal of section 28 in the absence of any satisfactory reassurance that it will be replaced by meaningful and enforceable guidelines, which will be of comfort to the people and parents of Scotland.

I am interested in Ms Alexander's comment to her colleague. Does it mean that the Executive may be willing to follow the example of her colleagues down south and consider putting marriage at the core of the guidelines that she proposes? Does that mean that she may even consider what her colleagues are doing down south and invoke a statutory protection for the public if section 2A is repealed?

I am sorry, Presiding Officer. I was—metaphorically—in the embrace of a minister.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I would like to begin—

I am beginning to wish that I had remained in the embrace of the minister. I speak in support of Mr Gorrie's amendment. I do so because I feel that MSPs are on a test of trust with the Scottish people. The people in the galleries of this chamber, and the people out beyond, will look keenly both at our judgment on where our new Parliament should be, and at how much it will cost. Unless an investigation of the other options is made, there is a grave risk that the new Parliament will be identified as a product of self-interested, self-indulgent and profligate MSPs. I do not affect to be Gypsy Rose Lee. It never entered my head when I spoke in the chamber in June last year that I should require to utter the same words again, more than nine months later, with perhaps a more chilling relevance. [Interruption.] I am sorry, Presiding Officer. It is a little difficult to concentrate with a kind of fairground going on in the background.

I recall that, for expressing views in support of Mr Gorrie's amendment last June, I and other colleagues were chided and rebuked. When we spoke of other options, we were told that the cost of a two-month delay would be between £2 million and £3 million. Is not hindsight wonderful? That figure seems like a drop of water in the ocean in comparison with the figures that we are now speaking of. Last June, we agreed—by a very narrow margin—that the Holyrood project should proceed within a time scale and within cost estimates that were detailed in the Presiding Officer's note. That amount of money was £109 million.

If Helen Eadie does not mind, I am reluctant to give way because I was badly delayed by the disturbances. We now know that the cost of £109 million was understated, apparently by £27 million, because of design risk costs. We now learn that the figure has escalated to perhaps £230 million, or perhaps £190 million, or perhaps £195 million. The debate this afternoon is about much more than votes on a building. It has become far more than an exchange of views about who wanted what, who said what, why silent secret costs crept up and up, who knew what, and—more pertinently—who did not know what. In the perception of the public, this project has become a farce. Something insidious is happening: the  public is making a judgment on the Parliament itself. It affords me little comfort to repeat some of the comments that I have heard recently from members of the public: "what a shower", or "they are out of control" or "who do they think they are?" The public are looking at an institution that has become associated with costs and rising costs; that has a huge swathe of ministers; that has legions of advisers; that has embraced the controversy of section 28; that allows a Lord Advocate to hop off and become a judge; that seems to be obsessed with fox-hunting; and that has presided over crises in our civil and criminal courts. It is small wonder that the public use epithets such as "what a shower" and "out of control". That is a judgment on the First Minister and the Executive. Leadership could, and should, have come from them. Although today we may take a vote on a building and where it should or should not be, at issue is something far greater. At issue is the integrity of this institution. The questions that we must all consider before we vote should be these: how do we begin to redeem ourselves in the eyes of the public, and how do we start to restore credibility and respect? If the advice that was proffered to this chamber in June last year by Mr Gorrie and others had been heeded, we would not be in this situation today. The building of a Parliament has now become just a detail of the problem. The only way of starting back on the road to good faith with the public is to approve Mr Gorrie's amendment so that the other options can be considered, and then to explain to the people of Scotland why we made that decision.

Will Mr McNulty confirm what the Conservative group asked for?

I also welcome the consultation paper. As Mr McLetchie said, we are broadly in support of the initiatives that are listed therein. We hope that there will be a wide and constructive response from the public. Transparency of procedure for appointments and transparency of operation of quangos is essential for the credibility of those organisations in the eyes of the public. It is important to bear that in mind as there is a degree of cynicism among the public about how those bodies operate. That transparency is equally necessary for the effective working of the quango. I hope that the broader issue of quangos in general can be examined. Perhaps some of them can be restructured into voluntary organisations. Not all of them need retain their current character. There is a need to depoliticise appointments and to remove the appointments system from the direct political arena although, of course, it is acknowledged that there must continue to be a  link, in the interests of accountability. My party supports the concept of an independent commissioner and—in the short term—using the UK commissioner seems a sensible transitional proposal. Merit and added value to the quango must be the criteria. Considerations of gender and other comparable and worthy factors must be balanced with that. Marilyn Livingstone made a good point: there are apparent deficiencies in the composition of many of those bodies, but it is important for the sake of the credibility of the people serving on the bodies and the credibility of the body itself that merit be paramount. I do not believe that it is impossible to find merit in the groups to which Marilyn Livingstone referred. The Conservative party opposes an abstract quota approach. For a responsible and transparent approach to these issues, there must be openness. An application of that approach would be to allow the commissioner to appoint the 27 independent assessors, and to increase the number of independent members on the Executive's appointment panels. Given what we can only estimate to be the total cost of remunerating personnel in quangos—that, interestingly, does not figure in the document, but it must be a significant sum—I suggest that there is a need to monitor the appointment process and the performance of appointees. To minimise bureaucracy and cost, the commissioner could audit the process. However, should not appointees be appointed for an initial probationary period, whereby continuance of their appointment would rest with the individual quango chairman? Given the responsibilities that those people have, and the budgets for which they are responsible, that would be a perfectly acceptable commercial proposition, and I see no reason why it should not be extended to the sphere of quangos. The Conservative party supports the minister's motion and hopes that the response that he receives will be positive and helpful.

I will declare an interest, as I am a member of the court of the University of Strathclyde. To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive considers that higher education is being adequately funded on the basis of the levels of funding outlined to institutions by the Scottish Higher Education Funding Council in its circular letter of 23 March 2000.   (S1F-249)

I thank the First Minister for the fullness of his reply, with which I do not agree at all. However contemptible he may consider the efforts of the Conservative Administration, we are now considering the efforts of the current new Labour Administration. Does the First Minister accept that the announcement of an increase in the overall grant funding for our higher education institutions of 2.8 per cent—which in reality translates to a 2 per cent increase—means that some form of top-slicing is being applied to the Scottish Higher Education Funding Council, which is tantamount to a covert agenda? Does he accept that that contrasts uneasily with the situation in England, where grant funding of 3 per cent—which was announced by the Higher Education Funding Council for England—has meant an increase of 3 per cent for institutions there? Does he accept that that means that as institutions in Scotland try to cope with reduced resources, they face the possibility of high-calibre staff being poached by English institutions? Is that not an affront to higher education in Scotland? Is not this Administration reducing it to the pauper's option?

I shall have another go at trying to get a simple answer to a simple question. A 2.8 per cent increase in funding to our higher education institutions has been announced at a time of stringent funding. In reality, that is reduced to a 2 per cent increase, although higher education institutions in England have received a real-terms increase of 3 per cent. What is happening to the difference and how are our higher education institutions meant to compete with those in England?

I would like to ask the minister if, in relation to the individual operating routes of Caledonian MacBrayne, she can demonstrate how effectiveness and efficiency are measured and how value for money is provided.

There would be little disagreement that the stated objectives for Scotland as described in Miss Hyslop's motion are manifestly worthy. A "dynamic, prosperous" Scotland with "quality affordable homes, a high standard learning environment for children,"— why stop at children; I would have said everybody—  "and modern high quality communication links" is a vision that we all embrace. As has already been said, the challenge is not the vision; it is the funding. The somewhat luxuriant language of the latter part of the SNP motion seems to be steering towards a very familiar Scottish nationalist path that is becoming well worn with the tramp of spend, tax and the familiar signpost of independence, proclaiming economic nirvana. It was at that point, Presiding Officer, that the motion gave me the jitters. Desirable is not the same as affordable, hence the amendment to the motion in my name. The rub in all this is the money. When it comes to infrastructure, there are three options. Option 1 is to do nothing. That seems to be pretty well the Executive's preferred option in relation to transport. Option 2 is to do something: add to public sector borrowing and tax to pay for it. Option 3 is private finance initiative: let public-private partnerships work for mutual benefit. Looking at the motion, I shall credit the SNP with ruling out option 1—I assume that its agenda is to do something. I become much more alarmed when I anticipate—and I have now heard it—that the SNP will rule out option 3, given its notorious opposition to PFI. That means it can go only to option 2. Miss Hyslop has tried to explain, very eloquently, why she considers option 2 not to be the Stalinist, socialist formula of former years, but an enlightened, imaginative use of finance. The minister and I have often disagreed about a great deal of things in this chamber, but I firmly agree with her in her analysis of Miss Hyslop's suggested solution. I, too, had prepared a speech dealing with the SNP's Scottish public service trust. I had understood from Mr Salmond's comments last year that it was the flagship for dealing with public finance. It seems to have sunk somewhere along the line, as there has not been too much reference to it today. When he unveiled that vehicle, Mr Salmond was talking about the Skye bridge. He said that the pledge that the SNP would make before the last election, to buy out Bank of America as operator of the Skye bridge and to scrap the tolls, would be achieved under the device of a public service trust. According to the SNP, Holyrood would then have had to put up an extra £4 million a year to pay for so-called shadow tolls. It alleges that that income would enable the trust to pay off the interest on its debt. Given the rosy vision of this morning's motion, the £4 million would be just a start. Reference has already been made to spending pledges given by the Scottish National party in this chamber. I shall not re-articulate them, but they are numerous. Miss Hyslop argued that the election pledges are  costed.

I acknowledge that Miss Hyslop told the chamber that that proposal had been costed as one of her party's election pledges. As was clear from her proposition, however, her whole argument assumes an independence—

Well, so she says. I get even more alarmed about the tax implications. What, I think, is not being addressed by the Scottish National party is the fundamental difference between using private money in a private finance initiative and using private money to fund what I think is called a nationalised administration of borrowing. I have to agree with the minister on that point. The two approaches are different: the comparison is not between apples and apples but apples and pears. Fiona Hyslop might believe that her apples are rosier than my pears. We will simply have to disagree.

I feel apprehensive, but I will.

With diffidence, I disagree with the formidable Mrs MacDonald. I do not agree that the choice is not simply between ways of borrowing the money. That is precisely what it is. The new royal infirmary is being constructed and I am sure that the people of Edinburgh welcome that. I must point out that, if the only way to secure funds for the hospital had been by old-fashioned public  sector borrowing, that infirmary would not be being built. If I seem cynical about the SNP's proposals on funding public infrastructure, it is because of my suspicions about the party's attitude to taxation. We know from the SNP's pre-election pledge that if the SNP had formed the Executive Scotland would have been the most highly taxed part of the UK. The SNP's "penny for Scotland" policy was penny wise and pound foolish: the burden proposed by the SNP on the public sector debt and the taxpayer would severely restrict the spending power of this Parliament. The Scottish public service vehicle that has been outlined today is nothing more than a mega-quango. The SNP finds it hard to argue that it can deliver its vision for Scotland by the method that has been described today. I am not satisfied that it would be able to. That private finance initiatives are the best and most imaginative way forward is not an opinion that is held only by me. Were that so, I doubt whether the Executive would have had anything to do with them. The Executive realised soon after coming to power that PFIs provide an efficient and manageable means of accessing capital to provide essential investment. They allow the Government to provide better public services at a lower cost to the taxpayer. The services remain publicly owned, but the use of private sector capital and skill means a better deal for the taxpayer. Mr Ewing referred to an independent report; I will refer to another. Arthur Andersen and the London School of Economics concluded, on 10 February 2000, that the private finance initiative appears to offer excellent value for money. The study, commissioned by the Treasury's PFI task force, examined 29 projects and concluded that, compared with the public sector estimates of the cost of buying the same projects conventionally, average savings run at 17 per cent. The current structure of our water authorities bears examination. They have difficulty accessing capital because of their structure. In my opinion, accessing external capital is vital if they are to continue with the essential infrastructure investment in which they will have to engage. The position is made a little more complicated by the Labour-legislated Competition Act 1998, which was introduced on 1 March 2000 and will ensure that dominant forces in a monopoly have a difficult time establishing the legitimacy of continuing to operate unchallenged. If we think that our water authorities will be immune from the consequences of the Competition Act 1998, we are misguided. What we want in this chamber is a mature debate on the water industry and the supply of  water in Scotland, without any of the ideological baggage that has dogged the subject in the past. All issues and possibilities must be considered if the quality of service is to be improved, if Scotland's environment is to be protected and if the households of Scotland are to receive real value for money.

If Mr Adam is brief.

No, I do not agree with that. Where they have been used, PFIs have been used for specific projects, which is why they have been popular in the health service and in education. They have also been used, to a limited extent and for specific projects, by water authorities. That has shown the merit and value of PFI. The task with which our water authorities are saddled is having virtually to renovate and replace centuries-old infrastructure. At the moment, they are trying to do that through huge capital expenditure out of revenue, which means very high charges for the customer—as members will know, having recently received their bills. This is an area in which there must be mature and intelligent debate, as the current structures are restrictive. We must be prepared to consider how we can enable water authorities to access external capital to give the people of Scotland a more manageable and affordable deal than they currently receive. I move amendment S1M-676.2, to leave out from "to increase" to end and insert: "other than using its powers to propose rises in taxation, to stimulate investment in Scotland's essential public services and infrastructure."

In relation to the Conservatives' record on the infrastructure, does the minister accept that the First Minister has adopted several of the PFIs that were instigated by the Conservative Government? Further, does she accept that, in doing so, the First Minister has embraced—admirably—the concept of PFI and made a significant contribution to the health infrastructure to which she alluded?

The Conservative party welcomes the initiative. We agree that the real problems that are emerging must be addressed and that this is an appropriate way in which to do that. We listened to a debate on manufacturing this morning, when there was all-party agreement on the fundamental need for our Scottish industry to remain competitive. I want to ascertain that the minister will consult with her colleague the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning on the proposed introduction of the climate change levy and any strategy for industrial and commercial waste, to ensure that business in Scotland is not placed at any greater disadvantage than business elsewhere in the UK.

rose—

Steady!

Will the member give way?

Mr Lyon is perfectly safe. I am curious about Mr Lyon's reference to the past 18 years. The one fact that comes through clearly in the document is that dramatic productivity gains have been made in that period. The document also points out that the difficulties that manufacturing encountered in this country are no different from the difficulties that were encountered in other countries. Mr Lyon is being selective with the facts when he makes his criticism.

Mr Lyon mentioned student fees. Some students who previously paid no fees will now have to pay fees. Will that induce our young people to go to universities?

I apologise if I sound a bit nasal; I blame monsoon conditions at Troon. The Conservative party welcomes the document "Created in Scotland—The Way Forward for Scottish Manufacturing in the 21 st Century" as a positive contribution to any debate on the enterprise economy. Indeed, the document shows a healthy recognition that, when we use the word "manufacturing", we should not think exclusively of big bits of metal and the horny hand of toil, however attractive those attributes might have been in the past. However, the honest sweat of brow remains enduringly relevant, as I shall explain. It is refreshing to find references in the document to how factors such as research and development, design, supply, production, software, services, distribution and aftercare can combine to create the process of manufacturing. It is equally helpful to track the course of manufacturing jobs over the past 19 years and to be presented with the analysis of the steady increase in electrical and instrument engineering jobs over the past five years. The chart in the document that illustrates a comparison between 1973 and 1998 of gross value added by the manufacturing sector is particularly illuminating. Although the chart shows where there has been sector decline, the consistent growth in other parts of the sector and the huge productivity gains in the past 20 years are both positive aspects. However, smiling at ourselves in the mirror becomes pointless when we lag behind competitors such as France, Germany and particularly the USA in terms of productivity. Successful business, whether in the manufacturing sector or elsewhere, exists on innovation, creation, productivity and competitiveness. To nurture those criteria, the document includes an extensive list of things to do, all of which are relevant and laudable. However, the question is how many of them are happening. Will some of them ever happen, or are they just a well-intended wish list? Since the Parliament began, the minister has given a string of announcements about initiatives, as Mr Swinney said. What has happened to them? Has anything happened because of them? Is anybody measuring output or outcomes? Has  anyone set targets? Mr Swinney appropriately referred to the Scottish university for industry. My perception is that there is slight scepticism among the business community about the relevance of the concept. I hope that that scepticism can be dispelled, but we must be much more public about the achievements and consequences of established initiatives. If such initiatives are not to be discredited and if politicians are to enjoy any respectability with business, we need to put flesh on the bones of such initiatives and we need to do so quickly. I hope that the minister can give us an early report on progress to date. I want also to mention a particular hobby-horse—the reviews of Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise. The minister should be under no illusion: business is looking for radical proposals and for clear links, not confusion. We must examine the Executive's intentions for the business environment if we are to avoid the Executive's publication being discounted. Page 5 of the document says that the Executive will "take steps to ensure that the regulatory burden is kept to a sensible minimum". That is great news, but what is happening? According to the British Chambers of Commerce, since 1997, the Labour Government has implemented more than 2,600 regulations and repealed only 20. Much of Scotland's manufacturing sector is made up of small concerns employing fewer than 10 people. For such businesses, being hamstrung and strangled with red tape is a threat to survival. An inquiry by National Westminster Bank plc found that the total cost of compliance with Government red tape was 8.5 per cent of turnover for businesses with a total turnover between £20,000 and £50,000 and 4.1 per cent of turnover for larger businesses. Those are alarming statistics, because they go to the heart not only of survival, but of competitiveness. My suggestion—which I make purely constructively, I hope—is to beef up IRIS. I am not exhorting the minister to go around fattening up women; I refer to the improving regulation in Scotland unit. I suggest that the unit be given a target and that the Scottish manufacturing steering group be asked to produce proposals for a reduction in red tape over the next four months. The minister should then ask IRIS to report on the proposals to see whether they can be implemented. I assure the minister that that will raise a cheer like nothing else. Page 5 of the report also says that the Executive will "ensure the competitiveness of Scottish manufacturers is not adversely affected by decisions on the business rate".  Mr Ewing referred to that. Because Jack McConnell, the Minister for Finance, has abolished the uniform business rate, we have a built-in business rate pound discriminator between Scotland and England. That is bad news and bad public relations for the Scottish business community, which needs to attract, not deter, inward investment. I do not expect a wand to be waved, but the minister should be aware that there is a disparity between words and what is going on—there is a shortfall. I am as anxious as anybody that this document should enjoy credibility, but it will do that only if deeds begin to match words. Another of the Executive's declared aims is to "build an integrated transport system, which meets Scotland's economic and social needs, but does not threaten the health of our environment". So far, we have no integrated transport system. According to the Minister for Transport and the Environment, we are not getting one this year, next year, sometime never. If the minister knows something that we do not, we should be put out of our suspense. We would like to know what M74 extension card is up the minister's sleeve, because unless a card is coming out of a sleeve—or a rabbit out of a hat—the commitment in the report means nothing. We have had only deterrent factors, which hit competitiveness. They include the highest fuel prices in Europe, proposals for road-user charges and taxes on workplace parking. On page 6 of "Created in Scotland", which deals with "the use of knowledge and technology", the Executive says that it will "develop an e-commerce strategy for Scotland". That is very worthy, and it is obviously vital, but let politicians not make the mistake of thinking that e-commerce is a stand-alone electronic innovation or an end in itself. I quote an economist, George Kerevan, who was writing recently in a Sunday newspaper.

He referred to the remark of the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Gordon Brown, that he would make the UK "the best place to do e-commerce". George Kerevan said: "But the whole point of e-commerce is that place disappears over the internet. There is no best place, only worse place where Government regulation limits individual access." Whatever the individual opinions in this chamber may be about Mr Kerevan's credentials, I think  that he is a fine man. [MEMBERS: "Oh!"] He is articulating a point of view that would certainly strike a chord with the business community in Scotland.

We have to— [Interruption.]

More's the pity. If we are really serious about e-commerce, we have to get computers and business into our primary schools, so that e-commerce is literally a tool of the trade. By the time those children who are now in primary school get to secondary school, the enterprise culture should be brought to our young people not as a freak for the few, but as a fact of life for all. Just to reassure the people of Scotland that I do not spend my weekends lolling around in indolence, I bring to their attention an article in the business section of Scotland on Sunday on 5 March. I found the article disturbing. It said that, unless crucial investment is made to provide high-speed connections, large swathes of Scotland could be by-passed by the information superhighway. The minister should confirm that he will enter into urgent consultation with current connection providers to address that threat. If there is such a basic problem with the infrastructure, the Executive's document will simply not stand up. Mr Swinney has referred to the macro scene. I have a certain sympathy with his doing so, although his credentials are slightly questionable—I remain unconvinced that the SNP would be anything other than a high-taxation party in an independent Scotland. The current platform of taxation is oppressive. The director general of the British Chambers of Commerce, Chris Humphries, said on 11 March last year that the net effect of the budget was that business would be £500 million worse off in 1999, £1.5 billion worse off in 2000 and £1.2 billion worse off in 2001. We cannot regard those as empty statistics. Those figures have a significant impact on business. The manufacturing sector is particularly vulnerable. The Conservative party commends the spirit of the Executive's report. Out there in our manufacturing sector, there is at every level the honest sweat of brow. Let us not turn that into a cold sweat. In "Created in Scotland", we have bones. I say to the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning that, unless we put flesh on those bones, I am afraid that there will be no conviction on the part of the business community that the Executive's initiative is anything more than  a verbal one. Speaking for my party, I want the initiative to be anything but that. I believe that the document is good and that its spirit lies in the best traditions of trying to help industry.

I thank the First Minister. The point that I was making, albeit clumsily and ineptly, was quite simply that the devolved structure in Scotland has created very different circumstances. It has placed a magnifying glass over every sector of activity in Scotland. We have never had the precedent of a Lord Advocate being a member of cabinet in a devolved Scotland. [Laughter.] The vision of the First Minister bobbing up and down is most enticing, Sir David. I shall keep him on his spring.

The issue is this: in a devolved structure, there is an absolute need for a political divergence and a professional detachment of the law officers. I do not want to stand here and harry  Mr Boyd. I do not want to stand here and knock his head off, or issue a tirade at him because I think that there has been some deficiency in his advice. I do not mind doing that to the First Minister, because he is elected to take that on the chin. However, I do not think that the professional adviser to the Executive is in a comparable position.

On the contrary, the member would find that the Conservatives have a lot of sympathy with what she is saying. However, does she agree that part of the cosy and perhaps too close relationship that exists in relation to appointments is due to the current structure of appointments? That is the very aspect that we were seeking to challenge.

Presiding Officer, I hope that you will accept that thought must be given to the circumstances that gave rise to this motion—last night's summary announcement that Lord Hardie had made himself a judge. Even allowing for the fact that such a mode of judicial appointment will almost certainly be consigned to the history books, the question is "Was I surprised?" In fact, I was astonished. Contrary to the First Minister's assessment, I think that the Executive is deaved by legal problems, many of them as a consequence of the European convention on human rights. There is a veritable catalogue of calamity. The First Minister may not consider it to be such but, as a practising solicitor, I certainly do. We have 126 temporary sheriffs who have lost their jobs and a huge accumulation of unaddressed litigation. The enforcement of our road traffic law is being called into question, the status of our children's panels is in doubt and our ability to take tough measures to tackle drug dealing is in question. The universal application of deferred tuition fees for all Scottish students throughout the United Kingdom has been proscribed.

Because in my book, if one is present when the going gets tough, one should stay put to sort it out and not run away. An enormous question mark hangs over the impartiality of the office of Lord Advocate in the matter of judicial appointments, given that he is a member of the Government. It is my submission to the First Minister that, far from disappearing into the blue yonder, the Lord Advocate should be on hand to advise on the problems and to steer us through the solutions. This situation is making the Parliament a laughing stock. The other issue arising out of this episode relates to the implications for the Lockerbie trial of Lord Hardie's departure. Roseanna Cunningham has already alluded to that. The trial will be the most significant ever to take place under Scots law. What does this departure say about the dependability and substance of our legal system, which formerly was the envy of the world? The departure makes a mockery of Scots law and our legal system. What about the position of law officers as members of the Government? In a devolved structure—a fact that is of particular significance—does not such involvement create an irreconcilable conflict of interest? How can professional advisers act with detachment when inevitably they are politically compromised? It is not a matter of culpability; it is de facto the situation.

Unlike the First Minister, I am tight for time. What about the manner of Lord Hardie's going at this time of crisis, a phrase that I repeat without apology? The going gets tough, and clear, firm guidance is needed at this testing time from the Lord Advocate. He is the principal legal adviser to the Executive, but what does he do? He makes himself a judge. Some may say that he does not do so directly, but I disagree. We know that a consultation paper concerning judicial appointments will probably be produced in March. The existing practice of appointment of judges by the Lord Advocate will almost certainly cease. I must ask the First Minster: is not what has happened, at best, unseemly? This resignation has made a laughing stock of the Parliament and a mockery of the Scottish legal system, but it has detonated public confidence in both. I submit that these are the hallmarks of a crisis-ridden, rudderless Executive, which has no guts, because there is no stomach and no control.  Looking at the motion before us and at the intended appointees, of course the Conservative group wishes Mr Boyd and Mr Davidson all good fortune in their positions. They are venerable and respected jurists. However, I must say that this motion is not remarkable for its content; what is remarkable is that, at this time in our affairs, we should be required to debate such a motion at all.

I acknowledge the point that the First Minister is making, but does he not accept that there cannot be any possible comparison between the circumstances surrounding the resignation of Lord Mackay of Clashfern and those surrounding the very summary departure of Lord Hardie?

To ask the First Minister what progress the Scottish Executive is making in meeting its key targets. (S1F-121)

That is all very cheery and encouraging. The Executive has previously indicated that one of its key targets is to have 12 special advisers and two law officers. Given that the First Minister has a remarkable capacity for losing them, does he have any hope of ever meeting that target?

On a point of order. In view of the unusual situation that has arisen, and given Roseanna Cunningham's comments, I should say on behalf of the Conservative group that we are minded to support the attempt to debate this matter this afternoon.

I thank the minister for his explanation of the Budget (Scotland) Bill. I noted particularly his phrase "spending the people's money well on the people's priorities". It is right that this party should affirm that there is no bottomless purse and that we are committed to no new or higher taxes. However, I must suggest to the minister that that makes analysis of "spending the people's money well on the people's priorities" particularly critical. I suggest that we consider the first component, spending well. I presume that that means not spending freely, but spending prudently. That brings me to words that I regard as helpful, such as "efficiency" and "savings". I had hoped that this bill might have been accompanied by a projection of efficiency and savings from the minister, in particular of what specific efficiency and savings directives he has issued to his ministerial colleagues. The Parliament needs to identify a base cost for core services. Without that, fire-fighting supplementary estimates will be a fact of life. I think that economic management requires strategic direction, which currently seems to be lacking. I fully accept that there may not be culpability on the minister's part, and I acknowledge that we are working in a new system and in a new structure, but we have to begin asking the question, "Who is responsible for strategic direction in economic management?" Without that direction, we are being led to a budget that is rather like a wheel with no spokes. I share the view of my colleague, Mr Davidson, that some rigorous discussion with the Chancellor of the Exchequer about the tax take from Scotland is long overdue, and Professor Midwinter's warning about the health service should not go unheeded. Efficiency in local authorities needs to be demonstrated. They should be rewarded for better outturns, core service focus and delivery efficiency. I echo the sentiments of Mr Johnston and Mr Ingram, and even the comments of the wolf in fluffy pink clothing, Mr Rumbles: attention demands to be paid to what local authorities are doing. The efficient ones have to be acknowledged, but I am not sure that there is any formula that does that. I also feel that, given the recent disclosures about uncollected community charge and council tax, this matter is long overdue for attention, and I would like to think that within the minister's formula, whatever it is, there is  provision for that facility. It seems that the minister requires an intimate knowledge about what is going on in local government. Only then will the phrase "spending well" have a ring of conviction. As for the people's priorities, it is clear that we are running short on essential public services. The rural economy is in a state of unprecedented disintegration, we underperform in business expansion and there are huge questions about the health service. What is disclosed in the bill is that more remains unexamined, uninvestigated and unmeasured in terms of outturn and efficiency. In those circumstances, I regret that this party is unable to support the minister's budget, and we shall feel it necessary to abstain when the question on the motion is put at decision time.

rose—

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I do not want in any way to diminish Nora Radcliffe's contribution to this debate. Some of the letters from which she has read extracts are familiar to us all. However, the member expresses a concern about the nature of some of the material that we have all received. A policeman outside this Parliament told me that if I handed it to passers-by in the High Street, I would be charged. Given that Nora Radcliffe has said that she would not wish that material to make its way into classrooms, what underpinning safeguard does she offer parents to ensure that if it ever made its way in or stood a chance of making its way in, it would be stopped by law?

Will Michael Matheson give way?

It is important to make clear the position of the Conservatives. We framed the motion as we did to indicate as precisely as we could the framework of protection that we believe must continue for youngsters in our schools. When we talk about deferring the repeal of section 28, we are not saying that we are prepared to dispense with section 28, but that we seek reassurance from the Executive that an equally safe measure, which is enforceable in law, will be substituted.

As one spinster talking to another, I should say that the minister and I are perhaps ill suited to be talking about marriage, but I accept the spirit of what she is saying and the way in which she says it. Looking at the amendments on the business list, does the minister agree that—notwithstanding what she says about consultation, and notwithstanding her express desire to ensure that the education that we agree is needed will still rest on the basis of guidelines—the public are seeking reassurance about how to provide statutory protection if something goes wrong? Where is that  protection to be found?

Section 28 is arguably the most perplexing and sensitive issue to come before this Parliament. I am sure that I am not alone in having been deeply disturbed by the nature and flavour of recent comments. We have to be clear about what we are discussing. To me, this debate is not, and never should have been, about homophobia. It is not, and never should have been, an unseemly and at times offensive exchange of views. For a society that aspires to reflect social inclusion, tolerance is, or should be, the foundation stone. I have no doubt that, when people are mature enough to make their own decisions on lifestyle, they must be free to make those decisions. The decisions are for them and them alone. The issue in this debate is much simpler—the stable, reassuring and supportive environment that we want in our schools for our young people. During adolescence, young people go through arguably the most turbulent and difficult time of their life and are perhaps at their most impressionable and vulnerable. That is what any debate on section 28 ought to be about. When the Executive first intimated that it proposed to repeal section 28—I recall that that was done not in this chamber, but at some event attended by the Minister for Communities at the University of Glasgow—the reasons advanced were that the presence of section 28 prevented or inhibited teachers from dealing with the bullying of young people who were thought to be homosexual, and it inhibited or restricted adequate discussion about homosexuality in schools. Those arguments troubled me, because I find it unacceptable that bullying in schools should arise from any cause and that it should not be dealt with. It also troubled me that there could be any meaningful sexual education class in schools without reference to homosexuality; the discussion of such matters, as appropriate for the age and  stage of development of our children, is absolutely essential. That took me to the text of section 28. Reading that text as a lawyer rather than a politician, I found nothing in it that would prevent schools from dealing with bullying or would inhibit the discussion of homosexuality in our schools. I say that because the nub of this issue is the word "promote". A confusion has arisen about the meaning of teaching, as distinct from promoting. In the "Oxford English Dictionary", "promoting" is defined as "advancing", "preferring" or "encouraging". That places a very different construction on the argument. As far as sexual education in our schools is concerned, section 28 is doing no more than preserving a balance. The reality is that, without any promotion at all, heterosexuality is the norm; and when I say the norm, I mean that it is the condition or situation in which the majority of people exist. That is a central tenet of society. I understand that the First Minister has said that he does not wish to promote homosexuality, as has the Minister for Children and Education. If that is so, the question that I and a great many people in Scotland are asking is: why has this issue arisen? Choice of lifestyle should not rest with schools, which are there to inform. Nothing in section 28 prohibits the imparting of such information. In my opinion, such information should also refer to the structure and value of marriage, the family and stable relationships, to use the Executive's own words in a newspaper this morning. In considering section 28, I have been struck forcibly by two factors. Before the Minister for Communities made her announcement at the University of Glasgow last October, no one had raised the matter with me. Nobody had expressed the fears that the minister seemed to harbour or the difficulties that she seemed to have. That view is supported by Chris Woodhead, the chief inspector for schools in England and Wales, who recently said that the issue had simply not been raised with him by the teaching profession. I presume that that is why the repeal of section 28 was not thought worth including in any party manifesto for the Scottish Parliament elections, and did not merit mention in the Executive's programme for government, the partnership agreement or any ministerial statement on the ethical standards bill. I cannot say that that silence has endured since the minister made her announcement. I cannot believe that I am the only MSP to be overwhelmed by a mountain of mail from members of the public who are deeply alarmed at the threatened removal of what they see as a  fundamental protection for young people. I cannot speak for others, but, as of this morning, of the 223 letters that I have received on the issue, 11 are for the repeal and 212 are against. I have to ask myself how the matter has arisen at all. There was certainly no public appetite in Scotland for raising it. I can only conclude that this is the naive afterthought of an Executive that is zealously obsessed with the politically correct.

Forgive me, Mr Macintosh, but there are intervals in your recollection. The Labour party has not shown consistent adherence to repeal of section 28. In particular—and Labour members can check this out for themselves—the Labour manifesto for the Scottish Parliament gave no commitment to seek to change that law. The public are acutely aware of that fact. At best, that may have been a convenient omission; at worst, it was deception.

No, I have dealt with that point. I can conclude only that the proposal to repeal section 28 is the naive afterthought of an Executive that is zealously obsessed with the politically correct, rather than the result of mature and measured consideration of an issue that is profoundly sensitive and potentially hurtful to many people. Would that such consideration had weighed more heavily with the Executive, as something regrettable and profoundly undesirable has arisen out of its precipitate and ill-advised initiative. In the past few weeks, I have seen a polarisation of views, caused by the Executive's decision to repeal section 28. That is unhealthy and unwelcome in our society in Scotland. An ugly and undisguised homophobia has been laid bare, to which the Executive's action has given a fair wind; its action has created a climate for the fertile spawning of such offensive attitudes. Had it not been for a clumsy and precipitate Government decision, those attitudes would never have seen the light of day. Ordinary people—such as the mothers, fathers, surgeons, doctors, teachers, nurses, social workers and youth workers who are represented in my correspondence files—have been stirred into fear. They also feel resentment that the fundamental protection that they thought was in place to ensure their children's safety is to be  removed without any democratic notice.

Yes. Everyone who has communicated with me has received my response and I have had very few returns to that response. That suggests that I am not alone in my understanding of the position, which is that parents are deeply concerned about the removal of a protection that will be replaced by guidelines that do not have the force of law. That does not escape parents' attention, Mr Kerr, nor should it. Parents feel that the fundamental protection that the Executive is removing, without democratic notice, should at least be replaced by something equally enforceable and protective. Guidelines with no force of law do not amount to that.

Mr Stephen should be more interested not in my opinion, but in the opinion of people outside Parliament. Our legal system includes numerous laws that protect children; there are too many such laws to enumerate now, but they exist. Section 28 undoubtedly provides protection, because it is concerned with promotion. I have given my understanding of promotion, which apparently is shared by many people in Scotland. Parents must have a fundamental say in what happens in our schools and must know that the protection of the law is behind them. They are saying that protection is required in this area. Mr Stephen has the democratic right to disagree with that view.

If Mr Rumbles does not mind, I am watching the clock. The threat of removing that safeguard and of replacing it with guidelines that enjoy no force of law is a curious way in which to aspire to social  inclusion in Scotland.

I am sorry. Social inclusion is not about fostering division, as this proposal has done, but about respecting the views of the majority and seeking to reconcile those with the views of a minority. In my judgment, the Scottish Executive has failed that test. I oppose the repeal of section 28, because I must listen to the fears and concerns of the people who put us in this Parliament, not to the zealous naivety of the Executive. I move the motion because it pledges continued statutory protection within a framework that promises a far better chance of promoting agreement, tolerance and integration; that is a form of promotion with which I have no problem whatever. I move, That the Parliament affirms its belief in an open, democratic and tolerant society where all members are treated equally under the law; calls upon the Scottish Executive not to include the proposed repeal of section 2A of the Local Government Act 1986 in the draft Ethical Standards in Public Life etc. (Scotland) Bill, to establish an official committee of inquiry to consider all aspects of the section and in particular the provision of sex education in Scottish schools and to give this committee the remit of ensuring that relationships form the basis for discussion and teaching of sex education and establishing what statutory protection for children, parents and school boards is required, accompanied by clear guidelines on what topics and materials are appropriate for pupils of varying age, experience and maturity, and agrees to defer further consideration of this matter until said committee has reported to the Parliament.  Amendment S1M-509.1 moved,  Leave out from "calls upon" to end and insert "notes the Executive's move to consult fully on all necessary safeguards before any repeal of section 2A and in particular the Executive's commitment to publish a draft circular to education authorities on introduction of the Bill, to set up a Working Group to review and consult on that circular, the existing curriculum material and support for teachers in relation to sex education and thereafter to use powers in the Education (Scotland) Act 1980 to issue any necessary guidance, and to consult on any other reassurance that may be required, including the status that then might be given to the guidelines."— [Bruce Crawford.]

I am still recovering from the spasm of thinking that Mr McConnell was going to tell us that he was a grandfather, which would have made me look at policemen in a completely different light. On behalf of the Conservatives, I thank the minister for his statement, which is genuinely received with favour. I am pleased to hear him say that he wants to investigate a system that has perhaps attracted the criticism of creating jobs for the boys. Speaking for my own sex, I should say that jobs for the boys is of little interest; jobs for the Labour boys—perish the thought—is of even less interest. In his statement, the minister listed the objectives of the system, one of which is to  "enjoy public confidence through being fair, open and transparent". Does the minister agree that we should concentrate on merit when enlisting anyone into a quango and that an important criterion of enlistment should be their added value to that quango? Furthermore, does he agree that, given how some quangos operate and the people who serve on them, there should be a monitoring process for whatever system is devised? For example, the champions for change initiative has been launched with a great brouhaha. I do not know what it has achieved, although Brian Souter and Ruth Mackenzie have been very busy recently. There is a need for public information and public reassurance that personnel on quangos are performing and continuing to add value and make a contribution.

Does the minister accept that there is a further problem that compounds the situation to which Mr Welsh referred, as many local authorities have a latent problem with capital infrastructure not being maintained and going out of service? Does the minister agree, given that he has said that he is anxious to encourage co-operation, that a national directive to local authorities commissioning a survey on all their capital infrastructures might be useful?

We welcome the Executive introducing a debate on this subject and, in so doing, embracing David McLetchie's suggestion. It has been an interesting and well-informed debate with a welcome, very courteous exchange of views. The title British-Irish Council has a slightly sterile and restrictive redolence akin to a dreary post-second world war trade mission—that is not the ambience that we want for the new body. To me, council of the isles has a ring about it that is substantive and romantic. St Columba and Ossian would have empathised with that name and with the spirit of the entity. Nor should the council of the isles conjure up a public perception of a peripatetic group of aquatic bureaucrats observing tokenism by circumnavigating their way round the British Isles. The council's composition and activity are important, as is its location. We feel that a permanent chairman and the imaginative inclusion of an interparliamentary dimension would be fruitful and strengthen the structure. The prospect of locating the permanent secretariat in Glasgow is alluring and would be a fitting tribute to the traditions of St Mungo. I suggest to Dr Ewing that the honest men and bonnie lasses of Ayr might indulge me in that view. The First Minister spoke of speeches to the council full of optimism and hope. That is welcome and this party applauds those sentiments. He also considered that the council could be a forum for discussion where interests coincide, overlap and collide. That aspect is very significant. This party endorses the First Minister's view, but adds that there must be rigour and candour in the pursuit of the objectives. Having regard to the matters that the council of the isles may discuss, specifically communications, Alex Fergusson and Dr Elaine Murray referred to the A75 and the A77 south of Ayr. Those roads are vitally significant to improving access between Scotland and Ireland, as are the expansion of our air travel and air freight. This chamber expects the Scottish Executive to pursue those matters with vigour. In relation to drugs, Mr McLetchie rightly pointed out the instructive visit that the Deputy Minister for Justice, Angus MacKay, recently made to Dublin, but of that we need to hear more, because so far there has been silence. I would like the Executive to confirm whether the European convention on human rights is proving to be an impediment to the  implementation of Irish solutions. Again, I find myself agreeing with Mr Raffan. He is right to allude to learning through the council about treatment and rehabilitation models in relation to drugs abuse. Alex Fergusson pertinently commented on the current battle, which is the interconnected cables that will be laid over the North channel. Beaufort's dyke is an important element of that. This is precisely the sort of useful, relevant and important issue that the council can embrace. Social inclusion is a vital area for the council to consider, but the input from Scotland will be flawed if it proceeds from a didactic and lofty standpoint, and if it is redolent of the Executive delivering input from a think tank, and not giving families and communities real control. In conclusion, this party wishes the council of the isles well and supports the initiative, the motion and the amendment, but whatever else happens, we are emphatic that this council must not be empty tokenism.

I appreciate that we are discussing not the minutiae, but the general principles—the rough shape—of the bill, which is akin to trying on a new outfit and having a quick squint in the mirror to get a first impression. First impressions matter, and I have to tell the minister that I do not care for my first glimpse of his proposals. The shape chosen by the Executive does not appeal. I find marked increases in expenditure where I do not want to see them. There is, for example, a 43 per cent increase in spending on this Parliament and a 50 per cent increase in spending on the Executive secretariat—on which spending has more than doubled. This budget garment is looking a bit baggy where I want it to be better fitted, but where I want it to be more amply cut, I find it pinched: there is a projected drop of £47 million in the total budget for rural affairs; the drop for the enterprise and lifelong  learning budget is £26 million; the development department's projected drop is £34 million. Professor Brian Ashcroft said: "It is difficult to resist the conclusion that the industry, enterprise and training budget has had to bear a large part of the burden of the set-up costs of the Scottish Parliament." There is a further cause for concern about the statement of budget principles. If I understand the position correctly, the education budget is set to increase by £41 million. However, the pound of flesh for the coalition deal was £80 million, so where will the other £39 million be found?

Oh, no, Mr Raffan—I shall not be caught again. Were we not so tight for time, I would take Mr Raffan's intervention, but I do not have time to deal with him adequately. As I said, there is a projected drop in the enterprise and lifelong learning budget of £26 million, but we have just heard that the Executive's response to the Cubie report will cost £50 million. Where will the extra money come from? I am thankful that there is a projected increase of £73 million to the health budget, but we know that health trust budgets are currently overspent by £50 million. Is that allowed for? The three financial components that I have mentioned will be found elsewhere, or we are talking cuts, which will be, I suspect, considerable cuts. I would rather that there were more nurses than special advisers to the Executive. In conclusion, I do not like the cut of Mr McConnell's budget suit. It does not fit Scotland in the way that the Conservative party would wish it to. Furthermore, in relation to recently disclosed areas of extraordinary expenditure, there is no transparency about which budget sector will bear what burden. I regret that, in those circumstances, the Conservative party will have no alternative but to abstain and not approve the minister's budget principles.

rose—

The minister's news of improvements to the health service is welcome, but does he accept that there is an estimated overspend by health trusts of £50 million? Is that overspend allowed for in the minister's budget projection?

To ask the Scottish Executive what the gross annual cost is, including salaries, office provision and support, and loan and leasing charges, of the delivery by local authorities in Scotland of economic development services. (S1O-958)

I thank the minister for a reply that, if not explicit, is certainly significant. I inquire how, on the basis of such ignorance, his colleague Mr McLeish can announce a business initiative such as he did in The Herald yesterday. There is apparently no means of assessing whether that is the best means of delivery, given that we have no means of quantifying the performance audit of such activities.

I, too, thank Mr McNeil for lodging the motion and for bringing the problem to the attention of the chamber. He, Colin Campbell and I all share not just a deep knowledge of, but a profound affection for, Inverclyde. I have one experience that perhaps Duncan does not share—that of playing hockey in Battery park, in appalling weather, in a gym slip and black stockings. At least, I hope that we do not share that experience. As I reflected on the many years that have passed since I did that, it occurred to me that the weather has deteriorated. Conditions have become wetter and, sadly, Inverclyde has been a victim of that, as has been manifest in the problems caused by the acute flooding in December. I echo what Duncan McNeil said—the transport infrastructure is crucial to Inverclyde's economy, because the area is a jewel in the enterprise crown. We must recognise that Inverclyde is a real success story of grit and determination by people in the area to turn round adversity and bring something positive to the area. Inverclyde has a lot going for it and all members who are taking part in the debate are anxious to ensure that that is not impeded or obstructed. Undoubtedly, the recent flooding in the area led to gridlock and chaos for commuters, businesses and schools. I am aware that the Executive met representatives from Inverclyde Council on 17 December with a view to setting up a study to recommend improvements to prevent further disruption. We would all like to know the outcome of that meeting. I understand that the Executive has not requested a report from West of Scotland Water on the causes of the flooding and has not assessed the impact of the flooding on local business. Although I understand that, technically speaking, that might not be the responsibility of the minister's department, members are profoundly concerned that the Executive take on board more actively than it has done so far the difficulties that we have identified. The nub of the problem is simple. I agree with Duncan McNeil that we need a multi-agency  approach. I would like the Executive to clarify the outcome of the meeting on 17 December. Will the Executive encourage collaboration among itself, the local council, West of Scotland Water and the local emergency services, including the police, to prepare for, and pre-plan management of, flooding when it occurs—as occur it will—and to identify what measures can be taken to reduce and, if possible, eradicate flooding? On a more serious note, will the Executive accept that, even if that were achieved, failure to improve the M8 at the Kingston bridge bottleneck will create as significant a barrier to commerce and industry in Inverclyde as any unaddressed issue of flooding?

To ask the Scottish Executive what support exists in Scotland to assist schoolchildren suffering from dyslexia. (S1O-874)

I am obliged to the minister. Given that there is no standard screening programme in Scottish schools to identify children suffering from dyslexia, and that dyslexia has no respect for age, sex or background, does Mr Galbraith agree that to consider such an initiative would be an encouraging demonstration of the Executive's social inclusion policy? In particular, will the Executive consider entering into dialogue with the Dyslexia Institute of Scotland?

I thank the minister for expanding on that point, but does he agree that the absence of a standard programme is an alarming omission? There are clear disparities between different communities in Scotland. Is not that a matter for some concern, which the Executive could usefully address?

I welcome this debate. I have been uneasy, perhaps, about the tone of one or two parts of it. Some fundamental elements have been obscured by more personal and, at times, parochial issues. I welcome the fact that Mr Russell lodged this motion. I entirely support the amendment. Quite simply, this issue is as simple or as complex as one chooses to make it. There are two inescapable elements: the monarchy and discrimination. I will make clear my standpoint. I am a deputy lieutenant and, as such, I both support and believe in the monarchy. I am also a member and elder of the Church of Scotland and, as such, I am wholly opposed to discrimination in any form, wherever it is found. On the question of why this issue has arisen now, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton rightly referred to devolution putting our whole constitutional process under the microscope. I do not agree with Mary Mulligan, as I think that the royal family has become more topical in the past 10 years. The constitutional settlement for Scotland has enabled an eye to be cast over the more intricate relationships that exist between Scotland and other elements of our constitution. It was curious that Mr McCabe just about managed to omit any reference to the monarchy in his speech. I wondered whether that reflected a 50 per cent appetite for all this. At least Mr Henry was more forthright: he dismissed the monarchy as an irrelevant institution. On the Executive's amendment, I wonder whether the difficulties are not being slightly exaggerated. It is indeed the case that seven or eight statutes would require repeal or amendment, and that, perhaps, the Church of England would have a more significant dilemma over this matter than any other religious institution. However, it is also the case that our devolution settlement involved us in a very considerable number of statutory repeals and amendments, so I cannot believe that this constitutional challenge would be insuperable. As Lord James said, reforming the House of Lords has proved to be within the management of the Government. I do not think that, in technical constitutional terms, this would be more challenging.  It pleases me to say that I have no doubt that this Parliament has a role in this matter, and I do so genuinely. In the past six months, I have been taken by surprise by how important many significant institutions in Scotland regard this Parliament to be in relation to reserved matters. It has become clear that those institutions see this Parliament as a repository for opinion, and an increasingly influential player in that role. Therefore, I entirely support what Lord James said: it is important that this chamber sends out a message that is sensible, constructive and, above all else, contemporary with the feelings and mood of the Scottish people. If there is one thing that we can infer from this debate, it is that we are all opposed to religious discrimination, wherever it is to be found. If we can be unanimous in that message, it will do this chamber a lot of credit and will be a good advertisement for Scotland. I am conscious that the Act of Settlement as currently framed is, at best, divisive and, at worst, profoundly offensive. That is an unacceptable anachronism. I support Mr Russell's motion, and endorse the Government's amendment.

Does the member agree that the devolution settlement for Scotland and the increasing topicality of the monarchy during the past decade are perhaps, as Lord James indicated, one reason why attention has been focused on the constitutional aspects of the monarchy, the royal family and the particular significance of the Act of Settlement in relation to the royal family?

Does the minister recall that the Conservative party had occasion to make that very point to the Executive, when it happened that approximately 38 minutes were devoted to a debate on homelessness, followed the next day by a debate of three hours on the millennium bug? I am pleased that the Executive acknowledged that problem and accorded more time for the subsequent debate on social justice.

We welcome the Minister for Finance's statement. I was interested to hear that the consultation had elicited a low response. That may be because we are dealing with level 2, so many people felt unable to comment. I also listened with particular interest to his words: openness, accountability and probity. I agree that, as has been said, we need a greater disaggregation to make sense of the spending proposals. Even at level 2, however, there is cause for concern. We are dealing with a presentation that is on a cash basis. Although Mike Watson applauded that, I find it a simplistic approach. The cash basis shows cuts in some areas, but they are even worse if an adjusting inflation factor is introduced. Will the people in Scotland relish cuts in real terms, since Labour came into power, in housing support grant, to funds to the Crown Office and fiscal services, to enterprise and lifelong learning and to the police? The reality has been expressed frequently during this debate: Labour is spending £1.1 billion less than the Conservatives. If that is not bad enough, Labour has failed to anticipate demands on health, education and services in local authority areas. The Executive cannot sit back in complacency, look at the sums that have been divvied up and say, "We've done a good job." It is the Executive's business to anticipate the needs of our communities in Scotland and to make a serious attempt to address those needs. I have no doubt that it will be of great comfort to patients, parents, pupils, teachers and the police that this Executive is able to fund 22 ministers and legions of special advisers, spin doctors and ancillary staff, not to mention Mr Rafferty's pay-offs. I suggest to Mr McConnell that charity begins at home, and some pruning of the Executive's ménage would be a start. Politically, the coalition budget is not about openness, accountability and probity, because this Labour Government has taxed more than even the previous Labour Administration, and, in relative terms, it is spending less than any other UK Administration in four decades.

Alas, we have not had a Conservative Executive. Perhaps when we do, such transparency will not be a problem.  I already challenged Mr Lyon on the matter of his party's commitments, or at least some of them, which simply flew out of the window once the partnership agreement was hatched. Under Labour and the Liberal Democrats, Scottish expenditure is down in many key areas. The Lib Dem manifesto commitments include pledges on education, health and transport, but the money that the party could have used to abolish tuition fees has been quite clearly designated for other areas. There can be no other explanation for the prevarication and obscurity of the Executive's replies to questions posed about that matter. This is a time of festive good will; far be it from me to be churlish and to not show some contemporary spirit concurrent with the times. We have watched with interest the debate about Scottish Enterprise. I spoke to Mr McConnell and to his colleague Mr McLeish, and I am pleased to note that the latter is a convert to Conservative thinking in relation to a reconsideration of Scottish Enterprise. I float the suggestion to Mr McConnell that there may be merit in considering the operation of Scottish Enterprise development funding, which is a successful activity. I suggest that there is good reason why Scottish Enterprise should be allowed to obtain net gain from successful development funding, thus creating a self-generating, indigenous enterprise development fund where success would, literally, breed success. I say that in a spirit of co-operation. I do not envy Mr McConnell's difficulties in trying to examine a spending plan alongside his budgetary proposals. I have articulated my criticisms of those plans, which have been repeated many times in this chamber. At times, it behoves the Opposition to try to be constructive and positive with its suggestions. I suggest that if Mr McConnell adopts our idea on development funding, he could both create money, which is legitimately the fruit of development activity in Scotland, and retain that money for a fruitful and vital purpose. We are unable to support the minister's motion and certainly unable to support the Scottish National party's amendment. While we welcome the minister's statement, we have profound reservations about the current levels of spending in Scotland. We are far from satisfied. With the degree of taxation—much of it by stealth—that applies to the population of Scotland, this spending round is a double blow to the Scottish people.

Does Mr Lyon welcome with equal relish his party's ditched promises, which, as Nicola Sturgeon will be interested to learn, included a promise at the previous election of 2,000 extra teachers? The Liberal Democrats' promise to abolish tuition fees has evaporated in the interests of the partnership agreement; they also promised to boost the planned education budget by £170 million. Can we anticipate that Mr Lyon will welcome such breaches with the same fervour as he welcomes the minister's statement?

rose—

I can hardly wait.

Will the member give way?

There is some confusion over who is slavering over whom. I was not referring to the amendment. I merely observed about the motion—and meant it—that it was refreshing to see a motion that was not fulsome in its praise and adulation of the Executive.

Will Mr Lyon clarify how the problem of the roads infrastructure should be addressed? That problem is what stands in the way of much of his very favourable comment.

I welcome the Executive's motion for two  reasons. First, it offers for debate a subject that is of vital interest to Scotland. Secondly—and refreshingly—it does not seek to slaver fulsome praise and adulation all over the Executive. From Mr McLeish, I would expect nothing less. Those two features of the motion are innovatory, and I hope that they will become the hallmarks of future debates. Mr Swinney referred to the Conservative amendment. We did not excise support for the concept of modernisation—that is specifically retained—but we framed our amendment as we did because we detected something of a tautology in the motion. If the amendment is read with the motion, it is clear that we embrace the need for modernisation. The Conservative party is glad to contribute to a meaningful debate but finds the motion unexceptionable. Indeed, it is so anodyne as to be almost soporific—along the lines of a fireside chat. We want to amend the motion to focus attention on specific areas that, if they are not dealt with, will not only obstruct the modernisation of the Scottish economy but set us back from where we are. Before discussing the motion and the amendment in more detail, a quick spring clean round the Executive's cupboard marked "Business" would be timely, because I see in there some items that should head for the skip without delay. They include excessive rolls of red tape—as the minister knows, a favourite theme of mine. There have been 2,600 new Labour regulations since May 1997, which represents grim news for business. Joining the red tape is the box marked "No new roads", to which passing reference has been made. As an item in the Executive's enterprise portfolio, "No new roads" has no place in a modern enterprise economy. In the current economic climate, asking local authorities to assume responsibility for matters such as the M74 extension is like asking granny to take part in the 400 m hurdles. The Scottish Executive should not hide behind the skirts of local authorities, but examine the current enterprise budget and, with the private sector, identify funds for the improvement of our roads infrastructure. That is synonymous with sound business investment, as business cannot function without an adequate roads infrastructure. Well worth taking out of the Executive's business cupboard and dusting down are two boxes marked "Education" and "Training". It might even be worth while looking in those boxes to see what they contain. If our education system and training schemes are driven by a vacuum of provision, rather than by the demand-led needs of business and industry, we shall end up hitting a  wall at the end of a cul-de-sac. In the recent debate on the Scottish university for industry, I asked the minister what consultation had taken place with industry and how industry had responded. Answer came there none. Inquiries that I have made from business about the Scottish university for industry have not elicited a flattering response. Such initiatives, if not validated by demonstrable business demand, are at risk of damaged credibility and dismissal as tokenism, which would be unfortunate, as there is merit in the concept of a Scottish university for industry. If, in the Labour business cupboard, there is a shelf creaking with the burden that it bears, it is the shelf marked "Tax". That shelf is in danger of coming away from the wall. The Conservative party is calling on the minister and the Chancellor of the Exchequer to lighten that burden. I do not share Mr Swinney's observations on the merits of macro-economic decisions being taken exclusively in Scotland. I am a supporter of the United Kingdom and a firm believer in the union, particularly in the advantages that it has brought to our trading position.

I get the feeling that Mr Wilson sees only the sweeties in the jar while I see their cost. My concern is that he talks about the merits of independence and ignores the possible disadvantages. We will never agree on the matter. I have confidence in the structure of the United Kingdom and I am in no doubt that it has brought immense trading advantages to Scotland.

Married one week, promoted the next. Heady stuff, Mr Sheridan.

I favour low taxation—Mr Sheridan will have his reasons for disputing that that is a respectable agenda. If new Labour has lightened the corporate tax burden, that is because it stole the idea from the Conservative manifesto, which I  applaud. The minister and the Chancellor of the Exchequer must consider ways of further lightening the burden of tax on business. I say that as someone who believes in the union but sees no paradox in discussing macro-economic matters in this chamber. An escalation of business tax equals regression, lack of growth and recession. The omens under new Labour—despite Mr Sheridan's comments—are not auspicious.

I have a lot to get through and I want to make progress.

He has tried in the past, but to no avail. An Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development report published on 3 November shows that Britain has the fastest-rising tax burden in Europe. The tax burden is rising 30 times faster than that of France and 10 times faster than that of Belgium. We pay more tax than Ireland, Spain, Portugal, America and Japan. For the first time in a generation, we are paying more tax than Germany. I do not list those statistics as a sterile litany of criticism of the Labour Government. I state them as evidence of the chilling reality of the situation. They are indicative of precisely the climate that business does not need. In relation to the motion, I suggest that careful note should be taken of the level of taxation. If I find an unlikely ally in Mr Sheridan, I find an even more improbable one in Mr Livingstone, who, on 7 November, was honest enough to say "we haven't increased the standard rate, but we have increased a lot of other taxes . . . we have done it with all these stealth taxes. I just think it would have been better to have honestly told people beforehand". The fact of increased taxation is without dispute. I have listed several areas in which the Government is impeding the growth of a healthy enterprise economy. However, this debate also provides an opportunity to think positively and adventurously. I hope that our amendment reflects that. We are considering the motion and the amendments against an alarming backdrop—given the wording of the Executive's motion, it is also a perverse backdrop. According to the Scottish new business statistics, published by Scottish Enterprise on 12 November, 5,064 businesses were started in Scotland during the second quarter of this year, which is a decline of 12.9 per cent from the second quarter of 1998.  That is not the evidence that we want to have before us, but it leads to the text of our amendment, which is an attempt to broaden the debate and to make the phrase "modernisation of the Scottish economy" meaningful in the best sense. The key is an expansion of the Scottish enterprise base. We lag behind the rest of the UK in terms of business start-ups. It is difficult to procure data, but I have been able to secure some information that suggests that the ratio of Scotland's business birth rate to that of the UK average improved during the five years to 1997. Although I recognise that there has been a modest reduction in the gap between Scotland and the rest of the UK in terms of business births, I have a document that says that the data "merely underlines what was said in the Business Birth Rate Strategy when it was originally published in 1993: that closing the gap with the rest of the UK in terms of new business starts is a long-term task, requiring sustained effort by many people and organisations." If asked about the most likely deterrent to the creation of a new business, any businessman will say that it is difficulty in securing finance. Scottish Enterprise says that "the evidence certainly seems to suggest that problems in securing finance are seen as the biggest obstacle to start a business." It also says that "making it easier for people to gain access to finance, helping people to understand more about how to go through the process, could have a significant impact on the number of businesses that are created." Access to finance is a problem that also dogs businesses that seek to expand. We need to encourage a change in lenders' attitudes from risk aversion—to which the minister referred—to an acceptance of risk as an investment. In Scotland, the trend is to leave as much risk as possible with the borrower. That contrasts sharply with attitudes in other countries, particularly the United States of America. It is time for the Government to engage in a dialogue with the enterprise agencies and Scotland's major lending institutions to consider ways of changing attitudes and transforming our economic culture to one in which failure is not a stigma. In the USA, failure is regarded as a sign of having tried; in Scotland, it is a stigma. Our culture must change so that risk assessment is seen as respectable economic judgment.

I cannot be seen to be bought by anyone. Sit down, Mr Gibson. I suggest that we widen the debate, with our  colleagues in Westminster, to consider fiscal encouragement to allow prosperous businesses to invest in other businesses. In America, that is succeeding well, because the Americans have a far broader enterprise base than we do.

Of course I give way.

I welcome a very helpful intervention by the minister, which well illustrates the point that I seek to make. In entrepreneurial terms, I wish that there were more Brian Souters and Ann Gloags in Scotland. We do not have enough of them; that is why we cannot generate self-expansion in the enterprise base, which is what we desperately need. Whatever happens, we must recognise that the number of businesses does not increase because Government so commands. Yes, I applaud the minister's initiative of seeking to have 100,000 new businesses by 2009. However, in terms of a Government edict, that may sound praiseworthy, but it will not happen unless some dramatic changes begin to take place in Scotland. I genuinely believe that we have an opportunity to do things for Scotland—we should seize it. I move amendment S1M-296.1, to leave out from "initiatives" to end and insert: "improving our education system and our transport infrastructure; and in particular urges the Scottish Executive to promote an expanded enterprise base by encouraging a new culture of risk management in Scotland to enhance the opportunities for new and young entrepreneurs."

I thank the minister for his statement, which was full and reassuring. I am also grateful to him for the additional information that he has made available in the course of questioning. There are many positive aspects of the statement and it is right that they be acknowledged. The Conservative party endorses the stance that the Executive is taking and applauds it for becoming fully prepared for what might be a significant problem, which has taxed minds all over the world. We are reassured by what the minister said about Loganair and Caledonian MacBrayne. I will welcome the more detailed information that he has undertaken to provide, on lighthouses and meteorological facilities. Loganair and Caledonian MacBrayne might find it difficult to operate without reassurance on those points. The minister should also be commended for setting up the Scottish information liaison centre. It is critical that there should be a central point of contact for MSPs and other concerned people, so that they can find out about the approach that is being taken to deal with problems that might arise. I was relieved to hear the minister say that the Scottish information liaison centre will not be a  one-night sit-in—I was more relieved that it would not be a one-night stand. We acknowledge that we might all find ourselves on a learning curve from midnight on hogmanay. It is difficult to know what problems might unfold, and it is reassuring to know that the Scottish information liaison centre is structured to continue. Although I have been positive so far, I must now change the tone of my remarks. I address not Mr McLeish personally, but his colleagues in the Government. I do not think that I am alone in being surprised that three hours of debating time in the chamber should be allocated to this topic. If we are as prepared as we can be to meet the challenge of the millennium bug, why are we having the debate? Would not a ministerial statement with questions afterwards have sufficed? If we are not in a state of preparedness and there are some dire and unanswered questions, we should be having an emergency debate on the state of Scotland. In fairness to the minister, I think that the situation is not the latter, but the former. If that is the case, I allude to a matter that concerns my party and, more important, an audience outwith the Parliament. It is becoming apparent to many that the timetable of the Parliament is within the firm—and some would say dictatorial—grip of the Executive's parliamentary schedulers. I find it curious that while we have allocated three hours to the debate this morning, in yesterday's debate on homelessness we were reduced to a mere 30 or so minutes. That is despite the fact that serious doubts exist about the Scottish Executive's rough sleepers initiative. I contrast that with previous instances in the Executive's programme. I think that I speak for many members in the chamber and beyond when I say that the people of Scotland would not just welcome a three-hour debate on drugs abuse, but probably would want us to be here for three days discussing the matter. Yet not once have we had a full session devoted to that topic. The public of Scotland would welcome almost a monthly debate on health. It is a huge issue, affecting everybody in Scotland yet, spasmodically, we are offered a debate when a particular issue arises that concerns the interests of the Executive. I do not propose to pad out this speech by talking about something that—because of the good work done by the minister—does not merit being included.

I appreciate Mrs McLeod's comment and do not for one moment disagree with her. What I am saying is that this is a major issue that has been known about for a considerable period. In fairness to the minister—and I hope that I have made this point clear—it is the fullness of his statement that properly indicates the state of our preparedness. There are other aspects on which members might seek or desire clarification, but it should not take three hours to achieve that. My point is that in the context of the issues that matter to the people of Scotland, responsibility has been assumed for this; the minister acknowledges that. There has been full preparation. It is the people of Scotland for whom the Parliament is supposed to exist. It has been called the people's Parliament, but I am concerned that it is becoming the puppet of the Executive, as it is not being allowed to breathe. It is not being allowed to debate the issues that matter to the people. We are debating the issues that matter to the Executive or, more important, Mrs McLeod, we are not debating the issues that the Executive does not want us to debate. Whenever there is potential contention or controversy, what do we have? We have a sidestep with an inquiry. Abolition of tuition fees? Sidestep it—appoint an inquiry. Demoralised, demotivated, depressed teachers? Set up an inquiry. I would rather have a debate in the full chamber, where the people of Scotland can see what is going on and be reassured that the highly paid members whom they have put here are attending to their interests, not the interests of a microcosm of powerful people called the Scottish Executive. As I said earlier, I do not wish to pad this speech out with content that is superfluous to the matter in hand. If I have any concern about this, it is the one that I have just articulated, which is the amount of time being devoted to something that could have been dealt with adequately and competently in another manner, taking up far less of the chamber's time and—more important—freeing up time for debate on issues that are significant to the people of Scotland.

Like John Swinney, I welcome the minister's statement, which was full and reassuring. I have two practical questions. First, can he give us any information about the coding, under the Action 2000 traffic-light system, for lighthouses and for weather stations and related meteorological facilities? Secondly, given what happened to the telephone system in the west of Scotland when people tried to procure football tickets by telephone, can he reassure us that our telephone system can cope with any unexpected onslaught of demand arising from problems caused by the millennium bug?

Is the same true of weather stations?

I have never looked up at the Church of Scotland's motto, "Nec tamen consumebatur", with such feeling. The classics obviously desert Mr Raffan, like reason and most other attributes. I wind up with pleasure for the Scottish Conservatives in this debate. In a positive mood, I am minded to look again at the terms of the motion and to remind the chamber of what we are supporting. The motion begins by saying:  "That the Parliament endorses the Scottish Executive's policy of continued positive engagement within the European Union". We have made it clear that we do. The purpose of our amendment is to express concern about one aspect of European policy, which is, of course, the  euro. The Conservative party sees tremendous opportunities in Europe and has never pretended otherwise. Interestingly, the advent of this Parliament provides a positive European dimension for Scotland, as does Scotland House—I share Dr Ewing's view on that. I have to make those points clear because in the hurly-burly of the debate, naturally, much abuse and vitriol have been slung at my party. We acknowledge that, but reserve the right to defend our position and to make it clear that there have been misrepresentations and calumnies. On the euro, it is fair for the Conservative party to observe that the Liberal Democrat policy, as outlined by Mr Raffan, is not entirely clear and does not align with the policy of the Labour party. As Dr Ewing says, the policy of the SNP is clear: it wants to go into the euro now. We do not share that view. The Labour party's policy is the most interesting—it is spoken with all the enthusiasm of the suitor. The policy is that the euro is a wonderful proposition—"Let us go in, in due course, at some unspecified point in the future, when we think that it might be all right, but do not ask us when because we do not really know." It is much more honest to adopt the Conservatives' position. We say clearly that we do not think that it is safe or in the interests of the UK to go into the euro just now, and that we do not think that we should go in during this Parliament or the next. That provides clarity. [Laughter.] Members in other parties may laugh—if I were in their position of embarrassment, I, too, would laugh.

The Scottish Conservatives' stance is not, "Non, non, non." It is, "Nous pouvons faire mieux." In case the language skills of my friends in the chamber are on a par with their Latin, that is the French for, "We can do better." By "we", the Scottish Conservatives mean not just this chamber, or Scotland, but the United Kingdom. We contend that we can do better. We believe that within Europe we can press for enlargement to be made a top priority, not from some doctrinaire view, but because it is an historic opportunity to advance free trade, free markets, deregulation and co-operation.

Those are not the terms of our amendment. Ben Wallace made the fair point that the euro clearly has constitutional implications that point to a federal state. We do not know whether that will be the outcome; hence our preservation of flexibility. We are not rushing this country into anything, but are standing back to see what happens. We can then take an informed decision, rather than one into which we are bullied by some form of political dogma. We want Europe to work and have no interest in Scotland being in a weak or unsuccessful Europe. We believe that Europe can work better if there is greater openness in decision making in Brussels and if there is improved ministerial accountability, with new procedures at Westminster. Above all, the British citizen wants to know what is being agreed to in Europe. There is some merit in investigating whether Euro-budgets can be reduced and whether spending priorities can be reformed. We would certainly oppose any attempt to abolish UK frontiers or any further erosion of the British veto. We believe that, although every member state must accept the rights and responsibilities of the single market and core elements of an open, free- trading and competitive Europe, Governments should have greater freedom in deciding which other aspects of European policy to adopt. That is why we advocate the flexibility clause. This is not a party—

I am terribly sorry—I am just winding up. The Conservative party is not opposed to Europe—very far from it. This party has the courage to examine Europe objectively and vigorously and to suggest changes because we want Europe to work and want to remain in Europe.

rose—

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has any plans to launch an initiative to raise the profile of blood donation in Scotland given that only 5 per cent of the Scottish population currently donates blood. (S1O-509)

I thank the minister for that full  reply and for getting me married as well. [Laughter.]

Given that since the inception of the Parliament many sections of the public have been baying for the blood of MSPs, does the minister agree that there is now a laudable and, indeed, novel opportunity for MSPs to give the public what they want, by going to the conveniently located centre at Laurieston Place as soon as possible, and giving as many pints as we can?

It is with the greatest of reluctance that I divert my attention from the young man's posterior—one of the more diverting features of the debate—on page 16 of the document. The Conservative party entirely endorses the principle of the document, which states very properly that many people perceive learning as an end in itself and not as way of fulfilling their potential. It also says that "the Scottish university for industry (SUfI) will change that. It will address people's aspirations, and raise their expectations of what learning can do for them." That is admirable and we Conservatives applaud it, but endorsement of a principle justifies examination of the practice. This debate has raised questions about practice. How will the concept work and, indeed, what is the concept? Mr Stephen said in his introductory remarks that it will not be a university. Perhaps we ought to stop calling it that. He also said that it would not end up being called the Scottish university for industry. We need to get the nomenclature right. If I may say so, if I think that the minister is an honourable man, I shall call him that, and if I think that he is a prat, I shall call him that, too. Whatever we think this is going to be, we ought to understand what it is and we should define it more precisely. I suspect that it would be more honest to describe it as the institution for Scottish lifelong learning. One of the case studies in the document opens with the question: "Why a Scottish University for Industry?" and answers: "If Scotland wants to remain part of a highly competitive global economy, it has to grasp fully the wide-ranging opportunities afforded by advances in technology." That suggests to me that it must be driven by  industry and I hope that, when he winds up, the minister will confirm what consultation has taken place with industry and how industry responded. Mr Swinney was right to refer to concerns about duplication of advisory and educational facilities at local level. That problem is already exercising the attention of members of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee. The document has much in the way of verbiage, but it also has glaring gaps. If, as has been indicated, this institution or concept is not to be a mere telephone database, we need to know the answer to some questions. We need to know how the expensive duplication of existing education and advice sources will be avoided and we need to know how the concept will materialise in a manner that is clear and accessible to the public. Such clarity is certainly lacking. Would not the network of local enterprise companies be a sensible co-ordinator of local provision to serve industry? What will be the quantitative measures of the performance of the institution? How will we know whether it is working? How will be know whether it is succeeding in achieving whatever its declared objectives will be? This Parliament has a specific interest in those questions and I hope that the minister will clarify the Executive's intention to make matters more transparent. Will the institution, whatever it is to be called, be directly accountable to the Executive? For audit purposes, will it be subject to annual examination by the Audit Committee of the Parliament? If those questions cannot be answered satisfactorily, the proposal will be seen as empty Government dogma and that would be regrettable. The Conservative party would like to see the Scottish university for industry as a much-needed added-value component to industry. That is what this country needs. The Conservative party endorses the motion and the amendment. However, I hope that the minister will respond to questions about areas of concern when he winds up the debate.

Unlike Andrew Wilson, I was not in the Boys Brigade but I declare an interest, in that the guide commissioners of Scotland gave me dinner last month. I welcome this debate and thank Andrew Wilson for raising the subject in the chamber. It has highlighted an area of profound concern for many people in Scotland—as is demonstrated by the fact that so many people have stayed. It is clear that many of us have been approached by representatives of concerned organisations. I am  closely connected with the Church of Scotland, and it is in that context that I am aware of concerns. Two issues arise. The first is that none of us can take exception to or challenge the issue of safety for young people who are involved with voluntary organisations. Everyone in the chamber agrees, as Cathy Jamieson said, that this is a matter of fundamental concern, and no responsible grouping of people would for one minute diminish the significance of the need for proper and extensive checks. The other issue is cost. Might I suggest to the minister that, as many members have said—Mr Wilson made the point cogently—we have in Scotland an enormous reservoir of talent and good will. All those people, who are unpaid, use their own time and, in many cases, their own resources, help others, whatever form that help may take. They are numerous and the contribution they make to Scottish society is probably impossible to quantify. Theirs is a gesture of a responsible society and good will, and it is the sort of contribution that, in a healthy society such as we want in Scotland, is fundamental. It should be encouraged and in no way impeded or obstructed. I view with grave concern the possibility that voluntary organisations will be subjected not just to considerable costs carrying out checks but, if we can take the estimates from the scouting and guiding movements as accurate, that the costs will be of a magnitude that will have a significant effect on their ability to do their excellent work. I urge the minister to view that cost as an insurance premium that society ought to pay for the safeguards it needs. Is it unreasonable for the Government to regard that premium as an investment? There is arguably no item of public expenditure that could be better justified or more useful than underwriting and supporting what those thousands of excellent people in Scotland seek to achieve. I am glad that a review has been announced and I urge the minister to consider with the greatest concern and care the excellent points that have been made in this debate.

Sir David, my question refers to Mr Angus MacKay. With your permission, I wish to inform members that I believe Mr MacKay is getting married tomorrow. I am sure that the chamber will want to express its very good wishes for the future to him and his fiancée. To ask the Scottish Executive, further to the answer to question S1W-101 by Angus MacKay on 30 June, what progress the ministerial group has made in tackling the drugs problem in Scotland. (S1O-420)

I thank the minister for that full response. Conservative members welcome those initiatives, which represent a significant step towards addressing the problem of drug misuse. Does the minister agree that it might send out a useful message to the audience beyond this chamber if the Executive considered appointing a minister with sole responsibility for dealing with drug abuse in Scotland? I make that suggestion in the belief that something rare might happen in this chamber. I suspect that there is total cross-party  consensus about the fact that we as a Parliament want to be seen to be tackling what is probably one of the greatest threats to society in Scotland. Will the minister offer a visible and demonstrable sign of the Executive's resolve to provide a global strategy for addressing the problem?

In no way do I wish to diminish what the minister has said. I do not want to create additional ministers—good heavens, they are breeding like chickens as far as I can see. I want to make improvements in the ministerial structure.

Rabbits. They are breeding like rabbits. Perhaps even foxes. The ministerial structure is sensible—none of us doubts that. The minister's answer is significant. He said that he occupies a position that neither I nor, I suspect, the public were clear about. I suggest that, were that position to be more public, a positive message would be sent to the people of Scotland.

Is the Deputy First Minister seriously suggesting that that is an effective way for the Government to transmit information to members of this Parliament? Is that the best that we can expect? [Applause.]

rose—

rose  —

Mr McNulty is quite right in saying that we now have the concordats and are having a debate about them. That is what Mr Dewar said in his speech, but I still have some concerns. What does Mr McNulty suggest should be done if members were to say that we disagree with most of the content of all the concordats? The concordats are printed, published and agreed. Despite the terms of the motion that is before Parliament today, a vote in favour of the concordats would be very much a cosmetic endorsement.

You will be relieved to hear, Sir David, that I will not be moving anything—

I am delighted to report to Mrs Ewing that my spies tell me otherwise. Mr Neil has legitimately made the position of the nationalists transparent, as he had to. That position is based entirely on an independence agenda and so I understand why it is difficult for him to embrace the spirit of the concordats and the memorandum of understanding. I say to the First Minister that the position of the Conservatives is also transparent: we are a party that is committed to the United Kingdom, but we recognise within the devolved settlement the need for a mechanism to regulate the administrative issues that are bound to arise in the creation of a Parliament such as this. We welcome the composition and the publication of the memorandum of understanding and the concordats as they are contained in the annexes. However, Mr Dewar, we have concerns and it is right that we should articulate them. The document is, for example, optimistically called a memorandum of understanding. I might suggest, Mr Dewar—

I beg your pardon, Sir David.  I suggest to Mr Dewar that if proper regard for parliamentary protocol is not shown, and if there is not reasonable dissemination of information, this document is in grave danger of ending up a memorandum of misunderstanding. It will be a memorandum of misunderstanding because of the genuine paucity of opportunity to consider the content of the document. The Conservatives want the concordats to work—we want them to provide a reliable and stable framework for civilised liaison and a conduit of views. We want them to be a sound structure for determining what the administrative difficulties are. We have genuine concerns, however. I find myself sharing common ground with Mr Neil— [Interruption.]

Someone seems to have come to life on the back benches. I share common ground with Mr Neil in that I feel that the Executive has shown contempt for Parliament in its decision to unveil the concordats at a press conference. If this Parliament is good enough for Mr McLeish to give a ministerial statement on Continental Tyres Ltd to, and if it is good enough for Mr McConnell to present his expenditure statement to, surely it is good enough for the First Minister to come to first to disclose and publicise the memorandum of understanding and the concordats.

I thank Mr Swinney for that comment. I was going to expand on that in my remarks. The underlying approach of the Conservatives in this Parliament is that we want the Parliament to work. Rather than the covertness, furtiveness and constant shadow of secrecy with which the Executive is tainted, we should have a Parliament that is graced by transparency, visibility and honesty. Time and again we see behaviour that is redolent of dominance and we see furtive retention of information. That may be uncomfortable for the Executive to acknowledge, Mr Dewar, but that is  how many other members view the behaviour of the Executive. There is a spirit of co-operation in this chamber on this subject and a desire—at least among the parties that believe in the United Kingdom—for the concordats to work. Given that, it is ironic that an opportunity for consideration, discussion or even disclosure of some of what was proposed in the document was denied to us. If that information had been made available, Mr Dewar, the chances are that the memorandum would have been a better document.

Within the past 20 years, Mr Dewar, I am not aware that we have ever had to consider the regulation of relationships between two Parliaments in the United Kingdom. I thought that that was why this Parliament was an innovation—why it was an historic creation. That is why, Mr Dewar, this is unprecedented.

I apologise, Sir David. My natural amity for the First Minister will have to become slightly more obscure. In the spirit of wanting the memorandum to succeed, I feel that it would have been helpful for us to have had some indication of the draft contents. We accept that there might have been a limit on the efficacy or completeness with which we, as a devolved Parliament, could have regarded these documents, but a little information, and the facility to contribute ideas, would have been both healthy and helpful. We know that there will be additional concordats; what we have here is just the first batch. I hope that there will be an opportunity— and I urge the Executive to consider this—for some disclosure of what those concordats are likely to govern and embrace. If the subject is relevant to our own parliamentary committees, we might want to make some comment, suggestion or proposal—not to be didactic or binding, or to have legal effect, but simply to be helpful. I was interested in what both Mr Neil and Mr Swinney said about the assertion that the memorandum is not legally binding. Some play was made of Mr McLeish's contribution to the debate in the House of Commons. I, too, have a slight concern. An authoritative view was expressed in the House of Lords by the English Solicitor-General on second reading of the Government of Wales Bill. Lord Falconer made a good point, saying of the concordats: "They will not take the form of binding contracts; they will not take the form of statutory documents, but it may well be the case that they will create a legitimate expectation of consultation. For instance, if one party to a concordat suddenly ceased to consult the other in accordance with the concordat, the result might be that its decisions could be challenged by way of judicial review, so it is wrong to say that there will be no legal underpinning to these concordats."—[ Official Report , House of Lords , 21 April 1998; Vol 588, c 1131.] My concern is that we are straying on to a potential law-making facility and that we may be doing so through the back door. I do not think that that is healthy. If, in Scotland, a potential investor felt that his or her rights had been ignored or disregarded by the Executive, in relation to the directions within the concordats—it might be a lack of consultation or whatever—that investor might seek judicial review in the Court of Session. His case might be founded on the alleged lack of consultation or some other neglect or failure by the Executive in relation to the concordats. I am concerned that this Parliament has not had an opportunity to examine in detail the text of these documents. I do not want to labour the point; I simply make it and observe that it is one issue over which the Conservatives have concerns. The joint ministerial committee seems to have been conceived with good intent, but I am not sure just how it will operate. According to the memorandum of understanding, the joint ministerial committee is to carry out various tasks. Its terms of reference are to consider various matters, to keep arrangements for liaison and to consider disputes. I am not quite sure about the committee's status. I am not sure whether it is consultative or executive; perhaps it is meant to be neither. The Executive has a duty to this Parliament to clarify how it regards the status and structure of that committee. It is important for us to know precisely how the committee is meant to operate. There is a feeling—unworthy, perhaps—that the  committee's status may deliberately have been made vague. It may be a deliberate fudge to deal with Governments of different colours in different parts of the United Kingdom. If the Conservatives were in government in the United Kingdom and in Scotland, those fears would be groundless. However, if there are to be different Administrations in different parts of the United Kingdom, there may be difficulties in the way in which the joint ministerial committee functions.

Mr Neil tempts me, as he often does. [Laughter.] Suffice it to say, I expect that these concordats are meant to be—and have to be—flexible in content and intent. Without a crystal ball, I am unable to say what exactly a Conservative Administration would do, but I shall bear in mind Alex Neil's helpful suggestion. [Interruption.] He has now made me lose my bit of paper.

The word riveting springs to mind. The Conservative party welcomes the spirit of the memorandum and goes so far as to applaud what has been produced. However, that in no way minimises the reservations and misgivings that I have expressed about the way in which the matter has been handled. We see no reason why this Parliament should not be party to the intended content of future additional concordats. That would be both helpful and healthy. In conclusion, I thank Mr Dewar for his contribution to this debate. The Executive will be tested on how it behaves and on what it does rather than on what it constantly says about transparency, visibility, honesty and all the rest. That test has not, as yet, been discharged. [Applause.]

On a point of order, Sir David. I doubt that any of us in this chamber have been unaffected by the news of the dreadful rail tragedy down south. Would you, on our behalf, extend our sympathy to the families that have been affected by the death or injury of loved ones?

Mr McConnell gave a very attractive performance. He has the jaunty, Jack-the-lad air that could entice a lady to follow him into a bar, but it will no doubt be a source of great relief to him that I shall not be that lady—I would end up paying for the drinks. As an expenditure statement, this is a Chinese puzzle; the more one looks at it, the less one sees. In my question, I mentioned the minister's key strategic priorities. The statement includes a worthy list of areas on which the minister proposes to spend money and many of the contributors to the debate have referred to that list. Under the heading of education, however, the list makes no acknowledgement of the teachers' plight and no recognition that we have a serious situation—an impasse—in which the teachers are being promised no comfort until the outcome of an inquiry in May 2000. If Labour, in its first year of spending, managed to cut spending on education by £219 million, does not that make the £80 million look paltry in terms of the educational sphere's current needs? On justice, what about more, instead of fewer, police? What about fewer cuts to funding—or more money—for Victim Support? I asked the minister about enterprise and lifelong learning. Reference is made to increased access and doubling assistance to mature students on low incomes, but it is difficult to reconcile that with the tuition fees impasse. There is complete silence on help for enterprise. Mr MacAskill eloquently described the shortcomings of our transport system. If ours is an unholy alliance, Mr MacAskill, I am proud to share  it with you. It is the duty of Opposition to point out such things. In Scotland, we have an overdue improvement programme for killer roads and a tired and inadequate roads infrastructure that desperately needs investment. The statement is good on communities and no doubt encouraging for those who will benefit from that, but what cheer is there for people who have the misfortune to live in the country? What about fuel taxes, the neglect of our rural communities and the difficulties that face them? Under the subject of rural affairs, there is no comfort for our agriculture industry. That is very pertinent to those members who today met the representatives from the pig industry; we heard an acute plea from an industry that is on the point of collapse. What succour is there for the pig industry? I see gaping and disturbing gaps in the statement. On health, what about reducing waiting lists and waiting times? What about increasing the number of nurses? Such things matter to the people of Scotland. There is no doubt that the minister's statement is ambitious, nor is there any doubt that it is carefully crafted. There is no doubt whatever that the money has been recycled so much that the food processor is in danger of exploding as it tries to produce yet another dish from the minister's kitchen. At Westminster, there is a roll-forward of surpluses that are not being disbursed; that practice is spreading to this Parliament. That is not welcome news. A war chest is being built up and is becoming immoral in its immensity. At the current rate, it is costing £1,500 for every taxpayer in Scotland. We are entitled to ask whether that money could be distributed in many more advantageous ways than being kept to hone the weapons of election combat. In short, the expenditure statement might bring comfort to some people, but it will bring none at all to most.

The minister said that the Executive would be aligning spending priorities within its departments with key strategic priorities. However, he did not say anything about enterprise. Is that no longer a key strategic priority?

rose—

I wish merely to observe that perhaps the reason why there is only one member of the press in the gallery is that the rest had some prescience that Mr Raffan was going to speak.

I endorse much of what Mr Wilson said. This party also welcomes the bill and the general principles that are set out in it. In terms of content, it may be riveting to the point of being dangerously exciting, but none the less it deals with some serious matters. Like Mr Wilson, we congratulate the minister, his team and others who have assisted in producing a very complex bill in a very short time. We may express slight concern about the budget amendments. I think that it is now accepted that the budget will be set out through primary legislation. As a member of the Audit Committee, I am concerned, as is the Conservative group, that amendments should also be made through primary legislation. In his opening remarks, the minister mentioned honesty and transparency and we all applaud that. However, there is a need to ensure that that is  effected in reality and that it does not become just a verbal shibboleth. In the interest of flexibility, we accept the concept of ministerial direction on the format of accounts. However, we hope that the courtesy of allowing the Finance Committee to comment on format will be observed. That would be a proper demonstration of transparency. My colleague, Mr Davidson, who is in his sick bed and cannot be with us today, serves on the Finance Committee and has asked me to raise one or two points on his behalf. He had a slight concern that the bill makes no mention of the role of the Finance Committee. I accept that the minister considers that that role will evolve and that he may not wish to make any prescriptive mention of it now. However, it might give some comfort to the chamber if he were to expand a little on how he sees the role of the committee unfolding, because there is no doubt that it is an important committee and one that is singularly relevant to the matters under discussion today. I have been asked to point out—although I do not wish to be polemical—that when the bill was put out for consultation, it went into the public arena before the Finance Committee had an opportunity to view it. In the interests of a more harmonious relationship between the Executive and the committee, perhaps the minister will have regard to that sort of omission in future. There is also a feeling that the budget bill, whenever it appears, ought to be in the province of the Finance Committee and, unless I have failed to read the bill correctly, there does not seem to be any specific provision for that. For example, does the minister intend to allow the Finance Committee to see the draft budget for some predetermination of how matters look, or is it simply to be landed straight into the parliamentary chamber? Mr Wilson alludes to his concerns about audit functions, which I will come to in a moment. However, I have a concern—I have already placed it on record in the Audit Committee—about the position of local authorities. While I understand the constitutional precedent that allows the Accounts Commission to audit local authorities, I think that it is necessary for me to put the following comments on record in the chamber, for the public information of the electorate. We, as a Parliament, are attempting to deal responsibly with the expenditure of very large sums of public money, as the minister said. It seems anomalous that the bill does not provide for the slice of expenditure that goes to local authorities, which currently spend approximately £6.4 billion, to be examined in more detail. I accept the minister's response that the Parliament  would have access to the overall figure. However, an overall figure of that magnitude in isolation is not very meaningful. There are serious concerns that—when we talk about expenditure of the size and extent currently seconded to local authorities—the creation of this Parliament affects constitutional precedent. Finally, Mr Wilson described the Scottish Executive as a conduit—I pronounce the word slightly differently, but that is a small matter. Mr Wilson was making an articulate and skilful attempt to justify an agenda of independence. Not surprisingly, he will find little support for that from these benches.

It happens that none of them is on these benches for which I specifically said that I speak, and where, again as I said, Mr Wilson will find little sympathy for the concept of independence.

I shall refrain from comment. Mr Wilson made an important point about the constitutional arrangement. Now that there is a Parliament in Scotland, we have a distinctly altered relationship with the Secretary of State for Scotland and the United Kingdom Cabinet. As long as we have a strong Secretary of State for Scotland I have some confidence that Scotland will have a strong figure batting for it in the Treasury. I do not share Mr Wilson's apprehension that a Secretary of State for Scotland would try to cream off significant sums of money because the devolution settlement makes it difficult to see where he would cream them off to. Given Dr Reid's recent comments at the Labour party conference in Bournemouth that he was less than confident about the continuation of the office of secretary of state, will the minister clarify how the budget on which this Parliament depends and which is vital for Scotland will be negotiated and who will be responsible for that negotiation within the United Kingdom Cabinet? Is the minister confident that he will not be left—as Mr Wilson has suggested—a hapless puppet with a hand stretched out, waiting for something to happen? The Scottish Conservatives endorse the principles of the bill and we are minded to co- operate with its swift passage.

The Conservative party's position is quite simple. Like Mr McLeish, we are confused about the text of the amendment and concerned about the way in which it is phrased. We accept that much of our economy is integrated with the rest of the United Kingdom and are somewhat uneasy about the use of words like competitors. We also share Mr McLeish's expressed position.

I remind Mr McAllion that when I specifically referred to directives—many more than Mr McAllion mentioned—I made it clear that I did not dispute the fact that they would be regarded in certain quarters as having virtue and merit. However, I felt that it was my job to point out that, in the context of the debate on manufacturing and industry, those regulations have had an effect.

I welcome both this motion and the minister's constructively articulated comments. They are in character with the minister, and we endorse much of what he said. As a prophet observed, minister, for every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under heaven. The purpose of this debate, on our part, is bluntness—bluntness that the minister will understand is not directed at him. We support the motion. Indeed, it is a good motion that represents fine words. It suggests that everything in the garden is rosy; all is tickety-boo. However, just as a garden is not created by reading three pages of horticultural specification followed by fencing off an area, flinging some plants in and erecting a sign marked "Garden", so a vibrant manufacturing sector is not created by pulling out a map of Scotland, marking off some areas with a red pen and a few asterisks, adding some cheery comments and then tucking it away in a filing cabinet marked "Scotland's vibrant manufacturing and industrial sector". Industry needs a congenial climate; it needs fertile conditions; it needs protection from its own form of bugs and leaf rot. It also needs a gardener, in the form of a Government that is sensitive to its needs. We must examine whether the words of this motion are matched by the acts of new Labour. The first signs were encouraging.

You will understand, Ms Ferguson, if I say that I feel nervous. I shall give way.

Thank you, Mr Gallie. I am beginning to feel redundant already.

I observe that, in the creation of the circumstances that are congenial to a vibrant manufacturing and industrial sector, certain conditions must apply. In fairness, the first signs were encouraging. Tony Blair said:  "I would say that the new and right direction for Europe is investing in people, skills and technology rather than regulation and constant burdens on employers. For the first time, this signals a different direction, saying that we want to reduce costs and reduce burdens." That was said by Mr Blair in 1997. The story since then has not been quite so encouraging. We have had a series of directives: the minimum wage, the working time directive, the works council directive, the part-time workers directive and the parental leave directive. No matter how meritorious those are regarded as being in certain quarters, and no matter what virtues they may have—and, no doubt, they do have them—it must be understood that, for manufacturing and industry, directives of that nature are not good news. In fairness, those regulations do not stem solely from Labour's decision to sign up to the European social chapter. The British Chambers of Commerce has observed that Labour has implemented more than 2,600 of its own regulations since May 1997, and that it has repealed only 20. I am not making a cheap point. All I am observing is that, if there is to be the vibrant sector that all of us here want, certain essential criteria must be in place and must apply. I could list a catalogue of other new burdens on business that have been introduced since May 1997, with which members would be familiar. The Centre for Policy Studies has warned that Labour's new burdens could lead to as many as 800,000 job losses UK-wide. Some may scoff at that; some may consider it excessive; some may seek to dismiss it. I think that there has to be an element of substance in it. What does our industrial garden make of all of that? Not a particularly positive interpretation. Only in February, the chair of the Federation of Small Businesses, Brian Prime, said: "Small firms are now being over-regulated to such a degree that it is too costly and too risky to employ staff". That concerns me. It strikes at the heart of being able to sustain the sort of sector that the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning has in mind. Mr Prime's views are supported by the Confederation of British Industry, which has called for a moratorium on new business burdens, such is its concern over current policies. In short, I think that the gardener in this area has been found wanting. I would like to see the secateurs chopping through the red tape. Every bit of red tape which unfurls from a civil servant's desk sets off on a deadly mission which will end in the extermination, to a greater or lesser extent, of jobs. What else can cause wither and blight to our manufacturing base? Taxation, obviously. Mr  Sweeney has already alluded to this. What did our horticultural supremo have to say about taxation? I quote Mr Blair again: "I vow that the promises we make on tax, we will keep. This is my covenant with the British people. Judge me on it. The buck stops with me." He said that in 1996. That does not tie in with the words of today's motion; the reality is slightly different. Only in March, the director general of the British Chambers of Commerce, said: "Business today is more heavily taxed, more heavily regulated than we were two years ago."

I think that that is what we did. We introduced the uniform business rate. I remember why that happened. I was looking with horror at a rates notice that had come to my own business, following a revaluation. I took the view that control of business rates and taxation in that form had reached a vicious and oppressive extent. I am very glad that the Conservatives intervened to put the brakes on that. I wish that that lesson would transmit to the current Government and to the Executive. Taxation is not good news for business. Significant taxes have been applied; significant new taxes are threatened. Even in loose talk, when there is reference to the potential higher business rates, new parking taxes, tolls on trunk roads, tolls on urban roads, bed taxes or whatever forms new taxes may come in, they have to be seen in the context of what they are doing to existing business and what they threaten to do to potential investors. From the point of view of manufacturing and industry, a transport policy that seems, frankly, to have hit the buffers, is certainly uncongenial. I listened with interest to what the minister was saying, but the reality is that we have the highest fuel prices in Europe. Those of us who were invited to go to Arran learned that the highest of the high prices are there, where the poor souls are wondering what they have done to be so victimised.

We have been perfectly frank: we introduced the fuel escalator in good faith, as did other powers who were party to the Kyoto conference. At that time—a significant number of years ago—it was a well-intended environmental measure. The passage of time has shown that the fuel escalator has had no impact on the environment whatsoever. Gordon Brown is using it to elicit from people the equivalent of 9p in income tax. I do not call that fair or honest. On transport, in the absence of specific proposals for our existing road system—albeit that the minister's remarks indicate that proposals may be forthcoming—there is little comfort for manufacturing and industry. We have a public transport system that, at the moment, is inadequate. I think everyone is agreed on that.

Mr Raffan, it is always a joy to be reminded why you are no longer with us. [Laughter.]  As recently as within the past 24 hours I delighted in the transport offered now by ScotRail on its improved route from Glasgow to Edinburgh, which was made possible, I suspect, by the privatisation of the system by the last Conservative Government. If such difficulties confront our manufacturing and industrial base—and I make no apology for continuing the horticultural analogy—what has proved to be the Dutch elm disease of that sector? There is no question that Labour's high pound has been the death knell for much of our export business. I was particularly interested in a recent Scottish Council Development and Industry survey, which identified that the high value of the sterling in Scotland has adversely affected 87 per cent of all businesses, resulting in 69 per cent losing export orders. The chilling factor was that it created 31 per cent of redundancies. To me, that is a factor that cannot be disregarded. The strength of the pound, caused by current high interest rates, is actively deterring what that sector can do. The Executive should use all influence available to it to consult colleagues down south as to when a reduction in interest rates might be considered.

I have no hesitation in supporting Mr Swinney's view. If this Parliament has established anything, it has established its merit as an effective way of transmitting opinion to the Government at Westminster. He will have his own solution to that dilemma, which I would not share; none the less, I accept the spirit of his intervention. In relation to this motion, all in the garden is not rosy, because the gardener has been absent without leave. If we can cut the red tape and taxation, find a transport policy and make the pound the asset, rather than the enemy, of business, the Conservatives will not just support this motion in spirit, as they do, but will feel that it means a lot more than mere words.

I thank Tavish for bringing this motion before the chamber. I think that it is extremely helpful. The issue I want to focus on is fairly technical and, indeed, slightly obscure. Having spoken to Tavish before the debate, I appreciate that it may not be a particularly visible part of the problem in Scotland, but it affects other areas of salmon farming. My point concerns the anomaly that arises when a salmon farmer is required by law to slaughter his salmon stock. That has immediate effects on jobs and the financial sustainability of that salmon farm. There is also a more insidious and corrosive consequence. The loss of the stock in those circumstances would appear to fall between two stools. It is not an insurable risk. If the salmon has died not as a direct consequence of ISA, but because of the mandatory need to slaughter following the Government directive, that is not an insurable risk, nor is it a case for statutory compensation by Government. In no way am I seeking to criticise or blame—I realise that this is an obscure and difficult situation—but the practical effect is that, literally overnight, millions of pounds can be wiped off the balance sheets of the industry and its participants. That can have a devastating effect on the viability and sustainability of the industry's operating  capacity. Many farmers will be operating with loan funds and they may be pledged by way of security. It will be an alarming consequence to find suddenly that a capital asset in the balance sheet has been eradicated overnight. I have benefited from the submission to me of a legal opinion, produced by one of the major salmon farmers in Scotland. I would be very happy to pass that on to the minister.

I suspected that that would be the case. From the point of view of this chamber, what is important is that article 1 of the first protocol to the European convention on human rights states: "Every natural or legal person is entitled to the peaceful enjoyment of his possessions. No one shall be deprived of his possessions except in the public interest and subject to the conditions provided for by law and by the general principles of international law." If the United Kingdom compels a fish farmer to destroy his fish stocks, that would appear to amount to a prima facie interference with the farmer's peaceful enjoyment of his possessions. I appreciate that the minister may not be able to give a simple—or indeed any—answer on this point, but I am compelled to raise it and I thank Tavish again for letting me take part in the debate. I am compelled to raise the point because it strikes at the very heart of the commercial sustainability of a major part of our industry in Highland and rural communities. I shall be grateful if the minister responds in any way that he can to that concern.

I share Mr Lochhead's concerns, and I have noted the response to his comments. I am a little unclear from the statement about how the local consultative committees will be constituted. How will members be appointed and who will they be—or, if members have already been appointed, who are they? On a lighter note, I presume that the title of water industry commissioner is to ensure that the mnemonic is WIC rather than WC?

On a point of order. Had I been able to express myself as Mr McNulty has done, I could have asked about five questions.

Will Mr McNeil give way?

Will Mr McNeil give way now?

Will the lady give way?

I can remember the outbreak and I am proud that I can.

If this unhappy episode has demonstrated anything, it is that whether the Executive likes it or not, this has been the political issue of the Parliament since its inception. That may not be palatable to the Executive, but it is the reality, not only to the Opposition parties but to the public.  In response to Mr Gorrie, I must say that during the whole debate, from early August until now, I did not detect any attempt to personalise attacks. All that we-and the Scottish nationalist party-were saying was that it is not for us, or for ministers or advisers, to become judge and jury. If we wish to test a law, we must ask a court to undertake that task. That dramatically illustrates the relevance and significance of the role of Opposition. It is not for the Opposition to go around kowtowing, apologising and promising not to be unpleasant or nasty. It is for the Opposition rightly to consider any given situation, particularly one of the gravity of the Ruddle case, and to determine whether the Executive has fully, responsibly and openly discharged every obligation upon it and explored every avenue available to it.  In that respect, there is one question to which I, personally, have not received an answer. I listened with interest to Mr Wallace's remarks. In his preliminary observations, he said that there was "no appeal, no interim interdict". Did Mr Wallace receive advice that, within a judicial review application, it is competent to include a conclusion for interim suspension of a sheriff's interlocutor?  We in the Conservative party have made it clear that we support in principle this welcome attempt to plug the loophole, and we certainly support the motion that it should be treated as emergency legislation. We shall co-operate in so far as we can in the enactment of this bill.  To be helpful to Mr Wallace, there are one or two areas where we genuinely offer contributions. I notice that the bill proposes the adoption of the framework of the 1984 act, which means a  continuance of the application to the sheriff court. However, we ask Lord Hardie whether it is possible to consider an application to the minister. We realise that that may fall foul of the European convention on human rights, but we suggest that, given the immediacy of a grave situation such as that created by the Ruddle case, control might be more immediately achieved if there were the possibility of the procedure consisting of a straight application to the minister, with the ultimate safeguard of appeal to the court in the event of the applicant being dissatisfied.  Quite rightly, reference has been made to the bill's attempts to include personality disorder as part of the definition. That is a further issue that requires careful consideration.  It is not clear from the bill whether the burden of proof proceeds on the balance of probability or on proving a case beyond reasonable doubt. That needs to be clarified and is a fundamental issue that must be determined.  The Conservative party supports the emergency legislation. We deeply regret that we have to consider it in such a rush. None the less, we shall do our best to assist in facilitating its enactment.

On behalf of the Conservative group within the Parliament, I want to express our deep sorrow to the work force and to share the sentiments that have been articulated. We hope that the workers will find a secure future through the assistance of the action team and that they know that the  Parliament supports them by trying to secure some way forward for them.  I would be grateful for the minister's comments on two areas that are a cause of concern. We, and the work force, will want to be reassured that the action team is not a seven-day wonder. Can the minister confirm that he intends to report to the chamber on the action team's progress? We all have a profound interest in what is happening at Newbridge and would like to kept informed of what progress has been made.  Secondly, I accept in good faith what the minister has said in his statement about the company and other interested parties having a collective will to introduce counselling and retraining programmes. However, it is vital that such a help package is conducted on a one-to-one basis with the employees. I would welcome the minister's clarification of those aspects.

I applaud the spirit of the motion, but I have to express some cynicism about its substance. To propose, as the Government does, motorway toll taxes, city entry charges and employee parking taxes is a curious way of promoting skills, of promoting a stable and competitive environment for enterprise and of encouraging the growth of new business. That all comes on top of the already crushing weight of tax increases that the Labour Chancellor of the Exchequer, Gordon Brown, has imposed by way of fuel taxes. As Scottish products have to be distributed over large distances, the increases in fuel taxes and the recently announced penalties for using Scotland's roads will further threaten the health of the Scottish economy. That seems to strike at the heart of the motion. The health warning is clear: Labour taxes will seriously damage job prospects.  It is extraordinary that the minister did not allude to the Manpower Employment Services report that was published this week. Its quarterly survey of employment prospects indicated that Scotland was unlikely to prosper as much as England. It seems that business is scared by the arsenal of stealth taxes that Scottish Labour intends to unleash on the Scottish business community. That relentless pounding will presumably intensify when Labour creates the minefield of permitting local councils to reintroduce a variable business rate. I applaud Mr Hamilton's contribution but, perhaps unlike him, I know the pain of such measures because I have been in small business. I am deeply concerned about the implications of the Government's proposals for that sector.  Labour is incapable of understanding the basic law of economics that taxes destroy business and kill jobs. Whenever the electorate are told about new or increased taxes, someone, somewhere, as sure as night follows day, is losing a job as a consequence.  I have not yet mentioned the crippling cost to Scottish business that has been created by Labour's high-value pound. I submit that our business sector is much more fragile than the tone  of the motion would suggest. Any further taxes would badly affect the demand for products and services and could well push business over the edge, taking jobs with it.  In its motion, the Government has the temerity to mention skills. I share Mr Swinney's concerns about the new deal. Quite simply, I do not think that it is working; it might be better classed as no deal at all. A system that fails more than 60 per cent of its participants does not seem to me to be a good model for the reintegration of people who have been without jobs. The Labour party hypocritically trumpets loudly its stolen slogan, "Scottish solutions for Scottish problems". Why then did it mess up a good and improving series of skills development programmes that was made in Scotland, by Scots and for Scots, by forcing on Scotland an English programme-the new deal? As we now know, Scottish skills experts urged the Labour party not to do so.  Looking at this motion, I feel that this Government is no friend of Scottish business and enterprise; it may masquerade as such, but it is posturing. Deeds mean a lot more. Judged on its legislative programme, this Government is a "spend" Government. It is neglecting the enterprise base-the very base on which we rely to produce the generated taxation and Exchequer funding that we need before we can consider what we can spend within that allocation.  I oppose the motion and I welcome the amendment of my colleague Mr Davidson.

Will Mr Lyon give way?

Will Mr Lyon exercise his influence in the coalition pact to emphasise the urgent need for the immediate lifting of the beef-on-the-bone ban?

It is a little difficult to bring any sense of passion to this debate, with topics such as the Financial Services and Markets Bill, the electronic communications bill and the limited liability partnerships bill. It would be an exaggeration to say that the people of Scotland talk of little else.  Mr Mackay will probably be relieved to hear that Conservative members are broadly in agreement with what he proposed, but I have been asked to flag up one or two specific concerns relating to the Financial Services and Markets Bill. Mr Swinney has already alluded to the concerns that I hold and to which I was alerted by the Law Society of Scotland. If I speak with conviction, it is that of the zealot of poacher turned gamekeeper. From a previous existence as a solicitor dealing with investment work, I know that no body could have been more rigorous, robust or harassing than the Law Society in its regulation of solicitor members.  That brings me to the more serious point that the bill apparently does not seek amendment to the Solicitors (Scotland) Act 1980, which is the primary legislation governing Scottish solicitors and regulates what solicitors handling investment business must do or should not do. There is grave concern that a dangerous duplication will arise: not only an unwelcome one for solicitor members in Scotland who may find themselves subject to two lots of administrative charges-which at first estimate will be hefty-but one which could cause confusion for consumers. That is distinctly undesirable.  There is a perception-and it may be worth investigating-that the Law Society of Scotland and its member solicitors would be content to remain with the existing adequate framework. In Scotland we have the unique virtue of an independent legal system and we have in place a satisfactory framework for the regulation of solicitors who handle investment business. Allowing a duplication to arise is an unnecessary complication and an unwelcome expense.  I hope that the minister will look carefully to see whether any steps can be taken to preserve the integrity of what already exists in Scotland and is in every respect admirable, to avoid bringing in any unnecessary confusion.  I also draw the minister's attention to some of the definitions in the proposed bill, specifically to the distinction between an investment and investment business. In the interests of clarity and legal certainty that should be defined in the  primary legislation; it should not be left to the statutory instrument. Due regard should be given to that important point.  I referred in my general remarks on the possible confusion to the cost of regulation. The Law Society of Scotland has ascertained from the FSA that the likely cost to Scottish solicitor practitioners will be a minimum of £1,000 for authorisation. That contrasts sharply with the existing charge of £135 imposed by the Law Society. I gather that the FSA has accepted that it will be neither as efficient nor as economical as the Law Society in regulating the investment business of Scottish solicitors. The minister may wish to give significant attention to that.  On a matter of corporate governance, the Hampel committee on corporate governance confirmed the recommendation of the Cadbury committee that in principle the roles of chairman and chief executive officer should, for obvious and understandable reasons, be kept separate in every public company. It is logical that that principle should be extended to comparable positions in the FSA. That is in no sense meant to denigrate or diminish the stature of Mr Howard Davies, who has a fine reputation; it is meant to point out that a distinction should be drawn between those two very separate roles. The Conservatives welcome Mr Mackay's proposal, but we hope that regard will be given to the very real concerns of the legal system of Scotland and its practitioners.

I speak in support of Mr Gorrie's amendment. I do so because I feel that today MSPs are on a test of trust with the Scottish people-the people in these galleries and the people out beyond. Those people will look keenly at our judgment on where our new Parliament should be and on how much it will cost. The hallmark of what we are our discussing should be  prudence and good husbandry, because the Scottish people are entitled to expect no less from this chamber. The question is not what we should have, but why we should have it. If we can answer that second question, MSPs can be at ease with themselves and with the Scottish people, not only today but for future generations.  A Parliament such as the one we seek must have a location, with ancillary facilities, that is suitable for a modern forum of government. That is essential and indisputable. However, the question that cannot be answered-because there is neither sufficient information to do so nor acceptable information about other options-is simply this: does the current proposal for a Parliament building at Holyrood represent the best option?  As Mr Gorrie has indicated, the Scottish people were certainly denied full information about the costs at the time of the devolution referendum. At that time, the figure in the public mind was between £40 million and £50 million. Today, the final estimate is running at approximately £109 million. With a capital cost running at that level, it is unacceptable that MSPs-without any investigation of other options-should endorse such expenditure. If we do, many doctors, nurses, schoolteachers and policemen throughout Scotland will question the wisdom of that decision.

It may be Dr Simpson's loss, I do not know. [Laughter.] Is that better, can I be heard now?

Mr Gorrie's amendment suggests a sensible and practical way forward. It does not seek to halt all progress, nor does it seek to rule out the current Holyrood proposal; but it rightly calls for the brakes to be put on, pending proper investigation of other options. I offer no comment on those options other than to say that they seem worthy of investigation. Until that investigation happens, I cannot see how MSPs can responsibly mandate the expenditure of significant sums of public money when they cannot justify why their decision is the best one.  By instinct, I am a protective soul, and while I shall draw short of accepting Mr Miralles's invitation to embrace the First Minister, I feel an obligation at least to look after him. Unless the  investigation of the other options is made, there is a grave risk that the new Parliament will be identified as a product of self-interested, self-indulgent and profligate MSPs, and Dewar's folly will become a reality. In all seriousness, I think that that would be fair neither to him nor to the people of Scotland. His name should be associated with a Parliament that all of us can be proud of and can defend because we made the best decision based on all the information available, rather than a poor decision based on inadequate information.

This legislative programme seems to be rather like the curate's egg-good in parts. As Mr McLetchie has indicated, there are areas of the programme which the Conservatives are prepared  to endorse and to support, but the other parts cause concern.  I agree with some of the earlier comments about the determination of priorities and the consequent gaps in the programme. The First Minister, in his preliminary remarks, said that people ask when this Parliament will make a difference. He also said, in defining the Parliament's role, that we are here to keep promises.  One of the most alarming gaps in the programme relates to drugs abuse in Scotland. I endorse what Mr Gallie and Mrs Godman have already said, and I am grateful to Mrs Godman for an accurate outline of the extent of the problem. The Deputy First Minister, Mr Wallace, has some sympathy for the problem. During the election campaign, he and I met in connection with the problem of drugs abuse in Scotland. I think that he and I would agree that the people we met-the youngsters we encountered, and the people who work with addicts and victims-were a deserving and meritorious group.  If I heard one comment recurring throughout the election campaign, it was that drugs abuse in Scotland is one of the major issues that perplexes, worries and alarms people. I am concerned that there is a silence about that in the legislative programme. Another recurring theme that I heard-as did the Deputy First Minister-was that all those who are trying to work at grass-roots level with the horrendous consequences of addiction and abuse are apprehensive about the lack of coherence, cohesion and a definitive Scottish programme to deal with the problem. During the election campaign, the Conservatives submitted that the issue was one of beckoning opportunity for this Parliament. We can look at the problem, take it on board, and spearhead a Scottish initiative through a minister or a parliamentary committee.  It is regrettable that the coalition Government has been unable to produce anything of comfort to the people of Scotland. They are desperately and acutely aware of the problem and they seek urgent reassurance. I hope that, notwithstanding the silence on drugs abuse in the legislative programme, it might be possible for the Executive to devise a means of bringing this problem to the fore, and in so doing to reassure the people of Scotland that this Parliament is concerned not about minutiae or technical detail or other aspects of bureaucratic tedium, but about the profound issues that are ravaging the communities of our country.  I am equally alarmed about the omission from the programme regarding enterprise and business. It is a matter of concern that there is no specific encouragement for the business community. Mr Dewar said that he wanted to build an enterprise  economy. As Nicola Sturgeon said about education, however, words may be one thing, but what are the substantive components of policy and legislative intent that will bring bricks and mortar to that proposal?  On the transport bill, there is silence on the need to address the desperate concerns of the business community about inadequate transport links. If one speaks to business communities in all parts of Scotland, one finds concern about congestion in a road structure that is unable to cope with the needs of business and commerce and concern that the ability of those areas to attract investment-inward or otherwise-is being deeply prejudiced.  I am concerned that apparently that is not perceived by the Government as a matter of any importance. What about reassurance on business rates? What about succour for the small business community? I come from that background, and I know that running a small business is a matter of daily, indeed hourly, challenge and preoccupation.  It would be helpful if the Government could reassure the business community that the matter of business rates has not been lost sight of, and if the Government could emphasise that it recognises the importance of preserving stability of business rates. If it does not, business communities in Scotland have real cause for concern.  In relation to training, the new deal-which I think we all acknowledge was Labour's English solution to a Scottish problem-has not been a success. It can hardly be classed as a success when more than 60 per cent of those involved do not end up in full-time jobs and when the cost of success is huge for those who do.  I am concerned that that problem has not been addressed. It is known to exist; one cannot speak to the business communities or the business agencies and not hear that there is deep concern about the efficacy and the workability of the new deal. I should have thought that this was an ideal opportunity for the Parliament, within the Government's legislative programme, to look at that and to determine a better structure for people in Scotland.  I, too, welcome the attention to the technical detail of feudal reform, which most people recognise is long overdue. However, it might not be universally recognised that there is a useful aspect of feudal law: the current relationship between what is technically known as the superior and the vassal allows the superior a preservation of amenity conditions, as well as private expense and immediacy of enforcement action. I am pleased that the Government acknowledges that and is prepared to try to support and retain it. That  can be contrasted sharply with the lumbering enforcement procedures under planning law, which are carried out at public expense.  I hope that the Government, in framing the bill, will not throw the baby out with the bath water, but will preserve the best, the most workable and the meritorious aspects of feudal law.  I endorse what Mr McLetchie said about the national parks bill; there is a need to see clearly what the bill is about. It is easy to wave the words "national parks" around and imagine that it is a panacea for all the problems that have been identified in relation to the management of land and water in, for example, the Loch Lomond and Trossachs area.  One of the burning issues at Loch Lomond is the abuse of activity on the water extent, which has been going on for many years and is of deep concern to both riparian dwellers and visitors. I hope that in the phrasing and drafting of the bill, due regard will be given to the need for proper management of activity on the water surface.  As Mr McLetchie said, the Conservatives will gladly support aspects of the Government's programme. However, there are huge gaps, which are a matter of concern, and there are other areas where the greatest sensitivity and the exercise of manifest common sense will be required.

If I may respond to Mr Raffan, the trouble with his being a turncoat is that it makes it difficult for us to find him convincing, because we do not know where he will turn up next. [MEMBERS: "Over there."] He is nearer to Mr Salmond than he is to us.  I want to defend my leader, Mr McLetchie, against Mr Gorrie-he is just a lamb, Mr Gorrie, just a lamb. Beside him and behind him are other lambs. The difference between the Conservative party and Mr Gorrie's party, the Liberal Democrats, is that we approach each issue with Scotland's best interests in mind, instead of soldering ourselves into some wee pact for the sake of self-interest.  I am principally concerned with the part of the Scotland Act 1998 (Modifications of Schedules 4 and 5) Order 1999 that refers to Short money. I am tempted to observe that facts are chiels that winna ding. The facts are very simple and should be obvious not only to this chamber, but to the people of Scotland beyond. Short money exists to allow Opposition parties to do their job effectively. The amount that is currently available at Westminster is £10,000 per member, with a vote supplement. New Labour is halving that for the purposes of the Scottish Parliament.  These are the facts. Short money is not available to Governments. The Liberal Democrats, perceived by the Scottish people first as the smiling and latterly as the gloomy Judases of Scottish politics, are part of Government; if Mr Gorrie thinks that Mr McLetchie is vituperative, he should just wait. Mr Wallace said:  "I am delighted that Nicol Stephen and Iain Smith have joined the Government team. Along with myself and Ross Finnie, this demonstrates again that the Scottish Liberal Democrats are right at the heart of this partnership government."  The Liberal Democrats propose to accept this Short money. If they do, they will take sitting on the fence-admittedly their legendary pastime-to new heights. If they aspire to being in government and opposition at the same time, they will not only have perfected the art of having their cake and eating it, but will find that the fence cuts through their collective political crotch, and the Scottish people will not forget their dishonour in their dismemberment.  In my opinion, the Liberal Democrats would do well not to touch a penny of the blood money. But if the Liberal Democrats reek of obsequious ambivalence, what about the ill-disguised  arrogance of Labour? It is the party that heralded the launch of this new Parliament with the creation of a bloated, padded, opulent Administration, which is costing the taxpayer more than £5 million. What an advertisement for a country that is characteristically associated with prudence and thrift.  Labour has single-handedly transmogrified the Scottish lion into a tartan fat cat. As its members feed themselves at the taxpayers' expense, the Opposition parties are to be put on a starvation diet. How convenient.  That is arrogance-but it is something more sinister: the Government does not want opposition. It does not want the Scottish National party and the Conservative party here asking questions. It does not want them opposing or testing what it is doing, or examining and, where necessary, exposing. Yet this is a Government that proclaims to have set up this Parliament for democracy. It is my submission that that is not democracy. Unless the Opposition parties in this chamber are to be treated fairly and with parity, we do not have democracy; we have suppression, repression and control. That is bad for this chamber, but even worse for Scotland.

I listened with interest to what Mr Salmond said. It is important that all of us in the chamber do not get too bogged down by an apparent or deemed gravity. I have a lot of sympathy for what the motion proposes. My background is in no way remarkable in that respect; it is probably like that of several other members. I am a member of the Church of Scotland and an elder of the kirk. I have fruitlessly spent years trying to improve the political ways of the father of Ms Wendy Alexander, the member for Paisley North-without success.  It is important that those of us here who have some sense of belief or religious adherence should be given the opportunity to draw from that belief or adherence, whatever it may be, the very comfort to which Mr Fergusson alluded, in an informal and, I hope, relaxed manner. My preference would be for that to be possible on a daily basis. There is an old Russian proverb that says if the thunder is not loud, the peasant does not cross himself. I am not suggesting that, in this chamber, we should await claps of thunder. However, I feel very strongly that challenges may lie ahead-and there I am in sympathy with Mr Salmond's view.  I think that it is important for us to remember, as a fraternity, that we are people first and MSPs after that. While I am very much in sympathy with Mr Salmond's view on further consultation with the faiths, I believe that it is essential to keep the matter before us as simple as possible. To me, the simplicity is this: for those of us in this company who have a desire to seek some sort of comfort on a daily basis, it would be helpful, whatever our beliefs or adherences, to have that facility available within the Parliament.  I support the motion.