Throughout the budget process, the Scottish Conservatives have made it clear that our priority is the Scottish economy, and we have said from the outset that we would test the Scottish Government’s budget on whether it prioritised economic recovery. To my regret, it does not. As Willie Rennie said, there is good news about economic recovery; growth is up and unemployment is down. Just two weeks ago, the International Monetary Fund raised the forecast for UK growth in 2014 from 1.9 to 2.4 per cent, and other estimates suggest that in the coming years the UK economy will be the fastest growing in the developed world. However, the recovery is still fragile, and the Government needs to put in all the support it can. In recent years, Scottish businesses have benefited from a competitive advantage, partly because of the small business bonus, which the Scottish Conservatives supported. However, other steps that the SNP has taken have not been so helpful. For example, the retail levy was bad news for business; it deterred investment and might well have cost jobs. The good news is that Mr Swinney has indicated that he will scrap it, although it is a pity that he could not act sooner. He has also missed the opportunity to introduce the retail bonus that is coming in south of the border. He could have chosen such measures in order to prioritise economic recovery. Instead, the SNP has chosen not to boost the economy, but to put the money into welfare. It is putting more money into local councils’ discretionary housing budgets, despite the fact that councils across Scotland are already unable to spend the very large sums that they have been given. I will take my own—and Mr Swinney’s—local authority, Perth and Kinross Council, as an example. I understand that as of January only 14 per cent of its total £1.3 million DHP budget for the current financial year had been spent and that it is likely that a very substantial sum will have to be returned to the Scottish Government at the end of the financial year. That pattern is being repeated across Scotland. There is no evidence that there is a huge level of demand for discretionary housing payments resulting from the spare-room subsidy.

The question for Mr Gray—in his new alliance with the SNP—is this: why is pouring money into an already undersubscribed budget a priority? Indeed, why is the issue a priority at all? Why have the SNP and the Labour Party deemed that putting more money into supporting people who are underoccupying properties is their top priority in this budget? What about the people who are—as James Kelly fairly asked—living in overcrowded accommodation? Why are they not getting the same priority? My fear is that the budget is more about political opportunism and beating the UK coalition Government with a big stick than it is about any serious attempt to take practical steps to produce a budget that is in Scotland's best interests.

No. I need to make progress. Members from around the chamber will object to being accused of opportunism, but I think that it is worth considering just for a moment the stance that both parties have taken in the past on the question of an underoccupancy charge. When it was in power at Westminster, the Labour Party introduced as part of the Welfare Reform Act 2007 the local housing allowance, which was an underoccupancy charge for people who were living in private rented accommodation.

I need to make progress. I will give way later, if I have time. The measure was steered through the House of Commons by Jackie Baillie’s friend, the then Minister for Employment and Welfare Reform, Mr Jim Murphy. I read Hansard with great interest to see how many times Labour members described the current underoccupancy charge as “iniquitous” or “draconian” but, bizarrely, not once did either of those words appear. In fact, the legislation was unanimously supported by the Labour Party, which today seems to be remarkably incensed at the current coalition Government introducing more or less exactly the same measure for people in social rented housing. This is more about political point-scoring than it is about taking any stance of great principle. It is not just Labour that is guilty here.

I am just about to turn to the SNP, so Mr Macintosh might enjoy this. Where was the opposition from the SNP members at Westminster? Where were the speeches against the underoccupancy charge? Where was the outrage? Where were the denunciations? There was none. Not a single SNP member in the House of Commons raised so much as a murmur in opposition, and when it came to the vote, not a single SNP member could even be bothered to turn up, never mind to vote against the measure. Who were the guilty men? Let me name them. They were Mike Weir, Stewart Hosie, Angus MacNeil, Angus Robertson, Pete Wishart and—yes—Alex Salmond. So the man who is the leader of the SNP and First Minister and who regularly denounces the underoccupancy charge as an outrageous measure did and said nothing when a similar proposal was introduced for the private rented sector.

Mr Ewing can take time to apologise later. I am sure that the Presiding Officer will make that available to him. When SNP members denounce the iniquity of the underoccupancy charge—we have heard plenty of that this afternoon, and we will hear more of it—they should be embarrassed by the behaviour of their SNP colleagues at Westminster, including their own First Minister. Any reasonable person would conclude that the SNP’s stance is no more than posturing, pure opportunism and rank hypocrisy. It is about scoring political points rather than taking any stance that is based on principle. In conclusion, the budget sets the wrong priorities for Scotland. It fails to put the economy first. It is all about politics, and it exposes the double standards that are at the hearts of both the Labour Party and the SNP Government. For all those reasons, members should reject it.

Will the member give way?

Can Jenny Marra answer me this simple question: does the local housing allowance, which was introduced by the Labour Party, incorporate an underoccupancy charge—yes or no?

I support Richard Lyle’s amendment 2, which deals with the issue of charitable status, an issue that I raised during the stage 1 debate. As Richard Lyle pointed out, there will be many faith-based social providers who might well fall foul of this legislation, should it be passed in its current form. I have no doubt that, if the bill is passed, there will be challenges to the charitable status of certain faith-based social providers that take a traditional view of marriage. As has been mentioned, we saw that in relation to St Margaret’s adoption agency and its view on same-sex adoptive couples. As we have heard, the good news is that that issue has been resolved and the decision has been taken that charitable status should be retained. Of course, that does not mean that the same will necessarily apply should the bill be passed, because we are dealing with completely different legislation and a different set of circumstances. Even so, even though St Margaret’s survived, it nevertheless suffered huge disruption to its important charitable work and a cost of some £50,000 in legal expenses—a cost and a challenge that could well close down many other faith-based charities that have a much smaller budget. The issue is simple and straightforward. The Scottish Government has made it clear that it does not want to see charitable status removed from such faith-based social providers. The Scottish Government should take the lead on this—it should put the matter beyond doubt and accept amendment 2. The Government will no doubt say that it is unnecessary, but it seems to me that if anything can be done to deter what might be vexatious challenges to the charitable status of faith-based social providers, such provisions should be put in place. I ask the cabinet secretary to address one point when he comes to wind up on this group of amendments. If he does not think that amendment 2 is necessary but agrees with me about protecting the charitable status of such faith-based social providers, would he undertake, in the event that the bill is passed and we subsequently see such challenges to the charitable status of faith-based providers, to bring back to the Parliament primary legislation to put the matter right? I believe that Parliament is agreed that it does not want to see that charitable status removed.

Before the cabinet secretary finishes on amendment 2, will he address the point that I raised? If, when the bill is passed, he turns out to be wrong about the issue and there are successful challenges to the charitable status of faith-based social providers who take a traditional view of marriage, will he undertake to introduce primary legislation to this Parliament to put matters right?

I am sure that we all agree that there will be commercial opportunities for Scottish companies that use the .scot domain name. However, can the First Minister confirm that there are no plans to replace the existing .uk suffix that is used by Scottish Government and many public bodies throughout the country?

4. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking—I am sorry; that is the wrong question. I was reading Mr Hume’s question by mistake. [Laughter.] I will start again. To ask the Scottish Government what action local authorities are taking in light of Police Scotland’s decision to withdraw traffic wardens. (S4O-02830)

As the cabinet secretary made clear in his response, Police Scotland’s removal of traffic wardens is putting an additional burden on local councils that have not decriminalised parking offences. In Stirling, for example, six traffic wardens are employed, and it will cost the council £180,000 a year to replace them. What will the cabinet secretary do about a situation in which a centralised public body’s cost cutting is being carried out at the expense of a cash-strapped local council?

We have heard a lot about austerity this afternoon and, again, there have been references to savage cuts, a phrase that we hear regularly from SNP members in particular. It is worth looking at the actual sums involved and the evidence of what has happened to the Scottish Government’s budget. As Gavin Brown pointed out, in cash terms, the budget, which is £35.3 billion in 2014-15, is the highest in history for the Scottish Government or the Scottish Executive. People will say, “What about the real-terms figures?” We have heard that from Mr Gibson and others. I have the real-terms figures, too. Using 2013-14 prices, this year’s budget is higher in real terms than last year’s and the current year’s. In fact, in the 15 years since devolution in 1999, the total has been higher in only five years; in 10 of the years since 1999, the total has been lower. In that historical perspective, Mr Swinney has a relatively high sum of money to deal with. We accept, of course, that there has been austerity. Every country in the western world is affected by a downturn in public finances. François Hollande’s approach in France was the only exception, but he accepted in his famous new year’s speech that it was not working. He had to change direction—although, of course, he is somewhat focused on other issues at the moment. Let us look at the evidence of the savage cuts that we keep hearing about. We agree with some of these policies and not with others, but people in Scotland have free personal care for the elderly, free prescriptions, free bus travel for the over-60s and free university tuition, none of which is available south of the border. They all still exist in Scotland; none has been affected by cuts. People south of the border say, “How can Scotland still afford to pay for those things, notwithstanding the impact of austerity?” That is not the end of the story, of course, because even since 2010, not only have all those benefits continued, but Mr Swinney has been in a position to announce whole new areas of spending. In brief research, I picked up eight new spending lines that have been announced since the election of the coalition Government in 2010, with its so-called savage cuts. There is £13 million next year and £42 million the following year for free school meals for children in primary 1 to primary 3, and £15 million next year and £44 million the following year for an expansion of childcare. In December, Mr Swinney announced additional business rates relief worth £38.5 million next year; a town centre housing boost of £2.7 million was announced by Margaret Burgess and Mr Mackay; and an £8.6 million family nurse partnership extension was announced. In November, Margaret Burgess announced a £25 million regeneration boost for communities.

I will when I have finished my long list. In October, the Scottish veterans budget was increased by £40,000, and there was the announcement of a £20 million increase for discretionary housing payments, of course. In January last year, a £21 million rare medicines fund was announced. There will be many more examples of new spending commitments over and above all the benefits that already exist. I am sure that Mr MacKenzie will have yet more to add to my list.

The evidence under this Government is that many capital projects are not being delivered at all. That is precisely the point that my colleague Gavin Brown and others have made all too often. My point is very simple: there is no evidence of savage cuts. The Scottish Government is, relatively speaking, insulated from cuts in budgets elsewhere and is still able to maintain very high levels of spending and announce all sorts of new spending commitments. I accept that Mr Swinney has a difficult job in trying to balance all the priorities and demands on him. He usually handles that pretty adeptly, but I suspect that the budget that is before us is more about politics than anything else. Mr Swinney tried to set a trap for the Labour Party in relation to pledges on childcare and free school meals, but so far it has been careful not to fall into that trap. Our criticism of the budget is that the priority is wrong. Our priority would be putting the economic recovery first. Our concern is that Scottish businesses will lose their competitive edge, and our priority should be restoring that. Just two weeks ago, Mr Swinney made the very welcome announcement that the retail levy would not continue when it comes to the end of its life. He announced that at the Scottish Retail Consortium event, and people were very pleased to hear it. He gave the impression to me of being a slightly embarrassed father not admitting that that wayward child was his responsibility; it seemed to be someone else’s idea. I am very pleased that the retail levy is coming to an end, but of course it was a mistake to introduce it in the first place. It has now been revealed that the levy was nothing whatever to do with public health, which is how it was dressed up when Mr Swinney introduced it, and that it was purely a revenue-raising measure. It has now been accepted that the levy was costing jobs and investment, as those in the industry said it would. Mr Swinney has taken the very welcome decision to get rid of the levy, but it is a pity that he could not bring that in in this budget as opposed to waiting for next year. We have had some very good economic news for the UK, with unemployment figures better than expected. As Willie Rennie said, the IMF forecast for UK growth for 2014 has been raised from 1.9 to 2.4 per cent. Mr Swinney is very good at claiming credit when the Scottish economy does well, but some forecasters are saying that Scottish economic performance in the future will not be as good as that of the UK as a whole and that we will fall behind. In that context, we think that this budget is a missed opportunity and that Mr Swinney should be prioritising economic recovery.

At stage 2, the Scottish Government lodged an amendment that brought in section 32B. That new section amends the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 to allow for the provision of fixed-penalty notices for contraventions and non-compliance with forthcoming carrier bag regulations. Amendment 1 seeks to delete section 32B, and therefore to reverse the decision taken at stage 2. I have two reasons for opposing the provisions. The first relates to the substantive issue. On a point of principle, the Scottish Conservatives do not support the proposed plastic bag tax. There are good, detailed arguments against the measures set out in the briefing for the debate that was provided by the Scottish Retail Consortium. [Interruption.]

I have always believed that we should introduce legislation or taxes to change behaviour only as a last resort. I do not believe that such an approach is necessary in this case. Already, a voluntary approach by many retailers has substantially reduced the volume of plastic bags being issued. The British Retail Consortium has noted that there has been a 50 per cent reduction in carrier bag use in England through voluntary action agreed with the UK Government. There are different views on how effective a carrier bag charge might be and how beneficial it might be to the environment. The issue was last considered in detail by the Parliament back in 2005, when the then Environment and Rural Development Committee considered Mike Pringle’s member’s bill on the issue. The committee unanimously came to the view that this was not the right way to proceed. Among the members of that committee were one Rob Gibson of the Scottish National Party and, even more interestingly, one Richard Lochhead, who is now enjoying a position as Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment.

Oh, yes, please, Mr Gibson.

That is a very interesting intervention from Mr Gibson. I took great care to read the committee report in detail. A whole range of very compelling arguments were made against the proposals at the time. For example, the Environment and Rural Development Committee said that there were “a number of unintended consequences that appear likely to be connected with achieving a large reduction in plastic bag use by means of the proposed levy.” The committee also heard evidence that a tax on plastic bags might mean an increase in other waste, with no overall decline in CO2 emissions. I am not clear what has led Mr Lochhead, Mr Gibson and all their colleagues on the SNP benches to change their views on the matter since 2005. No doubt, the minister will enlighten us when he comes to speak. Leaving aside the substantive issue, I think that the second and perhaps more serious concern relates to the procedure that the Scottish Government has followed. As members know, I convene the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, which spent a lot of time taking evidence at stage 1 on the general principles of the bill. The Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee did a further piece of work as a secondary committee, in looking at part 2 of the bill, which deals with SEPA. However, neither committee had the opportunity to take evidence at stage 1 on the proposal for a carrier bag tax, because it was only at the very last moment in the stage 1 debate that the minister indicated that a stage 2 amendment would be lodged to introduce the tax. Although the Scottish Government has consulted on the proposal, there has been no opportunity for proper parliamentary scrutiny. When we are dealing with an important matter that will have a wide impact—the introduction of a new tax—it should be open to a committee of the Parliament to give that measure full scrutiny, but that has not happened in this case. It is deeply ironic that in a bill that is about improving regulation, a measure has been introduced that has not been properly scrutinised. For those two reasons, I believe that the measure should be removed from the bill. It is open to the Government to bring back the measure in primary legislation at a future date for proper scrutiny if it wishes to do so, but it should not be in the bill. I move amendment 1.

And it is wrong. Members: Oh!

Some people are consistent on issues, unlike the environment minister and his party—that is the difference between me and the environment minister. I listened with great care to the minister, but I struggled to hear a single word of explanation for why the measure was introduced in such a way. If this is such a good idea and was thought of so long ago, why was it dropped into the bill at the last minute? Why was it not included in the bill that was introduced, so that committees of the Parliament would have the opportunity to scrutinise it fully at stage 1? I appeal to the minister, who I know is a reasonable man. There is still the opportunity for him to change his mind. We can have a debate about the substance of the issue on another occasion. This is a matter of process and respect for the Parliament. Even at this late stage, let the minister support amendment 1. Let him take section 32B out of the bill and bring the measure back in a different piece of proposed legislation, so that we can show the Parliament respect and allow for proper parliamentary scrutiny. I press amendment 1.

I commend Margaret McDougall for her dogged pursuit of this issue throughout stages 1 and 2. We debated the issue fully at stage 1 in committee when we took evidence and when we prepared our report. We heard from COSLA and other stakeholders about the concern over the right to reduce fees in the event of poor performance. As in the debate on the first group of amendments, I think that ministers have overall struck the right balance on this issue. I think that adopting a carrot-and-stick approach is the right thing to do with higher planning fees, with the opportunity to reduce them in the event of poor performance. For that reason, we will not support amendment 14, which seeks to take out section 41 in its entirety. Amendment 10, which seeks a requirement for consultation prior to guidance being issued, is a reasonable one. I note what Margaret McDougall said about the lack of definition of “satisfactory performance”. We will support amendment 10. Amendment 11 seems to me to put too broad an obligation on the Scottish ministers, and amendments 12 and 13 seem to me to propose an operation that is too bureaucratic. We will therefore support amendment 10 but, unfortunately, we will not support amendments 11 to 14.

Lack of consistency is clearly in the air this afternoon, but the Scottish Conservatives are consistent in our view. We welcome the bill and will vote for it at decision time, although we have one concern, which I highlighted earlier and will return to. Overall, it is a good bill that will make it easier for businesses in Scotland to operate, and will enhance the performance of SEPA in particular. As the convener of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, I reiterate the thanks that I expressed at stage 1 to my fellow committee members for their assistance in dealing with the bill, and our thanks to our ever-efficient and supportive team of clerks. We considered a number of substantive issues at stage 2—as we did again this afternoon—and had a good debate where that was required. The genesis of the bill was the Scottish Government’s regulatory review group. Too often, such Government-appointed committees are no more than talking shops, so it is good to see some positive changes emerging from the work that has been done. At the core of the bill is the introduction of an economic duty on public bodies. That is an ambition that the Scottish Conservatives have had for many years—it was in our manifestos in 2007, 2010 and 2011—so I am, therefore, delighted to see it now becoming law. As my good friend the late David McLetchie once commented in the chamber, the next best thing to a Conservative Government is an SNP Government delivering Conservative policies. I look forward to many more aspects of our manifestos becoming the law in due course. Throughout the passage of the bill, we have heard concerns from some that the duty on regulators to contribute to achieving sustainable economic growth is inappropriate. The only real concern that I had was about the definition of sustainable economic growth, but that has now been resolved following an undertaking from the Scottish Government that the definition will be explicitly stated in guidance. I appreciate that there are those in the chamber—not least in the Green Party—who take a different view to that of my party on the bill, and I respect their stance. However, I believe that the promotion of sustainable economic growth is in everyone’s interests. I am not surprised to hear that the Green Party takes a different view, but I am slightly surprised by the attitude of the Labour Party this afternoon. We know that the actions of successive Labour Governments have had the effect of destroying economic growth in our country—not least of which was the ruination of the public finances by Gordon Brown—but I am a little surprised to hear Labour being so open in admitting its opposition to economic growth. The one concern that I had with the bill was the introduction fairly late in the process of measures that will allow the implementation of a plastic bag tax. As I said earlier—I will not rehearse all the arguments—I am not convinced that a plastic bag tax is appropriate or that it will have the consequences that its promoters intend. Perhaps more important than the substance of the issue is the way in which that change was introduced. There was no opportunity at stage 1 for committees of the Parliament to scrutinise the proposal, to take evidence, to quiz ministers or to hold the proposals up to the light because it was only at the very last moment, just before the stage 1 debate, that the intention to introduce the measures was signalled. There was a very short debate on the matter at stage 2 and equally short consideration of it this afternoon. I do not believe that that is how legislation of this nature should be dealt with. There are concerns in industry about the impact of the tax; it should have been given proper parliamentary scrutiny and it is regrettable that that was not allowed.

I am interested to hear that from the minister—although, to be frank, it would have been better if that evidence had been brought to Parliament so that we could all have debated it in committee and in Parliament. I am sorry that that opportunity was lost. The concern that I have raised will not prevent me and my colleagues from voting for the bill today, because we feel that, overall, it will be beneficial. Over the years, I have heard a great many concerns from businesses about how regulation impacts on them. Often, the problem is not regulations themselves but interpretation of them, which can be a particular problem when many of the 32 local authorities in Scotland interpret the same regulation in different ways. As we heard at stage 1, that can give rise to a particular challenge for mobile food retailers who sell their products in more than one local authority area. We also regularly hear concerns from businesses about the planning system, which the bill will go some way towards addressing. I hope that the threat of reduced planning fees will be enough to ensure excellent performance and I genuinely welcome the constructive language that has been used by ministers in relation to how they will engage with local authorities and planning departments. We are going to get a better system of regulation, a faster and more responsive planning system and a requirement for public bodies to promote sustainable economic growth—that is what the bill will deliver and that is what the Scottish Conservatives wish for our public agencies. That is why we will be pleased to support the bill at stage 3 this afternoon.

Will the minister repeat what he said? It did not make sense to me at all. He said that he would write to me at the end of the stage 1 process. Will he perhaps reflect on and correct what he said?

8. To ask the Scottish Government when it last met representatives of CBI Scotland and what issues were discussed. (S4O-02784)

Will the cabinet secretary reassure us that the Scottish Government values the contribution made by CBI Scotland to the continuing policy debate? Does he agree that those from the business community who speak out for or against independence should be free to do so without being attacked for their views? Will he take the opportunity to distance himself from some of the disgraceful language used by some in the yes campaign to describe the well-respected director of CBI Scotland, Iain McMillan?

I think that we can all agree with the first few words of the Government’s motion, which are about “positive signs of recovery in the Scottish economy”. Indeed, as both Gavin Brown and Willie Rennie said, all the economic indicators are now positive and are much better than many people predicted. This debate is a welcome opportunity to scrutinise the SNP’s judgment on economic issues. That has never been more important, as Mr Swinney and his colleagues are seeking the power to run the economy not just of a devolved country but of an independent one. If we look at the evidence, the reality is that the SNP got it wrong when it came to predicting what would happen in the economy. For years, it told us that George Osborne's approach would ensure that there was no economic recovery. In speech after speech, the First Minister, Mr Swinney and their colleagues called on George Osborne to change tack and end his obsession with austerity. Time and time again, they told us that plan A had failed and that it was time to go for growth. Thank goodness George Osborne did not listen and instead stuck to his guns, as we are now seeing economic growth as a result. At least some of Mr Osborne’s critics have had the good grace to accept that they made a mistake. Writing in the Independent on Sunday this weekend, Professor David Blanchflower—a man who is often quoted in the chamber by those on the SNP and Labour benches with a love of Keynesian economics—stated: “I was wrong, I hadn’t expected the economy to grow as much as it did last year or for the welcome drop in unemployment.” We should remember that this is the man who predicted a triple-dip recession and that unemployment would reach 6 million. Professor Blanchflower got it wrong on all those counts.

At least he has had the good grace to accept that he got it wrong. It would be good to hear that from others. Perhaps Mr Mason will oblige us.

Maybe Mr Mason missed the eurozone crisis being much deeper than people expected, but my point is absolutely clear. All the predictions of doom and gloom and all the predictions from the SNP of a decade of stagnation have not come true. The SNP should have the grace to accept that. Let us look elsewhere. Let us look at socialist France, which for years was held up as an alternative to the austerity approach being followed in Britain, Germany and elsewhere. At the start of this year, just two weeks ago, François Hollande, the French President, said that he is now committed to reducing public spending, reducing the deficit and reducing taxation. The critics of austerity have found their cheerleaders, such as Professor Blanchflower and President Hollande, silenced, and they too should have the grace to accept that they got it wrong. The Government’s motion refers to inequality. A mantra is regularly repeated in the chamber by SNP members who state as a fact that the UK is the fourth most unequal country in the developed world. That is a convenient claim for those who want to be entirely negative about the United Kingdom as part of the unremittingly negative yes campaign for separation, but it is not supported by the facts. There are different measures of inequality. One measure is inequality of incomes.

No. I need to make some progress. According to figures drawn up by the United Nations, the World Bank, the Central Intelligence Agency and the OECD, in terms of income equality, the UK is ranked 43rd out of 156 countries in the world. In terms of the 34 countries of the OECD, we are ranked 28th, which, according to my arithmetic, does not make us the fourth most unequal. However, income inequality is only one part of the story. Perhaps more important is the distribution of wealth in society, and here the data tells us something quite different. The “Global Wealth Databook 2013”, which was produced last October by Credit Suisse, puts the UK at 14th out of 34 OECD countries in terms of equality of wealth, which is comfortably in the upper half. Crucially, we are more equal in terms of wealth than France, Germany and Switzerland, and indeed the supposed Scandinavian paradises of Norway, Sweden and Denmark. Those who want an independent country so we can be more like Scandinavia should be careful what they wish for. Trends are important here, too. Research by both the Office for National Statistics and the Institute for Fiscal Studies states that, over the past decade, inequality of income in the UK has been reducing. An ONS report that was published in July 2013 states that inequality of income in the UK is at its lowest level since 1986. The IFS takes a slightly different approach and states that inequality is back where it was in 2005-06. However, whatever study we use, the consistent message is that inequality is reducing. [Interruption.] SNP members do not like those facts; I can tell that from the murmur that we hear. However, as George Adam said in the debate yesterday, they take the view that facts are unimportant in a debate such as this. I think that we should rely on facts, not assertions. They do not like it.

They got their call on the economy wrong. Why should we trust them to run an independent country?

Does Mr Mason accept the evidence from the ONS and the IFS that, over the past decade, inequalities of income have been reducing throughout the UK?

I will concentrate my remarks on the Finance Committee’s report, and specifically on the recommendations that were made to that committee by the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, which I have the pleasure of convening. A number of those recommendations were picked up directly in the Finance Committee’s observations. I think that we would all agree that we want the Scottish Government to use its budget to maximise Scotland’s economic potential. In practice, that means putting in place measures that will assist with the growth of Scotland’s private sector businesses and industries. A number of aspects of the draft budget will have an impact on the ability of businesses to do just that, and I will highlight those. One issue that came up when the EETC took evidence on the draft budget was procurement opportunities, particularly for small and medium-sized enterprises. I am well aware that the Procurement Reform (Scotland) Bill has been introduced and is being scrutinised by the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee. It was clear to us that there is a large burden of expectation on the bill to improve the availability of public contracts for smaller, more local businesses. During the budget process I asked the cabinet secretary what percentage of Scottish Government spend was won by domestic businesses. His reply was that 80 per cent of the contracts that were awarded through the public contracts Scotland portal go to Scottish businesses. However, what is not clear is whether the 80 per cent of the number of contracts awarded represents an equivalent share of the value of the contracts. It might be, for example, that very large value infrastructure projects are going to companies outwith Scotland; we need to know whether that is the case in order to get a true picture of the benefit to the Scottish economy from the Government’s procurement spend. I was pleased that our committee asked the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee to pursue that issue as part of its scrutiny of the Procurement Reform (Scotland) Bill. Our committee spent quite a lot of time looking at the performance of Scottish Enterprise, Highlands and Islands Enterprise, and the business gateway. Scottish Enterprise has an ambitious target of increasing the number of its account-managed companies by 20 per cent over the period to 2015. On the basis of its record to date, it is doubtful whether that can be achieved. That is an area on which we need more evidence to see what steps are being taken by both Scottish Enterprise and HIE to accelerate the rate of increase. It is clearly in everyone’s interest that we see more high-growth companies being brought within the reach of our enterprise network. Concerns were raised with the committee about the operation of the business gateway. The committee has looked at that issue in the past, and we have asked the Scottish Government for further information on how it views the performance of the network. Specifically, we have suggested to the Scottish Government that now is the time for a review of small business support that would cover both the business gateway network and the work of the enterprise agencies. In view of the importance of those agencies to growth in the economy, it is important that we keep that under constant scrutiny. I was surprised to see that Scottish Enterprise is seeking to fill a gap in its income for the coming year of £26.3 million from what it refers to as “further asset realisations”, which are in effect property sales over and above the routine annual disposal of excess assets. Scottish Enterprise admitted in evidence to the committee: “This may not be the best time, in the economy, to dispose of or to realise money from those assets.”—[Official Report, Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, 30 September 2013; c 3307.] Indeed. If they are commercial property assets, as a great majority of them will be, it might not be the best time to sell them when the commercial property market is very depressed and they might achieve a very low value—in effect, we might be talking about a fire sale. That is a matter of some concern, and the committee agreed that we should seek further information on what is proposed; that was picked up by the Finance Committee in its report. The Scottish Government has put great store by its principle of prioritising capital spend in order to stimulate the economy. It seems rather to turn things on their head for Scottish Enterprise to dispose of its capital assets at a time when they might not realise the best price to be achieved in normal economic times in order to fill a gap in its annual income. I am not sure that that amounts to responsible stewardship of the public finances. Scottish Enterprise, Highlands and Islands Enterprise, Skills Development Scotland, VisitScotland and the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council are all part of the strategic forum, which requires to make savings of £40 million in each of the next two financial years. From the information provided to us, the projected savings amounted to £27 million for 2014-15. We must therefore assume that the Scottish funding council, which is not under our committee’s remit, is contributing the missing £13 million in savings, but it would be helpful to have that clarified. There seemed to be a certain lack of detail from the cabinet secretary on that point when he gave evidence to the committee. The committee is concerned, too, about the funding of fuel poverty programmes. We heard in evidence, as we have heard it in previous years, that £200 million must be spent annually to keep up to date with fuel poverty programmes. Some of that money comes from the energy companies, but there is a lack of clarity about how much exactly is coming from the private sector. It is important that that is identified. As we have heard already in the debate, the Scottish Government decided to take £10 million out of the fuel poverty budget to provide support to people impacted by the underoccupancy charge for social housing. To my mind, that is the wrong priority. We already have a major issue of fuel poverty in Scotland and it is a matter of regret that the fuel poverty budget has been raided. There is much in the Scottish Government’s budget that can be supported, but there are a number of key areas of concern. I hope that, as the budget progresses through Parliament, we will see those concerns addressed and a greater focus on private sector business growth and support.

I am pleased to open the debate on behalf of the committee. First of all, I put on record my thanks to everyone who worked with the committee, including all those who gave evidence; Accountant in Bankruptcy officials; our adviser Nicholas Grier, who, with intelligence and good humour, guided us through the bill’s sometimes very technical provisions; our researcher from the Scottish Parliament information centre; and, of course, our team of committee clerks. The committee reached some worthwhile conclusions that we hope will improve the bill and the overall bankruptcy and debt advice process. I should say that the minister has already pre-empted many of the points that I was about to make, which means that I will be able to ditch some of my speech. That is very good news because, as it stood, my speech was way over 10 minutes. Unfortunately, however, I do not think that it will be any shorter than 10 minutes as a result. Although advice and education are separate issues, I will address them together. The committee recognised that support for money advice and financial education was not overwhelming. Although support was expressed by Citizens Advice Scotland, StepChange Debt Charity Scotland and Money Advice, some of that support was more for the idea in principle than for the substance of the proposal. Some felt that it would be better to provide financial education on a voluntary rather than compulsory basis, but the committee concluded that it was important for money advice to be available across all statutory debt solutions. We did not think that money advice would be an unnecessary burden on debtors and, indeed, the process for well-informed debtors could be relatively quick and straightforward. We also supported the mandatory provision of financial education but considered that it would be beneficial to have some form of monitoring or pilot before it was fully implemented across the country. On the costs of provision, organisations expressed a great deal of concern about the additional burden that would be placed on the advice sector and the fact that no additional resources had been provided in the bill. We took a lot of evidence on this matter, with the money advice sector itself suggesting that it would be looking at a 6 to 8 per cent increase in the number of cases. Although I welcome the additional resources that the minister announced just a few moments ago, I wonder whether he could expand a bit more on that in his winding-up speech and tell us where the £200,000 will come from and whether it is intended to be a one-off or to be provided on an annually recurring basis. I am sure that the committee will be interested in hearing some more detail about that. On the qualifications of money advisers, we accepted that the quality, standard, relevance and consistency of the advice that is given is important. Citizens Advice Scotland said that advice should be “suitable and appropriate” to debtors’ needs. The committee looked for a response from the Scottish Government to that concern. We also supported the call for insolvency practitioners to be included as approved money advisers, and we are looking for further information from the Scottish Government on how it will monitor the provision of money advice. Many witnesses told us that they thought that financial education would be better placed in a school environment rather than being only for those who are in financial difficulty. The Money Advice Trust referred to the finding of its research that “the timing of such educational interventions is crucial”. We were interested to hear that both the Accountant in Bankruptcy and Money Advice Scotland are developing a module and national standard for financial capability education. The committee is seeking details from the Scottish Government on what monitoring and reviewing it will put in place with regard to the content of that module and the standard, which external bodies will be involved, and its overall approach to teaching financial education in schools. We heard a lot in evidence about how that financial education will be provided online, but we were conscious that it needs to be provided to everyone, including those who have access issues with online formats, not least because they live in a rural area where broadband is of poor quality. The committee spent quite a lot of time looking at the common financial tool issue. The common financial statement will allow money advisers and debtors to identify a debtor’s income and outgoings—household expenditure, for example—and what disposable income the debtor then has to pay off their debt. Different views were expressed to the committee. Some people were concerned about the adoption of the common financial statement as the common financial tool. For example, the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland, the Law Society of Scotland and Citizens Advice Scotland referred to flexibility and said that it was too rigid. There were strong concerns from StepChange Debt Charity Scotland, which has its own tool and wanted to continue to use it. In the end, the committee came to the view that it would be preferable to have a single common financial tool and that it was better to go with the one that is proposed in the bill, but we accept that that is a matter of judgment. We also recommended that a cross-section of key bodies be involved in the preparation of the guidance that will accompany the new tool when it is introduced. The 48-month discharge period to which the minister referred was more controversial. The bill seeks to extend the debtor contribution period from 36 to 48 months, although that could be shorter where a debtor makes sufficient payments from income or assets to settle their debts in full, or longer because the debtor has taken a payment break or because they have agreed to make payments for a longer period. We heard many concerns about the rationale for that extension. For example, Citizens Advice Scotland was concerned that increasing the contribution period may result in a growing number of debtors who are unable to maintain those contributions and that that may result in increased hardship. Other concerns were expressed by, for example, the Association of Business Recovery Professionals, the R3 Scottish technical committee, the Carrington Dean Group and ICAS, which questioned whether any analysis had been carried out of debtor contribution breakage timescales or the cost benefit to a sequestrated estate of that extended time period. The minister told us that he thought that “48 months is about right”.—[Official Report, Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, 6 November 2013; c 3542.] We heard that again this afternoon. However, strong views were expressed by a cross-section of organisations that took the opposite view. On balance and on a division, the majority of the committee supported the proposal in the bill. The issue of undischarged bankrupts and bank accounts came up in evidence. That is not an issue in the bill, but it could be addressed at stage 2. I was interested to hear from the minister that he intends to take that forward. I think that the committee would welcome that. The bill will bring in a new minimal assets process for those with little in the way of income or assets as an alternative to the low-income, low-assets—LILA—route. The Scottish Government believes that the entry criteria will be clearer and will end alleged confusion among stakeholders, and that, since the LILA route was introduced, it has been necessary to transfer a number of cases from it to full bankruptcy, because the criteria for accessing the route were not made clear. We heard a range of views on the proposal to allow debtors, under the MAP, to exit their bankruptcy after six months. Some, including the Law Society, thought that that period was far too short. The committee recognised that there was a well-intentioned purpose behind the introduction of the six-month discharge period under the MAP. We therefore considered that a cautious approach should be adopted by the Scottish Government, particularly as the MAP will apply to arguably the most vulnerable of the debtors. On balance, we agreed to support the provision, but we invite the Scottish Government to publish one year after the MAP is introduced a report on the impact of the new early discharge provision. There was a lot of discussion in the committee about the fee level. The bill provides for a fee in the region of £100 to be charged for the new MAP. Citizens Advice Scotland was concerned that there would be a fee at all and said that people would struggle to afford it. Other concerns were expressed about the level of the fee. We heard from the Accountant in Bankruptcy that she must ensure that her organisation balances its books and takes money in to cover its costs. It appeared to the committee that one of the reasons for the use of an application fee under the MAP is to ensure that the office of the AIB, as an executive agency, will be self-funding. Again, the committee was divided on the issue but, after a vote, we agreed that £100 was the correct figure, because we recognised the need for the AIB to cover its costs.

Mr MacKenzie is absolutely right to remind me of that fact. I hope that in time that can be taken forward. The committee heard some concern about the maximum debt level of £10,000 for the MAP. However, I can now quickly move on from that issue because the minister has already announced that the level will be increased to £17,000. I think that committee members will generally welcome that. Another important area to cover is the transfer of functions from the courts to the AIB. Strong views were expressed to the committee about whether the AIB has insufficient expertise in the areas of law or insolvency practice to take on some of the roles proposed. Understandably, we heard that from the Law Society and those representing insolvency practitioners. We also heard concerns about potential conflicts of interest. To be fair, there was a robust defence by the Accountant in Bankruptcy, who argued that there would be expertise in her office to deal with those aspects and that there would be internal review. In the end, the committee was content to give its approval in principle to the proposed transfer, although we are inviting the Scottish Government to respond to a number of issues.

I thank you for your forbearance, Presiding Officer, and will just say in closing that I look forward to hearing the minister’s responses in winding up the debate and to receiving further responses in writing from the Scottish Government. However, it was the committee’s view that, on balance, we should support the general principles of the bill at stage 1.

If Labour intends to oppose the bill, why were the Labour members of the committee happy to sign up to the bill’s general principles?

I am seriously wondering whether I heard the member correctly. Is she saying that it is the policy of the Labour Party not to support earnings arrestments for creditors in any circumstances?

I am grateful to the minister for providing clarity on the £200,000 sum, which I now understand is to fund a financial education package. That is clear and welcome. Is the Scottish Government planning to do anything to assist the money advice sector, which told us in evidence that it expects a 6 to 8 per cent increase in cases as a result of the bill? Will that sector get any additional resource?

Mr Gray clearly is the poor man’s Ed Balls this afternoon. Had Labour still been in power, would we have seen an increase in fuel duty in the autumn statement?

Is this a back-bench rebellion?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I am gently reassured by the fact that Bob Doris is unable to support the motion that is before us this afternoon. The Chancellor of the Exchequer’s autumn statement provided good news for Scotland. Not only were we told that the economy is growing again, and growing at an encouraging rate, despite all of the doom and gloom warnings that we have heard from Labour and SNP politicians—and, believe me, there was a lot of doom and gloom in the chamber this afternoon—but there were specific measures to help aid the economic recovery. Michael McMahon said that “self-praise is no praise”, and he is right, so let me tell him some of the organisations that have praised the chancellor’s autumn statement. They include the British Independent Retailers Association, the British Retail Consortium, the Confederation of British Industry, the Federation of Small Businesses, the Institute of Directors and the Scottish Chambers of Commerce—the list goes on. They have all combined to praise the chancellor’s statement. I will concentrate on the help that the UK Government is giving to business and why I believe that the Scottish Government should at least match it. As Gavin Brown pointed out, the freeze on fuel duty will be good news for businesses right across the country, and particularly in rural areas. We have seen the scrapping of employer national insurance contributions for 1.5 million under-21-year-olds across the UK, which will save businesses in Scotland £45 million and support the jobs of 138,000 young people here. In addition, the Barnett consequentials have provided the Scottish Government with an additional sum of more than £300 million over the next two years. Already, debate has opened up on how we should spend that largesse. Perhaps most interesting has been the chancellor’s approach of introducing a 2 per cent cap on the business rate increase, with a special discount for retail premises that sell food and drink and that have a rateable value of £50,000 or below. That will make a real difference to the attempts to breathe life back into our high streets. The Scottish Government and Mr Swinney are fond of telling us that Scotland has the most competitive business tax regime in the UK. Certainly, businesses here benefit from the small business bonus scheme, and I am proud of the role that the Scottish Conservatives played in ensuring that it was introduced earlier than the SNP originally intended. I have no doubt that the scheme has helped many small businesses on our high streets to survive the recent economic downturn. I also welcome Mr Swinney’s admission this afternoon that, had it not been for George Osborne’s cap of the business rates increase at 2 per cent, he would have been happy to impose an inflationary increase of 3.2 per cent.

Mr Swinney should join me in welcoming the step that Mr Osborne has taken. In fact, we should reflect on what a miracle worker Mr Osborne is because, under the devolution settlement, he has no power over the Scottish business rate, but he still ensures that Scottish businesses directly benefit from his announcement, as Mr Swinney follows his lead. Let us hope that that trend continues. The danger is that the competitive advantage that Scotland had is being eroded. We have had the increase in rates on businesses with empty properties and the retail levy, which is an additional rates charge that is not payable by businesses in England and that costs £95 million. The MSPs from all parties who met representatives of Sainsbury’s last week will have heard them say clearly that, as a direct result of that SNP policy, their business no longer believes that Scotland is as profitable a part of the UK to set up new stores as England and Wales. Residents in places such as Pitlochry and Perth who are looking forward to a Sainsbury’s store and wondering why it is not coming need to know that it is the decisions of the SNP Government that are delaying Sainsbury’s from taking forward projects. We have also heard concerns from the business community about the fact that Mr Swinney’s budget plans for the next two years include a £450 million increase in revenue from business rates. Therefore, if there is a competitive advantage, it is being eroded and that is already having a negative impact on the Scottish economy. The SNP’s white paper says that the SNP will take forward a reduction in corporation tax if it has power to do so. However, only a minority of businesses pay corporation tax, whereas virtually every business pays business rates.

A cut in business rates today in Scotland is therefore more beneficial to the economy than a cut in corporation tax would be, because more businesses would benefit. It is within the power of the Scottish Government to deliver that today, rather than wait for jam tomorrow in the unlikely event of independence. The Scottish Government should take action today to help Scottish businesses. We do not want to lose our competitive advantage in the UK, which is why I support Gavin Brown’s motion.

Has Mr Swinney been told by Sainsbury’s what it told some of us at a meeting last week—that it no longer finds Scotland as attractive a place as England and Wales to invest in and to open new supermarkets in?

6. To ask the Scottish Government what research it has conducted on red squirrel resistance to the pox virus. (S4O-02662)

Like the minister, I was interested to read the reports of red squirrels in Merseyside developing immunity to the squirrel pox virus. I encourage him to have the Government agencies work on the issue to see whether further research can be done in Scotland. At the same time, could he have some research conducted into the use of immuno-contraceptives as a means of controlling the grey squirrel population?

Has the minister seen the recent research that shows that workers who are employed on zero-hours contracts are the happiest with their work-life balance of any workers? Does he think that zero-hours contracts are bad in every case?

I thank all the members who signed my motion in order to allow it to be debated this evening and I welcome to the gallery visitors who have an interest in medical research and science. For 100 years, the Medical Research Council has played a vital role in the development of medical research. The MRC was established in 1913, with its main role being the distribution of medical research funds under the terms of the National Insurance Act 1911. Since then, its role has expanded greatly and last year it oversaw the distribution of nearly £770 million of funding, of which nearly £75 million was spent here in Scotland. The Medical Research Council is a United Kingdom Government institution that operates alongside seven other research councils helping to distribute funding throughout universities in the UK. Funding from the MRC also supports development of future research leaders: in 2012-13, £9.8 million of funding won in Scotland was spent on research studentships. MRC research has led to improvements in human health, boosted the economy, established jobs and sustained a competitive environment for world-class medical research in Scotland. The council supports 12 major partnerships with universities, the chief scientist office, UK charities and other research councils. In Scotland, institutions supported by the MRC include the universities of Edinburgh, Glasgow and Dundee, and the Farr institute, which will have representatives from the universities of Dundee, Edinburgh, Aberdeen, Glasgow, St Andrews and Strathclyde, as well as from NHS Scotland. The number of scientific discoveries uncovered thanks to MRC funding are too numerous to mention, but there are a few that deserve proper recognition. Alexander Fleming, one of our greatest Scots, discovered penicillin while receiving funding from the Medical Research Council; of course, he went on to win a Nobel prize in medicine for that achievement. Other noted feats while working with MRC funding include Sir Edward Mallenby’s discovery of the dietary cause for rickets and the 1962 uncovering of the structure of DNA. Hundreds of vital life-changing scientific discoveries have been unearthed by scientists and researchers using MRC funding. The importance of that institution must not be underestimated and is highlighted by the fact that 29 scientists working on MRC projects have won Nobel prizes, including eight since 2001. In the past year, MRC scientists have made some remarkable discoveries. At the University of Dundee, an MRC research study discovered that an inexpensive drug that is used for treating gout holds promise for preventing heart disease and stroke. Researchers at the MRC centre for regenerative medicine at the University of Edinburgh discovered that leprosy bacteria have the ability to hide inside cells of the nervous system and reprogramme them to take on the properties of stem cells. That finding increases our understanding of how leprosy spreads, and it could also help scientists to improve the safety and use of lab-produced stem cells, paving the way for new treatments to repair and replace damaged tissue. Hugely important discoveries are being made in the field of human health thanks to MRC funding. The life sciences sector makes a substantial contribution to the Scottish economy. As of 2012, 15 per cent of UK life science institutions were based in Scotland, resulting in an economic contribution of £1.5 billion gross value added annually and a turnover of £3.1 billion. The MRC also collaborates with the private sector to commercialise research findings, secure income from patent royalties and create spin-out companies and well-paid jobs. Looking at the wider research council picture, I note that Scotland punches well above its weight. UK research council funding is allocated on the basis of excellence through a competitive peer review process regardless of where in the UK it takes place. As part of the UK, Scotland’s well-developed and high-performing research base means that Scottish research institutions have traditionally performed strongly. Last year, Scotland secured £307 million or 10.7 per cent of the UK total of all research council funding—above what our population share would entitle us to. That demonstrates how well our Scottish universities are doing and the excellence of the research that they are producing. When I lodged the motion for debate, I had no idea that it would end up being debated today. Today’s white paper launch is, of course, a significant milestone in the Scottish independence referendum debate and it would be remiss of me in a debate entitled “The Future of Medical Research in Scotland Remains Strong” not to consider the issue of research funding in an independent Scotland. National Governments fund national research. Although UK research councils support international projects, they generally provide funding only to researchers in UK institutions. In the event of independence, the Government of an independent Scottish state would become responsible for deciding how much to spend on research activity and how to distribute research funding.

The minister is entirely right to say that collaborative programmes are taking place, but the total sums involved are much smaller than the sums that are spent nationally. For example, in the situation in Scandinavia, which is oft quoted by the minister and his colleagues as an example of the pooling of research funds, the total sum involved is £13 million annually, compared with the £300 million that is spent in Scotland alone. The difference in scale is substantial. I read with interest the section in the white paper on research councils, which states: “With independence, we would intend to negotiate with the Westminster Government a fair funding formula for Scotland’s contribution based on population share but taking reasonable account of the fact that the amount of research funding received by Scottish institutions may reflect higher or lower levels of funding.” I have read and re-read that sentence, and I am still none the wiser as to what it means. Perhaps the minister could explain in his speech exactly what it means and answer the crucial point, which is the one that people in the sector want to know the answer to—in the event of Scottish independence, will current levels of research funding in medical research and other areas be maintained, go up or go down? That is the crucial point, and the answer needs to be made clear. During its first century, the MRC has been at the forefront of international medical research and has contributed to some of the most significant discoveries in human history. I hope that Scotland, whatever our constitutional future, will continue to benefit from MRC funding and enjoy being part of the MRC’s next century of life-changing research.

6. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government is doing to ensure that statistics presented by Police Scotland are accurate. (S4F-01695)

I thank the First Minister for his response, but he will know that, this week, senior police officers have spoken out against a target culture in the centralised Police Scotland. What assurance can he give us that techniques such as gaming are not being used to present a picture of police activity and recorded crime that is less than accurate?

19. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the rights of academics at universities to express their views on the constitutional debate. (S4O-02610)

I warmly welcome the cabinet secretary’s response. Can we therefore take it that there will be no repetition of the bullying approach by his ministerial colleague towards an academic at the University of Dundee who had the temerity to speak out in public in support of the continuation of the United Kingdom?

I welcome the opportunity to debate the defence industry in Scotland. The Scottish defence industry is one of our highest-value industry sectors. It employs nearly 40,000 people and is underpinned by the world’s fourth-largest defence budget—that of the Ministry of Defence. In my region of Mid Scotland and Fife, we have great companies such as Raytheon Systems in Glenrothes, which employs more than 500 people, and Rolls-Royce, which has a presence in Dunfermline. Elsewhere in Scotland, Vector Aerospace is in Perth, there is Babcock in Rosyth, which works on aircraft carriers, and there are great companies such as Selex ES, Thales, QinetiQ and, of course, BAE Systems on the Clyde. All those companies rely on exporting, of course, but they are underpinned by UK domestic contracts from the Ministry of Defence, and they are key components of the Scottish economy. The jobs that they support are often well paid, highly skilled and much sought after, and we should be very concerned about anything that threatens them.

Margo MacDonald makes a perfectly fair point about the long-term future prospects for the Clyde, and Johann Lamont touched very effectively on that in her speech in talking about the need to diversify in the long term. However, we need to deal with what is happening in the next two, five and 10 years, of course, which is why the type 26 frigate contracts will be so important.

No. I need to make some progress, if I can. The new development that the debate touches on is BAE’s announcement of job cuts. Keith Brown was entirely right to concentrate on the fact that that is very bad news for people in Portsmouth, and it is bad news for many of those who are employed in Govan, but it means that Govan will have a future, and we should welcome that. We should also welcome the fact that the UK Government has proactively brought forward three new offshore patrol vessels to fill the gap in work between the completion of the Queen Elizabeth class aircraft carriers and the new frigates. That point is covered in my amendment. The key issue in the debate is what will happen if there is a yes vote in the referendum. The simple fact is that, since the second world war, no UK Government has ever had a complex warship built in any foreign country. That is the answer to Willie Rennie’s question, which the minister could not bring himself to answer. If Scotland votes yes, post the referendum Scotland will be a foreign country, and we know that the contracts for those frigates will not be signed until after September next year.

I will give way briefly.

Of course it was BAE Systems that made the decision, but the UK Government will make the final decision on where the contracts are placed. Why would the UK Government break with convention and place the contracts anywhere outwith its own home country? Let me pose a question to members on the SNP benches. If we imagine what would happen in an independent country, would the Government of an independent Scotland with a shipbuilding capacity ever place a warship contract outwith Scotland? No—it is utterly inconceivable that that would ever happen.

I have given way twice already. [Interruption.]

I am not giving way. I have made that clear. Can members imagine the political reaction in the House of Commons if the Secretary of State for Defence got up and said, “We’re going to place these contracts in a foreign country”? Can members imagine the reaction from the representatives of Portsmouth and elsewhere? It is utterly inconceivable. [Interruption.]

No. I have given way twice already. Mr Hepburn will have his chance to speak.

I am sure that, in this debate, we will hear about the situation in Norway. We heard about it from the Deputy First Minister the other week. The most advanced frigate in the Norwegian navy is the Nansen-class frigate, which is currently being built in Spain under a €2.4 billion contract. It is true that Norway builds ships for the offshore oil industry, but globally new ship orders in 2012 were at their lowest level since 1998 and it is a difficult, competitive market. We should be looking to diversify, but we should not underestimate how difficult that will be when we see commercial vessels that are required in Scotland today being built in the far east and elsewhere. Of course, if we are interested in diversification, the real question is why we did not start before now. Why did the Scottish Government not make efforts before today to start this very important work with a task force? It is telling that, in his speech and his amendment to the motion, Mr Brown fell back on that old stalwart that is used whenever the SNP is in trouble and referenced Trident. Trident money is being spent again. According to my calculations, it has already been spent 20 times, but today we have it being spent for the 21st time, this time on defence procurement. What Mr Brown forgets is that Trident already supports jobs in Scotland and, if he scrapped that programme, those jobs would be lost. Despite the protestations from the SNP benches, it is absolutely clear that the future of Govan is threatened by independence. Those jobs will be under threat if people vote yes in the referendum in September next year. That is why I support the Labour motion and my amendment. I move amendment S4M-08348.1, to insert after “Type 26 global combat ship”: “; welcomes the announcement by the UK Government that three new offshore patrol vessels will be built in Scotland, sustaining the workforce between the completion of the Queen Elizabeth Class aircraft carriers and the new generation of frigates, securing the vital skills needed to build the UK’s future warships”.

The cabinet secretary will know that a Roman Catholic adoption agency is currently having its charitable status threatened because it does not recognise same-sex couples. What guarantees can he give us that, if the bill is passed, faith groups and service providers that do not recognise same-sex marriage will not, similarly, have their charitable status in any way questioned?

I thank the minister for advance sight of his statement. With regard to his final point, I welcome the fact that he has now received a constructive response from Ed Davey to his latest letter—although I sense that it rather took the wind out of his sails—and express the wish that the healthy dialogue on energy issues that Scotland’s two Governments have had up to now will continue. What we need in Scotland and across the UK is not only a balanced energy policy but a properly informed debate. I have to say that I was rather confused by the minister’s comments on the cost of new nuclear power and the partial picture that he painted. I have with me the draft contract for difference strike prices, which shows that the price per megawatt hour will be £105 to £120 for biomass; £95 for hydro; £125 for large solar photovoltaic; £155 for offshore wind; and £100 for onshore wind. As I am sure the minister well knows, the strike price that has been agreed for the new nuclear station at Hinkley Point is £92.50, which is cheaper than the price for wind, solar, hydro, biomass or tidal and, unlike wind, nuclear has no problems with intermittency or unpredictability. The facts might not fit the minister’s narrative, but does he not have a duty to come to the chamber and give us the whole picture, not just the parts that suit him?

I am pleased to contribute to this debate on behalf of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, which is the lead committee on the bill. I thank all those who provided written and oral evidence to the committee, as well as my fellow committee members and members of other committees that considered the bill at stage 1. I also thank our team of clerks, who supported us so ably, and the members of the Scottish Parliament information centre who provided advice. The committee welcomed the introduction of the bill and agreed to recommend to the Parliament that its general principles be agreed, although I should say that that was not a unanimous view of the committee, as two members dissented. As the lead committee, we took evidence on parts 1, 3 and 4. I will concentrate on the issues that are raised in our stage 1 report. As the minister pointed out, the bill is wide ranging and covers a range of discrete policy areas. Part 1 has three main proposals: first, it gives the Scottish ministers the power to encourage or improve consistency in the exercise by regulators of their functions; secondly, it introduces a new duty on regulators to contribute to achieving sustainable economic growth; and, finally, it includes a code of practice to assist regulators. The aim of the enabling power is to improve how regulations are developed and applied so that they create a more favourable set of business conditions while delivering environmental benefits. Standardisation of the way in which regulations are implemented is intended to tackle the economic impact on the business community of dealing with inconsistently applied regulations. The committee heard concerns that the power for ministers would centralise decision making and, thus, remove democratic accountability and local knowledge from the decision-making process. That point was made particularly by local authorities. The committee welcomed the fact that the Scottish Government and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities agreed a memorandum of understanding to achieve consistency in the exercise of regulatory functions and future national standards. We also welcomed the collaborative approach that that demonstrates and hope that it will result in national standards that are transparent and workable and which take account of local circumstances.

I thank the minister for that assurance, which I am sure committee members will welcome. The committee heard that there is widespread support for inclusion in the bill of exemptions that enable regulators to opt out of national standards where exceptional local circumstances exist. Witnesses asked for clarity on the circumstances in which an exemption would apply and for a consistent approach to be adopted. We recommended that the exemption criteria be included in the forthcoming code of practice or the guidance that will accompany the bill. It is a little disappointing that the minister did not agree that that is necessary, but the proposal to publish ministerial directions in respect of the exemptions or variations is welcome. It would be helpful if, when he speaks, the minister could clarify where those directions will be published and how he will ensure that regulators are aware of them. I turn to probably the most contentious issue in the bill, which is the duty on regulators to contribute to achieving sustainable economic growth. We received a lot of evidence on that provision and witnesses raised a number of concerns about it. We also heard that, at the moment, there is no legal definition of sustainable economic growth and, as a consequence, regulators could face legal challenges in respect of how they choose to comply with the duty. The committee was clear that, for regulators to be able to comply with the duty, they must understand its meaning. During the evidence-taking sessions, we heard many different definitions of sustainable economic growth—somebody even suggested the one from Wikipedia, although I am not sure that that is helpful to the law-making process—but the Scottish Government provided us with its definition and explained that that is the one that it wants regulators to use. Because, in the end, it might be a matter for the courts to decide, the Scottish Parliament and Government have a duty to minimise the risk. The committee asked the Scottish Government to ensure that its definition of sustainable economic growth be explicitly stated. If it will not appear in the bill, it must be absolutely clear in subsequent guidance. We also asked for a commitment to be made that drafts of guidance be submitted to Parliament for scrutiny prior to being published. In his response to our report, the minister indicated that the definition will be included in the code of practice, which is subject to parliamentary scrutiny, but he made no mention of providing in the guidance to regulators details of how they will be expected to comply with the duty. Given the importance of that point, I would be grateful if he would address it when he speaks later. The Law Society of Scotland, among others, expressed the firm view that the duty raises questions of legal enforceability. Many witnesses questioned how regulators would be able to demonstrate that they have contributed to achieving sustainable economic growth and expressed concerns that it might leave their decisions open to legal challenge. There was a particular concern in relation to planning applications and, therefore, we were pleased that the minister decided to exclude the planning functions of local authorities from compliance with the new duty. Many witnesses also raised concerns about a conflict of interest. We heard in an intervention by Jenny Marra about the existing definition of sustainable development. Some people said that it would be better for that to be in the bill because it is better understood. The Scottish Government was quite clear in its response to that and, in evidence, the minister said that regulators were not to prioritise sustainable economic growth over other duties and that the code of practice would provide guidance to them on balancing competing duties. That, again, is why the code is so important. The committee wants to take evidence from stakeholders on the draft code of practice before the final version is laid before the Parliament. We also welcome the Scottish Government’s commitment to publish the guidance that will accompany the bill and to consult widely on the draft code. I turn to part 3 of the bill, which deals with three points, the most contentious of which is the issue of linking the level of planning fees to the performance of a planning authority. It is clear to the committee that an efficient and effective planning system benefits us all. We heard a lot of views from the business community that it wants to see a more streamlined planning system. The business community was of the view that the 20 per cent uplift in planning fees that will be introduced should be reflected in an improvement in planning authority performance. However, many of those who gave us evidence thought that reducing the income to underresourced planning authorities would only exacerbate the problem. The committee welcomed the minister’s confirmation that positive measures would be used initially before any reduction in planning fees. When it came to measuring performance, the committee was not convinced that the Scottish Government’s statistical data could adequately determine the performance of planning authorities. The committee welcomed confirmation that the Scottish Government will now use quantitative and qualitative measures to assess performance. We are aware that COSLA remains opposed to linking planning fee levels to the agreed performance markers. It is important that that issue is resolved prior to the conclusion of the bill’s parliamentary passage. Any update on progress from the minister today would be welcome.

Right on cue, minister.

I am grateful to the minister for that intervention. It is interesting that, during stage 1 evidence sessions, there was a clear divergence of opinion between the business community, which was very enthusiastic about those proposals, and people on the other side, particularly in local authorities, who were much more concerned. The adoption of a conciliatory approach by the Scottish Government, which is more about carrot than stick, will go down very well with COSLA. I am aware that I am short of time so I will briefly cover a couple more points. The committee largely welcomes the marine licensing provisions in the bill, which will streamline the current process. Similarly, there was unanimous support for improving the certificate of compliance for mobile food vans so that those who travel around the country selling burgers and ice creams no longer have to get 32 separate licences but can rely on one, which I am sure will be very welcome. The Government has indicated that a number of amendments will be introduced at stage 2. One of those is on primary authority, which we look forward to taking evidence on at stage 2. There was some suggestion at the last minute that there will be other proposals: one on the imposition of fixed penalties in relation to carrier bags, one on the abandoned mines provisions in the Control of Pollution Act 1974 to deal with cases in which contaminated land falls to the Crown, and one on allowing the Scottish ministers to authorise fuels that can be burned in smoke control areas. We look forward to hearing more details about those amendments, either in the course of the debate or subsequently. This is a comprehensive, wide-ranging bill. It is well intentioned and has generally been welcomed. It was certainly the majority view of the committee that it should proceed.

6. To ask the Deputy First Minister what the Scottish Government’s position is on the Student Awards Agency for Scotland’s finding that the level of grants paid to university students from the poorest backgrounds has fallen by 3 per cent. (S4F-01654)

Not only are grants to the poorest students in Scotland falling; the participation in higher education in England of those from the most deprived groups is consistently higher than it is in Scotland. In England, that participation is actually on the increase. Will the Deputy First Minister now accept, in light of that incontrovertible evidence on the oft-repeated mantra from her party colleagues, that student or graduate fees are not deterring those from less well-off backgrounds in England from accessing universities, as its record is better than ours?

Look at the evidence.

I welcome the cabinet secretary’s statement and I thank him for providing an advance copy of it. As he fairly said, the closure of the Grangemouth plant would have been catastrophic for those whose jobs depended on it and deeply damaging to the wider Scottish economy. I commend not only the cabinet secretary and his Scottish Government colleagues but the Secretary of State for Scotland and his colleagues in the UK Government for their prompt action in helping to keep the plant open. The Scottish people are clearly well served by their two Governments working closely together. We cannot forget that it was the irresponsible actions of Unite the union that put this plant at risk. No one in the Scottish Labour Party has dared to criticise its union paymasters, but can the cabinet secretary tell us how the Scottish Government will foster a more responsible approach to industrial relations in future? Secondly, the Grangemouth petrochemical plant’s future will depend on the importation of huge quantities of shale gas across the Atlantic from the United States. Does the cabinet secretary agree that the plant’s future would be more secure with a domestic source of shale gas? How will the Scottish Government encourage the development of a shale gas industry in Scotland?

I welcome the fact that we are having this debate, and I welcome the opening comments from the minister and the manner in which he made them. In a moment, I will address more specifically the wording of the motion and our amendment and the concern that we have, but I think that it is fair to say at the outset that there is little difference between us, as the minister fairly accepted. We just have a concern about one or two minor aspects of his motion. The minister is right to highlight the importance of the issue. We have a huge resource in fossil fuels in Scotland and in the UK more widely. We have fossil fuel burning power stations, for example at Longannet in my parliamentary region, which provides a high percentage—sometimes as high as 40 per cent—of Scotland’s electricity needs in burning coal, and we have other gas-burning stations. We have hundreds of years’ worth of reserves of coal in the ground. Indeed, the issue with coal at present, as we have debated previously, is that the world price is so low that it is almost becoming uneconomic to mine it in our own country. We also have continuing supplies of North Sea gas, and we have the opportunity that is shale gas which, as we have heard many times, has been exploited in the US. Of course, the issue with those sources of fuel is that burning them and releasing carbon into the atmosphere is incompatible with the climate change targets that we have set, so we must try to tackle that. We could move wholesale to low-carbon sources of energy, such as renewables and nuclear, but they come at a cost. We have debated many times the fact that the higher costs of renewables and nuclear relative to burning fossil fuels means that it is beyond their reach to provide 100 per cent of our needs at present if we are also to be aware of affordability and the cost of living, which we are always debating in Parliament. If we can find a way of burning fossil fuels economically and affordably while treating the carbon, we have an ideal solution and can continue to do both. I was pleased to hear the minister accept that if we are to develop more renewables—at the moment, that means, in particular, more onshore and offshore wind—we need to balance their intermittence. Our having more gas-burning stations is the simplest way of doing that, but we have to capture the carbon that comes from that gas. CCS is absolutely vital for developing an energy industry at an affordable cost and for fulfilling our climate change obligations. It also provides the opportunity to increase the rate of exploitation of North Sea oil reserves by pumping carbon under the sea. It is good news—I was pleased to hear the minister accept it—that the UK Government has supported the project at Peterhead and the white rose project in Yorkshire, and that the UK has the potential to be a world leader in the technology. The CCS road map that the Department of Energy and Climate Change has published has a number of proposals. There is a CCS commercialisation programme with £1 billion-worth of capital funding to support commercial-scale CCS. The two bidders have been successful in going to the next stage of that. There is a £125 million four-year co-ordinated research and development and innovation programme, which covers fundamental research and understanding, and the establishment of a new UK CCS research centre. Universities throughout the UK, including in Scotland, are benefiting from that investment. There is also the development of a market for low-carbon electricity through electricity market reform, which relates to the feed-in tariffs for contracts for difference. There is intervention to address key barriers to the deployment of CCS, including work to support the CCS supply chain, to develop transport and storage networks, to prepare for the deployment of CCS on industrial applications and to ensure that the right regulatory framework is in place. There is also international engagement, so that we share the knowledge that we generate with other countries in the world and learn from them at the same time. That will help to accelerate cost reduction. A lot of work is going on within the UK Government and DECC; it is good that the Scottish Government is supporting that work. Scotland will receive many opportunities from that—not only at Peterhead, but further afield. As I said, there is a lot in the minister’s motion with which we agree; I was just a little bit concerned about it being so specific about the competition needing to have more than two bidders. I was also a little bit concerned that it mentions a specific project—the captain clean energy project. That is not to say that I in any way disagree with the project. Although I was not able to get to the briefing this morning due to my having other engagements, I had the benefit of meeting its promoters some months ago. It is a great opportunity and I would certainly like it to progress. Indeed, there will be the opportunity for that to happen as the commercialisation programme proceeds, if more money becomes available or is freed up from the current process. However, I was concerned about being too specific about the project at this stage, so I lodged my amendment. I also want to draw specific attention to the opportunity for Scottish universities from the innovation funding to which I referred a moment ago. Our amendment is intended to be a gentle push in the right direction for the Scottish Government, rather than a fundamental disagreement with the direction that it is taking. I read with great interest Patrick Harvie’s amendment. I must say that I agree with a lot of it too; it makes a lot of sense. I am not quite sure, however, about the point that we undermine our climate change arguments if we promote CCS. The whole point of carbon capture and storage is that we can continue to use fossil fuels while removing the dangerous element, which is the carbon. It does not seem to me to be contradictory, but perhaps in a moment Patrick Harvie will explain.

I am grateful for that clarification. Of course, we should all be wary of pretexts, so I am grateful to Patrick Harvie for making that clear. I want to touch on Longannet, because the minister mentioned it and I am sure that it will come up later in the debate. I want to get my retaliation in first in relation to the Longannet situation. I am disappointed, as many members are, that the Longannet CCS project did not proceed, because Longannet is within my parliamentary region. The background is that the consortium behind the project, which consisted of Scottish Power, National Grid and Shell, told DECC in October 2011 of a number of difficulties with the project, such as that the costs were increasing and were up to £1.5 billion or as high as £1.9 billion, which was above the DECC limit of £1 billion. In addition, there were technical issues, such as the length of the underwater pipeline—of course, that issue is avoided by having the new trial project in Peterhead—and the cost of upgrading it to comply with the EU directive on large combustion plants. Although it was unfortunate that the project could not proceed, it is entirely understandable why DECC said that it did not make sense to invest more money in the scheme. The Comptroller and Auditor General’s report on the issue in March 2012 laid the blame firmly at the door of the previous UK Government. The report concluded that the competition was launched in 2007 with insufficient planning and recognition of the commercial risks. It was unfortunate that the previous UK Government went about it in that way. I hope that having the new plant at Peterhead will mean that Scotland will see the opportunity that was at risk of being lost when the Longannet project came to an end. I will touch on one further point, in relation to the provenness of the technology, as mentioned in Patrick Harvie’s amendment and in RSPB Scotland’s briefing for the debate. It has also come up at the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee. The minister is quite right to say that the technology works, but we do not know whether it works at an economic cost that would allow us to continue to burn fossil fuels on a financially stable basis. Scottish Power and SSE certainly questioned that when they gave evidence to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee back in February this year. It is an important issue, because if the Scottish Government is to meet its obligations in terms of climate change legislation and—specifically—“Low Carbon Scotland: Meeting our Emissions Reduction Targets 2013-2027. The Second Report on Proposals and Policies”, or RPP2, it must ensure that carbon capture and storage does work, because it will be an essential component. The point that I and others have raised at committee and which is raised in the RSPB briefing is that there is no plan B—no alternative. So, we are keeping our fingers crossed and hoping that CCS will work, that it will be affordable and that it will present a strong economic case. I hope that it does—I am sure that the Scottish Government agrees with me on that—but at the moment there is no guarantee of that, which is why the experimental programmes are being taken forward in Peterhead and Yorkshire. If it does not work, the Scottish Government will have a very serious problem. I very much welcome the debate and the way in which the minister introduced it. I also welcome the partnership between the Scottish and UK Governments on the issue. Scotland has an opportunity to be a world leader in developing this vital new technology, which is something that we should all embrace. I move amendment S4M-07974.2, to leave out from “but would like” to end and insert: “; trusts that progress will be made over an appropriate timescale that takes full account of the need for effective planning at all stages; considers that the announcement of the Peterhead Power Project as a preferred bidder is an important development of CCS on a commercial scale; welcomes the significant funding being made available by the Department of Energy and Climate Change for research into CCS and CO2 monitoring in Scottish universities, and recognises the need for policy certainty to enable much-needed private sector investment in the field.”

I started my opening speech by welcoming the positive tone of the debate, so I am pleased that the positive tone has generally continued throughout the two and a half hours of debate. I think that we have perhaps broken a record in a debate in this parliamentary session—we had to wait more than an hour before independence was mentioned, and then it was Margaret McDougall who mentioned it. I think that she was the only member who mentioned the constitutional question. That is very unusual, as we all know. Stewart Stevenson welcomed the UK Government investment in the project at Peterhead, and even Mike MacKenzie abandoned his partisanship at the door and encouraged us all to work together. From Nigel Don, we had a physics lesson—or a chemistry lesson; maybe it was both—in a typically thoughtful speech about the cost and necessity of experimental schemes. I will pick up on two or three points that have come up in the debate. First, Iain Gray picked up a point from the motion and the minister’s opening speech. The motion notes that there should be “more than the two preferred bidders” in the CCS competition. It is not clear to me whether the minister is calling for more money from the UK Government or wants the cash to be spread more thinly. Perhaps he will clarify that when he winds up. Secondly, reliance on CCS, which I mentioned in my opening speech, has been a bit of a running theme. Patrick Harvie, Claudia Beamish, Liam McArthur and other members made reference to the issue—it is Patrick Harvie’s Frankenstein’s monster. We know that CCS is technically possible. The minister was right when he intervened to say that during Patrick Harvie’s speech. We know that all the elements are technically possible. The question is not so much whether we can do it as it is whether we can do it economically. That is why the experimental projects are going ahead. CCS is not here yet; it is an opportunity and it is a prospect. We should be optimistic about that—we are always optimistic and looking forward—but our being optimistic does not mean that CCS is going to happen, so we need to be a little cautious about it. There is no plan B in RPP2 from the Scottish Government in the event that CCS does not work.

I have the perfect answer for Mr MacKenzie, because I was about to quote from the Committee on Climate Change’s report in 2008, which addressed that very issue. Patrick Harvie should love this, and Mr MacKenzie will love it even more. The CCC said: “CCS is currently not a proven technology at full commercial scale. If it were unavailable at reasonable cost, the MARKAL model suggests that a huge expansion of nuclear power would be the least-cost option”. That is not a prospect that concerns me, but perhaps Mr Harvie—and Mr MacKenzie, on the SNP benches—might find it a bit too much to stomach. The minister had better hope that CCS works. The emissions performance standard for new fossil fuel burning power stations is mentioned in the briefing from RSPB Scotland. It says that the UK-wide standard that is being set, which the Scottish Government has accepted, is not high enough, and argues for a higher Scottish standard. That reminded me of an interesting exchange between Fergus Ewing and Rhoda Grant at the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee a few months ago, when we had the rather surreal experience of watching the SNP minister argue vehemently for keeping to a UK standard, while Rhoda Grant, a Labour Party member, argued that we need a separate Scottish standard. In that case, I think, the minister was correct. As we heard in evidence, the difficulty that people from the industry have with a higher standard is that they would simply not invest in new plant in Scotland if they could build it cheaper south of the border, so we would still end up using the same power but would be importing it from down south. The jobs would be there instead of in Scotland, and we would get no economic benefit. The minister was right about that, although it might seem to be counterintuitive. Three principles should underlie a modern energy policy: affordability, security of supply and decarbonisation. It is always difficult to achieve a balance between those three principles. Also, as we are seeing at the moment, there is a conflict between affordability and decarbonisation because decarbonised forms of energy are more expensive. CCS gives us the opportunity to bridge that gap, if it can be done economically. Joan McAlpine mentioned that China is building one new coal-fired power station per week. This year, Germany is opening three new coal-burning power stations as a result of its Government’s deeply mistaken decision to stop relying on nuclear power and to move instead to a high-carbon supply using coal. If we are going to burn more coal, we need to deal with the carbon, which is why commercialisation of CCS is so important and why the UK Government’s stance, which is complementary to and supportive of that of the Scottish Government, has been so warmly welcomed. I am pleased to be able to finish my remarks by saying how positive the debate has been. It has been good to see pretty much all members on the same page.

I am sure that the minister will have seen the comments from the Federation of Small Businesses suggesting that the closure of public counters in police stations will be bad for local economies. Does he agree that small towns such as Blairgowrie, in John Swinney’s constituency, will be adversely affected if those closures go ahead?

I congratulate Nigel Don on securing the debate and thank him for his thoughtful speech in opening it, which was in slight contrast to the rather splendidly partisan speech that we just had from Mike MacKenzie. I agree with Nigel Don and the other previous speakers that we should pay tribute to Energy Action Scotland for all its work over the past 30 years. As convener of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, I know that Norrie Kerr, Elizabeth Gore and their colleagues are regular visitors to the committee, and they are very welcome with their insights into this area of public policy. Other members have referred to the 2016 target to eliminate fuel poverty, which is the sort of target that civil servants describe as challenging, given the situation that we are now in. With levels of fuel poverty in Scotland on the increase—the figure is above 30 per cent and perhaps even approaching 40 per cent—the challenge is even greater today than it has been in the past. There are three elements to fuel poverty: income levels generally; fuel costs; and levels of efficiency. I will not spend much time discussing the first, as that involves a much broader debate about income levels in the economy. On the second, we have seen a rise in wholesale fuel costs in recent years. That is partly due to a rise in the cost of energy, mainly from fossil fuels, but it is also a result of the green levies that we all pay on our electricity tariff. If we are to tackle fuel poverty, we need to have lower-cost energy, and we need to square that with the ambitious targets that we have set for climate change. Liam McArthur mentioned Ed Miliband’s magic solution. I will not spend much time attacking that—I will leave that to my good friend Fergus Ewing, who is much better at it than I am—but I am not sure that it is a solution because, of course, it is trying to rig the market and all that the energy companies would do would be to hike their prices in advance of a freeze and get the benefit of even higher prices for a longer time. Incidentally, it would do nothing for those of us who, like me, live in a semi-rural situation and who are therefore off grid. Fixing the prices would not help us.

I would be delighted.

No, I think that that is an unduly pessimistic view on the green deal. A few weeks ago, I was privileged to host an event in Parliament for the green deal, and there was a great deal of interest in it from people from all parts of Scotland. Perhaps if Mr MacKenzie had come along, he would have seen that for himself. On energy prices, we need to be aware that renewable energy, which is so beloved by many members, is expensive energy and that we are paying a high cost for it. We should look at the States and the exploitation of shale gas, which has reduced wholesale energy costs by about 50 per cent and saved carbon at the same time. We need to be focused on lower-cost sources of energy. The other element is energy efficiency, which Nigel Don mentioned. Energy Action Scotland calculates that we need £200 million per annum for energy efficiency measures if we are going to make progress. We need to get a share of that from the energy companies. Are we getting that at the moment? I do not think that we know, as we do not have that information, and the Scottish Government needs to ensure that it provides it. We need to know whether the money that the Government is putting in—I think that it is £79 million in the current budget—is to be matched by the private sector. We need to know who is getting the money and whether it is going to the right people and to the hard-to-reach households. Are we providing enough from the public sector? In the current draft budget, the Scottish Government has decided to reallocate £10 million from the fuel poverty budget. Does that make sense if fuel poverty is the priority that we want it to be? I am not sure that it does. Energy Action Scotland has helped to put such issues on the agenda and it is valuable. I hope that, in 30 years, we will not still need it but, if we do, I hope that it continues to do its excellent work.

I am a little confused by what the minister has just said. My understanding was that the Scottish National Party’s position was that in the event of independence it would want to retain the single UK energy market, so that the subsidies currently paid by 60 million consumers across the UK would continue to support Scotland’s renewables industry sector. Is the minister saying that that is no longer SNP policy?

I am grateful to Mr McMillan for reminding the Parliament that Labour introduced measures to end the spare room subsidy for private sector tenants. Can he remind us how the SNP voted in the House of Commons when Labour brought in that change?

I start on a note of disappointment. I am disappointed that Patrick Harvie’s Thatcherite phase has lasted less than 48 hours and I am very disappointed with the analysis that John Swinney gave in his opening speech, because all that we had from him was the same tired old mantra that it is all the UK Government’s fault and that the problem is the UK Government’s misguided economic policies. He was seemingly oblivious to the signs of economic recovery that we have been talking about in the chamber and which we have heard about over the past month or two.

Not at the moment. I want to make some progress if I can. Let us remind ourselves of some of the things that Mr Swinney has said. In 2011, he said: “the Westminster coalition’s Plan A is an abject failure”. He was then joined by his SNP colleague, Stewart Hosie, the SNP Treasury spokesman in Westminster, who said in August 2012: “The UK Government’s economic plan simply isn’t working”. Mr Hosie went on to say on 19 February this year: “The Chancellor’s failure to ‘go for growth’ risks a lost decade of economic stagnation if he doesn’t waken up and invest for the future now … Plan A has failed. It’s time to go for growth.” A month later, Mr Hosie said exactly the same thing. He could not be bothered to think up a new soundbite. He said: “Plan A has failed. It’s time to go for growth.” All proved to be absolutely wrong. John Swinney rose— Perhaps Mr Swinney will give us an explanation—or perhaps he has seen the light.

Throughout that entire period, Mr Swinney was urging the UK Government to borrow even more money, so I will not take any lessons from him on that point. [Interruption.]

The SNP’s sole solution, which we heard from Mr Swinney and from all the back benchers—the same old solution—is independence. We have heard that all week, we have heard it for the past year, and we will hear it non-stop for the next year.

Not just now. What I find inexplicable is that the party that says that it believes in complete freedom of action for the Scottish economy wants to tie its own hands. Yesterday, we heard an interesting speech from Rob Gibson—I do not think that he is back in the chamber this afternoon—in which he told us that UK energy policy was holding back the development of the renewable energy industry in Scotland. He was seemingly oblivious to the fact that it is the policy of Fergus Ewing—who sits on Rob Gibson’s front bench—that, in the event of independence, we would be tied to UK energy policy and nothing would change because we need the electricity bill payers of England and Wales to subsidise our renewable energy industry. As Willie Rennie and Richard Baker pointed out, we would be part of a currency zone with the rest of the United Kingdom, so the Bank of England would set our interest rates, be the lender of last resort and set our borrowing and spending limits. That is the Bank of England in a foreign country, answerable to a foreign Government. Bruce Crawford made an interesting speech in which he said that we need to cut our ties with the City of London. That is not the policy of his Government. The policy of his Government is that the City of London will still have our lender of last resort and our central bank. If ever we need evidence of links between monetary union and political union, we simply need to look at what has happened in the eurozone over the past five years. The lesson is that a monetary union requires a high degree of political union to work. If members do not believe that, they should just ask anyone from Greece.

I would be delighted to take a devastating intervention from Mr Brodie.

I am not entirely sure what the relevance of that intervention is. I sometimes wonder whether Mr Brodie is on the same planet as the rest of us. I have a point to make about the currency zone. Members of the SNP will be very familiar with the work of the economists Jim and Margaret Cuthbert. Last week, they produced an interesting paper, “Economic Policy Options for an Independent Scotland”, which says: “It is a very good question ... whether the constraints which Scotland ... would have to concede in order to establish a joint UK currency union would actually be consistent with any meaningful form of independence.” According to the SNP’s favourite economists, a currency union is not compatible with independence. I turn to the Royal Mail, which Richard Baker and Stuart McMillan mentioned. This afternoon, we had a shock announcement from the First Minister—it came as a shock to us, and I am sure that it came as a shock to Mr Swinney, who, on television last night, was asked six times whether it was SNP policy to renationalise the Royal Mail but would not answer the question. Maybe Mr Swinney will tell us when he knew about that change in policy. Did he hear about it at the same time that the rest of us did—at 12.20 this afternoon?

What is the timescale for renationalisation? How is it to be paid for? That just shows the weakness at the heart of this Government—it makes it up as it goes along.

Will Rob Gibson give way?

I welcome the Government’s motion and the opportunity to debate this very important issue that touches communities across Scotland. When I saw the Government’s motion, I thought that this would be a consensual debate with parties across the chamber coming together to agree a way forward for an industry that employs so many people. I did not reckon with Willie Rennie breaking through the ring of steel around the Liberal Democrats’ conference in Glasgow and making his way along the M8 to join us in concert with Patrick Harvie, with their joint scorched-earth approach to the coal industry. Perhaps I will have to check the television clips from the 1980s of the famous confrontation during the miners strike and, if I look closely, I might see a youthful and diminutive Patrick Harvie joined by a youthful Willie Rennie on the picket line with placards that urge the National Coal Board and Margaret Thatcher’s Government to go further and faster in closing down the coal mines than they had planned. We should reject such a pseudo-Thatcherite approach and support the coal industry in Scotland because it has an important role in driving Scotland’s economy. In addition to the sums extracted and the thousands of jobs that are provided in regions such as my own in Fife, it is worth noting that, even today, around 40 per cent of Scotland’s electricity comes from coal. It forms one part of a broad energy mix that provides us with security of supply and stability of price, and it is likely to retain that status for many years to come. As the minister said, however, we have seen an unprecedented collapse in the Scottish opencast mining industry. It has suffered at the hands of a perfect storm, with rising costs and falling global prices creating pressures that have overwhelmed even well-established companies—but coal still has a future. As demand in the expanding economies of Brazil, Russia, India and China—the BRIC countries—increases, we can also point to a growing market closer to home. Following its Government’s decision—one with which I fundamentally disagree—to close its nuclear plants, Germany is going down the road of opening six new coal-fired power stations this year, with more in the pipeline before 2020. It is utterly misguided to be closing down low-carbon energy sources to replace them with high-carbon sources, but it disproves the line in Patrick Harvie’s amendment that says that “the market for coal ... is declining”. It is quite the opposite. The world market for coal is far from declining. There are still great opportunities there.

There is, of course, no disagreement that coal produces more CO2. All that I was doing was pointing out a factual inaccuracy in Patrick Harvie’s amendment: demand for coal across the world is not decreasing. If Patrick Harvie is concerned about CO2 emissions, I suggest that we look at what has happened in the United States, where fracking for shale gas has substantially reduced not just CO2 emissions but costs to the consumer and to industry. Let us get back to the point in hand: what do we do about the mining industry in Scotland? I welcome the creation of a coal industry task force by the minister, and I am privileged to be a part of it. As the motion points out, it is an excellent example of constructive partnership working between a diverse assortment of public bodies at the UK, Scottish and local levels joining with industry and trade union representatives. We should be pleased with the progress that is being made even in the short time that the task force has existed. The key issue that we have to tackle is the troublesome question of restoration, as the minister said. With proper oversight, the issue should not have arisen. The Scottish Government’s 2010 Scottish planning policy document indicates that “Planning authorities should require a financial guarantee to ensure adequate restoration and aftercare”. That says “should”, not “may” or “can”. Those agreements should be in place before planning permission is granted. We know that that sometimes did not happen in the past, and it is now clear that existing restoration bonds have been insufficient to meet the bills for projects that have recently collapsed. Many local communities were initially sceptical about having opencast mining in their back yards and they are now concerned that they will have to pick up the bill, perhaps through their council tax, for the restoration of the landscape to its original condition. There have been various suggestions about how we should deal with the question of restoration guarantees for the future. The central principle should always remain that the minimum of cost should fall to the taxpayer because these are commercial operations. Concerns have been expressed previously about the possibility of pay-by-extraction schemes, the suggestion being that those schemes would by no means guarantee the restoration costs throughout the entire lifetime of a project. I have a great deal of sympathy for those concerns. I also appreciate that we are walking a very fine line between providing appropriate assurances that all foreseeable eventualities are prepared for and placing insurmountable burdens on a productive industry. There is a balance to be struck between providing necessary regulation and ensuring that opencast mining continues to provide much-needed jobs and revenue in different parts of the country that have perhaps faced a difficult economic situation in recent years. I welcome the work that is being done by the coal industry task force and the discussions that are taking place under the auspices of the restoration bond working group. We look forward to seeing more details. I am heartened by the creation of the Scottish Mines Restoration Trust and the initial cash injection that it has received. We recognise that restoration projects are far from straightforward, so sharing expertise and providing support and a point of contact for stakeholders to seek advice will, I hope, ensure improvements in restoration strategy and techniques across Scotland. The objectives that the Government has outlined in the motion are sensible and reasonable. We share with the Government an appreciation for the work of the industry and the need for a positive approach to its current problems. We fundamentally disagree with the approach that the Liberal Democrats and the Greens have taken in the debate because we believe that opencast mining in Scotland has a future; the responsibility now falls to us to provide the correct structures to secure that future. I am pleased to support the Government motion and the Labour amendment.

Just so that we are clear, is Mr Beattie saying that cheaper energy is a bad thing?

8. To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to vary the speed limit for heavy goods vehicles on the A9 trunk road. (S4O-02379)

I am sure that the minister is aware of the widespread concern that exists in the Highlands and Perthshire that introducing average speed cameras without addressing the question of HGV speed limits might increase the number of accidents on the A9, because it will add to driver frustration. I listened with great interest to what the minister had to say. Will he undertake not to progress the introduction of average speed cameras without first seriously addressing the question of the HGV speed limit?

6. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government is doing to ensure that terminally ill patients with conditions other than cancer are given access to palliative care. (S4F-01536)

The report from Marie Curie, NHS Lothian and the University of Edinburgh to which the First Minister referred found that eight out of 10 non-cancer patients are not identified for palliative care and that those who do receive it often get it too late to benefit fully. The report also found that many primary care staff have difficulty—understandably so—raising death with their patients. Will the Scottish Government instruct a review of the training and support for primary care staff to help to ensure that more non-cancer patients access palliative care in the last year of their lives?

I am grateful to the minister for giving way. We heard some interesting evidence this morning at the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee—I am referring not to the minister’s evidence, which was interesting in itself, but to the evidence that we heard later from those who are involved in the entrepreneurial arena on the question of account-managed companies. The witnesses were full of praise for Scottish Enterprise and account-managed companies, but they said that there was an issue with the selection of companies for the programme. Would the minister care to tell us something about how that process might be improved? It is very easy to say that we should select the companies with the greatest potential, but who does the selection, and how does the minister ensure that he always gets the right people into the pipeline?

It was in 2007 that I previously held the economy and enterprise brief for my party, but it is almost as if nothing has changed in the interim. Here we are, back debating Scottish Enterprise again. I well remember all the debates that took place years ago in which Scottish Enterprise was regularly a kicking boy. I confess that I did my fair share of kicking in those days, and I was not alone in that. Front-bench spokesmen from the minister’s party, which was then in opposition, were more than happy to put the boot in regularly. However, times have changed and the enterprise networks have changed with them. We now see much slimmed-down organisations that have smaller budgets, fewer responsibilities and a much more focused approach. The debate is held in the week when a new study has come out about Scottish Enterprise’s account-management approach. The study is largely positive, although it highlighted concerns about the low level of churn in the account-management portfolio, a slow transition from the business gateway growth pipeline to account management and shortages of management and performance data for account-managed companies. At this morning’s Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee meeting, we heard evidence from WeDO Scotland that there is a lack of information about who can apply to be part of Scottish Enterprise’s high-growth programme and that account managers with relevant experience and expertise need to be aligned with the high-growth companies that are accepted on to the programme. Companies to which account managers from relevant backgrounds are assigned have had positive experiences, but that has not always been the case. We also heard evidence about the disconnect between business gateway and the transition to account-managed programmes, which Jenny Marra picked up on, and about a general lack of knowledge of the help that is available to small and medium-sized enterprises. There are improvements to make, but they should not detract from what is a positive story overall. There remains a deeper philosophical issue about picking winners, which I debated with the minister a few moments ago. I am sure that that debate will continue. In her amendment, Jenny Marra makes the case for a full review of the enterprise agencies’ work. I listened with great interest to the case that she made, but I am not convinced at this stage that a review is the right thing to do. We had a major restructuring and upheaval in the enterprise networks not long ago. That has had time to bed down and, overall, the change has been positive. We should keep a close watching brief on that, but I am not sure whether a full review to dig that up and examine the roots is the right way to go at this stage. My amendment raises a specific issue in connection with Scottish Enterprise—that of the intermediary technology institutes. Members with long memories will recall that, in 2002, the then Scottish Enterprise chief executive, Robert Crawford, set up the ITIs with the laudable aim of helping to commercialise research from Scottish universities. Three ITIs were established—in life sciences, energy and digital media—with offices in Dundee, Aberdeen and Glasgow respectively. The then First Minister, Jack McConnell, was fulsome in his support of the new initiative. He said: “Scotland’s Technology Institutes will have a crucial role in making the giant leap to more world-beating companies and high-quality jobs.” It was not just members of the then Scottish Executive who were supportive. Alex Neil, the then convener of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, said: “they play a vital role in creating the industries of tomorrow”. Sadly, the ITIs had a chequered history. In the first two years, there was a high level of turnover of senior managers, amid complaints that Scottish Enterprise was cutting back on its initial funding promises. There was a major restructuring in 2007, and in 2009 the operation of the ITIs was brought back in-house. In 2010, Scottish Enterprise took the decision to stop investing in new projects altogether. The total spend over that period was some £231 million. The value of the intellectual property that has been generated to date is assessed to be a mere £600,000. On any measure, that represents a spectacular failure. This week, I asked the Auditor General, Caroline Gardner, to carry out an audit of the performance of the ITIs. When such large sums of public money are involved, it is important that we understand exactly what went wrong, not least so that we can learn lessons for the future.

I am grateful to the minister for that helpful offer, and I look forward to engaging directly with Scottish Enterprise. I raised the issue directly with Lena Wilson, the chief executive of Scottish Enterprise, in May, when she came to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, and she subsequently provided me with a study that had been carried out by the consultancy Frontline. Although it makes interesting reading, it does not specifically address the performance of the ITIs, so I think that further studies are required. I applaud ambitious programmes and accept that, on occasion, risks will be taken when public money is spent that do not pay off. I am not looking to damn anyone for mistakes that may have been made, but I think that we need to obtain a proper understanding of what went wrong, not least so that we can learn lessons for the future and avoid the Scottish Government and its agencies repeating the mistakes of the past. I move amendment S4M-07463, to insert at end: “, but believes that all public agencies must be able to demonstrate good value for public funds expended; notes that around £231 million was spent on Intermediary Technology Institutes (ITI) with very little return, and calls for a full independent audit of ITIs and their investments so that lessons can be learned for the future”.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I understood that the topic for debate was Scotland’s enterprise networks, on which we have a motion and amendments before us. Is it in order for a member to address a subject that is completely outwith the terms of the debate?

Does the cabinet secretary not agree that, contrary to the carping that we have heard from Mr MacKenzie, these encouraging figures show that there is, in fact, no conflict between a policy of austerity and the delivery of economic growth and that we are looking forward to greater economic growth as we go forward?

I am not a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee, but I read its report closely due to my constituency interest. I commend members of the committee for the report. Like my colleague, Alex Johnstone, I am pleased to support the recommendations set out in it. The Travelling community in Scotland plays a large and important role in the culture and life of our country. I agree that much more needs to be done to prevent the stigma and discrimination suffered by those in the Gypsy Traveller community. As the report says, accommodation and living space are, without doubt, the root cause of many of the problems that Gypsy Travellers face. The desperate conditions in which many Travellers find themselves must be addressed by the Scottish Government. An increase in appropriate sites is required as a matter of urgency, and it is Holyrood’s role to encourage and lead local authorities in that endeavour, as the report says. I hope that the minister will forgive me for taking time to lobby her on some of the issues affecting residents and Travellers in my region. The emergence of unauthorised Gypsy Traveller sites is a pressing matter for communities and local authorities in both Fife and Perth and Kinross. In recent years, an unauthorised site near the Broxden business park in Perth has been used by Gypsy Travellers, creating serious issues in the neighbouring Oakbank residential area. Indeed, only this week, a group of Gypsy Travellers left that unauthorised site, according to a report in The Courier from yesterday, “strewn with litter”. That has caused a great deal of concern in the local community. There have also been serious issues on the South Inch in Perth and at Glenrothes, Dalgety Bay and elsewhere in Fife.

I am just about to come on to address that point, if Mr Robertson will bear with me. Members present who represent Fife and attend the regular meetings that we have with the local chamber of commerce will be familiar with the many complaints from businesses and local residents about Travellers pitching up on privately owned land and refusing to move. In some instances, when Travellers move on, those unauthorised sites—we say unauthorised, but they are actually illegal—are left in a filthy state, covered in rubbish, dog waste and worse. In a perverse legal twist, the innocent business owner or landowner is then left with the task and cost of cleaning up the mess and, if they refuse to do so, can be served with an enforcement notice by the authorities and have to bear the cost of that. That behaviour is not only morally and socially unacceptable, it is also illegal. The Trespass (Scotland) Act 1865, which is still extant, makes it a criminal offence to camp on land without the owner’s permission. Why are there no prosecutions when there is such a flagrant breach of the law? It is because national guidance from the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland includes a general presumption against prosecution. Despite the fact that the law is on the side of the innocent victims of such behaviour, they will not usually have the assistance of the authorities. That cannot be acceptable. We cannot have a situation in which the police refuse to arrest those who are in breach of the law, whoever they may be. The general presumption not to take legal action against Gypsy Travellers for the crime of trespass creates many tensions within communities. To return to Dennis Robertson’s point, I entirely accept—it comes through the report loud and clear—that the lack of Traveller-specific sites exacerbates the issue. However, two wrongs do not make a right and the rule of law should be enforced regardless of non-harassment policies. Private citizens and businesses—some of them struggling in the current climate—should not have to suffer because of or pay the costs of the failings of local authorities. It is not their fault. When there have been clear public order abuses—including urinating in public, dogs running wild, littering, fly tipping and other antisocial crimes—the police must use their powers to act. Some Travellers—not a majority—seem to believe that they have carte blanche to do whatever they want without fear of prosecution from the police. That must change in order to create a more harmonious relationship between Travellers and the communities in which they live. I call for some common sense on the issue. I was taken with what the minister said in her opening remarks about the need for balance in the debate. We need urgently to settle the issue by making land available for Travellers to live on but, in the meantime, we cannot have Travellers setting up camp wherever they wish, in areas that were never designed for human habitation, and then leaving them in a terrible state. Residents whose lives are negatively impacted by Travellers must have the backing of the police and lawmakers. Similarly, Travellers who suffer from discrimination and hate crime abuse must have the backing of law enforcement officials. Mutual respect, understanding and common sense must be the cornerstones of any future Travellers strategy. The Scottish Government has an important role to play in ensuring that Gypsy Travellers are given access to clean, habitable sites and the public services that they require but, in exchange, Travellers must also recognise that they have responsibilities as part of society.

Not with vehicles—

Read the Trespass (Scotland) Act 1865—

The cabinet secretary is clearly enthusiastic about cutting taxes when the responsibility for them lies elsewhere. Can he confirm that the rumours are true that, in the budget next week, he will announce a major cut in business rates for businesses in the tourism sector, or is it the case that he would rather grandstand on the constitutional issue than take responsibility for taxes that are within his own remit?

6. To ask the First Minister what action is being taken to address the number of cases of type 2 diabetes. (S4F-01502)

The First Minister will be aware that an estimated 49,000 people have undiagnosed type 2 diabetes and that a further 620,000 are at a high risk of developing the condition. That is a ticking time bomb that has potentially devastating consequences for the health of individuals and the national health service. Will the First Minister commit his Government to fresh and urgent action? Specifically, will he ensure that diabetes is made a national clinical priority?

8. To ask the Scottish Government how it will promote a more diverse school education system. (S4O-02299)

In the past few weeks, we have had an expression of interest from a group of parents in Edinburgh who wish to create a new state school in the capital, and similar contributions and ambitions from various church groups. What encouragement will the cabinet secretary give those groups?

Does the minister really think that the most important event in Scotland in 1945 was the election of an SNP MP?

Does Mr MacKenzie remember those days?

It has been an interesting debate, during which we had a number of history lessons. In reverse order of antiquity, we had Mary Scanlon reminiscing about the monks at Fort Augustus abbey playing the electric organ as the lights dimmed around the nearby village; we had Mike MacKenzie remembering standing in front of a motor car waving a red flag; and we had Stewart Stevenson learning at the knee of Archimedes. We had a number of references to Tom Johnston’s legacy. Jamie McGrigor made the point that it is rare for Conservatives to praise a Labour politician. Some of us, of course, are making an exception at the moment for Alistair Darling—in one context only and only temporarily. However, Tom Johnston’s legacy is an important one. A number of members mentioned family connections. My own father worked on the Glascarnoch hydro scheme more than half a century ago. The point that the minister made in his opening speech about the economic benefit to the Highlands of constructing the hydro schemes was an important one. In addition, the Johnston project brought electricity to homes throughout the Highlands and Islands that otherwise would not have had it. The project was of great social as well as economic benefit. Members on all sides of the chamber see the opportunity ahead. It is true that there are limited opportunities for large-scale hydro schemes. The Glendoe project, which is now fortunately generating power again after a short interruption, is perhaps one of the last major schemes that we will see. However, there is great opportunity for very small-scale schemes, of which I have seen a number in Highland Perthshire. They can have a very low impact on the environment and a very low visual impact but nevertheless make a considerable contribution to meeting renewable energy targets while delivering a very good source of income to the farmers and landowners involved. Indeed, when the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee was doing its inquiry into renewable energy, we visited one hydro scheme in Glen Lyon. It was not the one that Mary Scanlon referred to, which destroyed her beloved freshwater pearl mussels, but one slightly further upstream from that. We saw for ourselves the beneficial impact that it would have on the local community, the revenues of the local landowner and the environment. Despite his antiquity, Mike MacKenzie made an interesting contribution. He made the interesting point that there was opposition to hydro dams when they were first constructed. The point that he was trying to make—which was reflected by Rob Gibson later in the debate—was that maybe 50 years on we will love wind farms as much as we now love hydro schemes. I am not quite so sure, for two reasons: first, the visual impact of wind turbines in our rural areas is much more significant than that of hydro schemes; and secondly, an inherent problem with the overdevelopment of wind power is that we have yet to overcome the issue of intermittency and the lack of predictability.

I was about to address pumped storage. We have a long way to go to build the pumped-storage capacity that would be required to balance out all the wind turbines that are being erected. Of course, there are issues with efficiency and the cost of pumped-storage schemes, which require subsidy. We need to remember that energy subsidy comes at a cost to the consumer. This is not a question of writing a blank cheque; we have to ensure that there is a balance. I want to raise a specific issue that Mike MacKenzie, Claire Baker, Jamie McGrigor and others mentioned, which is small-scale hydro schemes below 100kW. The issue was also raised by Scottish Renewables in its briefing for the debate. Currently, SEPA has a screening process for small-scale hydro schemes, which states that they must have no environmental impact. In practice, that limits such schemes to being very small and in steep and usually remote locations, unless the operators agree to remove only one quarter of the river flow, which in many cases would make them unviable. There is a concern that we are taking an overly cautious approach that is perhaps a good example of gold plating of European Union obligations that could be interpreted in a less stringent way. I do not wish to fall out with Mary Scanlon, because I accept that there is a need to protect the environment—whether for freshwater pearl mussels or the salmon fishing industry—but there is a need to look at how we apply the rules, which are preventing the development of very small-scale hydro schemes. As Claire Baker pointed out, those schemes could benefit farmers, crofters, householders and local communities. We are losing out on energy potential and we are disadvantaging very small businesses, as opposed to larger landowners who own land in further upland areas, which can benefit under the current rules. Smaller schemes are more likely to use local trades and buy equipment from British manufacturers. I am not sure why we should treat very small schemes differently from above-100kW schemes, and I would be grateful if the minister would address that point and say what the Scottish Government is doing to make things better and improve the development of small-scale schemes. A number of members mentioned electricity market reform, which we have debated before, and members have raised issues about billing, which are complex but are important to get right. I agree that it is important that we maintain the level of support for hydro schemes under the new contract for difference scheme. I urge the UK Government and DECC to do just that.

If I have time, I will give way.

I am sorry. Perhaps the minister can address the point in his winding-up remarks. Stuart McMillan raised the point about independence and said, “Oh, if only we were independent, everything would be fine.” He rather missed the point that Mr Ewing has made on many previous occasions that, post independence, the SNP wants to retain a single energy market. I presume that whatever rules are currently being put in place would be maintained post independence. I will close on a note of agreement, as the debate has been very consensual. Scotland has great hydro power potential. Much of that has already been developed and much more can still be developed. There are opportunities ahead, and I hope that Governments in both Edinburgh and London can work together to make the most of the industry.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to exploit the potential of Scotland’s shale gas reserves. (S4O-02258)

This week’s report from the United States Energy Information Administration states that the United Kingdom’s technically recoverable shale gas reserves are 26 trillion cubic feet—10 times our annual gas demand—of which a reasonable chunk is in Scotland. The Institute of Directors previously estimated that 35,000 jobs could be created from this new industry. Given that, in the US, shale gas has delivered a 50 per cent cut in wholesale energy costs, a reindustrialisation of the economy and a cut of millions of tonnes in carbon emissions, will the Scottish Government be enthusiastic about pursuing the new opportunity?

I am grateful for the opportunity to speak about the Scottish guardianship service and the tremendous work that it does in helping to look after and support vulnerable young asylum seekers, particularly given that, as the minister indicated, next week is refugee week 2013. The issue of asylum is emotive and complex and requires calm and serious consideration. In wider public and political discourse, it is often confused with immigration more generally. It is important to distinguish between economic migrants—those who freely choose to come to the UK—and vulnerable and persecuted people who, as we have heard in the debate, might be victims of human trafficking and in need of asylum. The UK is a signatory of the 1951 United Nations convention relating to the status of refugees and therefore has an obligation to those genuinely seeking asylum, perhaps as a result of persecution in their home countries due to race, religion, political beliefs, sexual orientation or other matters. We should be proud of our record in providing a safe haven for those who are desperately in need of freedom, safety and security. Seeking asylum is undoubtedly a traumatic process for all those who are forced to endure it. Many will have come from countries experiencing conflict, ethnic or religious tension, or political repression. They will sometimes have had to go through hell on earth just to get here and will often arrive with nothing but their name and the clothes on their back. For some it will be a more painstaking ordeal than for others. This debate is right to focus on those issues and the challenges facing the thousands of children who go through the asylum process every year, often without the support of their family or friends. It is a sad fact of life that forced migration affects millions of children globally. According to the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, nearly half of the 34.5 million people around the world who are classed as “people of concern”, and more than a third of all asylum seekers, are under the age of 18. In the UK, about 2,000 unaccompanied children apply for asylum each year, presenting unique difficulties and challenges, which often fail to be taken into consideration. Children are frequently unaware of their rights and have no real knowledge of the culture or language of their host nation. The UK Border Agency treats all asylum applications—from adults or children—in largely the same way. It is entirely right that UKBA ensures that all asylum applications are treated consistently and are scrutinised effectively. It has my support for the difficult work that it does. However, we should recognise that the process will inevitably be more difficult and demanding for younger people, particularly when they have very little family support.

The member makes an important point. It is important to distinguish the legal framework under which the UK Border Agency has to operate and the way in which it approaches individual cases. It seems to me that it is right to apply a legal framework that treats everybody the same, regardless of their age. However, when it comes to the sensitivity of dealing with individuals, there needs to be additional support or children, which is why this debate is so important. The guardianship service that we are talking about is crucial to ensuring that children are being properly listened to in that environment. Children can be subjected to interviews and they have to prepare a testimonial on why they left their country of origin. That can be particularly difficult for the number of children who have been forced to leave their home countries against their will. As Neil Bibby said, it is estimated that almost a third of children who apply for asylum may have been trafficked. Human trafficking is a heinous and sickening practice and we must do all that we can to eradicate it. We also need to recognise that it is a very important factor in contributing to the numbers that are being presented in the debate. For all children, regardless of how they arrive here, the asylum process can be traumatic, uncertain, and at times bewildering. Many will not have access to the guidance that they need. That is why the work of the Scottish guardianship service is so important. It is a very good example of the third sector filling in to provide essential services in the absence of direct Government support. The service, as we have heard, provides a guardian to children to act as a point of contact throughout the entire asylum process. That is invaluable and it goes some way to filling the void that is left by the absence of close family. It also helps to ensure that young people are aware of their rights and are given advice on how they can integrate into the local community. The latter point is particularly important, given that the children come from a wide variety of different backgrounds and cultures and many of them have little or no proficiency in English. Our asylum system is not perfect and much more can be done to improve it, but I am encouraged by some of the steps that the UK Government is taking, such as the asylum improvement project, which seeks to speed up the processing of applications and improve the quality of decisions. That project has had significant results and the evidence shows that asylum cases are being handled more and more quickly. Despite that, charitable organisations and the third sector have—and always have had—a crucial role to play when it comes to supporting some of the most vulnerable people in our society and they are worthy of our praise and our support. I was pleased to hear from the minister about the additional funding for the service and I hope that that means that the Scottish guardianship service is here to stay, to help those who are most in need who come to our country. I commend Aileen Campbell for bringing the debate to the chamber. It gives us all an opportunity to pay tribute to that excellent service and I am pleased to support the Government motion.

The most striking aspect of this debate has been the personal stories of the young people involved. I was very taken with Stewart Maxwell’s contribution in which he highlighted a number of those stories. What we have in essence is a situation in which children are arriving alone in this country. We know from the figures that roughly five per month are arriving in Scotland. As Stewart Maxwell said, they are mostly aged between 15 and 17. They arrive in a country where they might not speak the language, the culture is alien to them, and they have no home, perhaps very little education, no family or friends and literally no one to turn to. It must be the most confusing and in some cases terrifying situation to be in. Thankfully, there is support for those children in the form of the guardianship service. Members on all sides of the chamber are right to celebrate the success story that is the Scottish guardianship service. I am glad that it has been possible to have this debate. If we drill down into the causes behind these stories, we find that human trafficking is at the core of many. Apparently 32 per cent of the young people involved have trafficking indicators, which might be domestic servitude, sexual exploitation, cannabis production or the supply or sale of drugs. Human trafficking is one of the great social ills of our age. The UK led the way in the abolition of the slave trade. It was the great crusade of William Wilberforce more than 200 years ago—I think that we remember the bicentenary celebrations that were held a few years ago. We are also leading the way in relation to human trafficking. The Foreign Secretary and the UK Government are doing great work on that internationally. As a result of the displacement of persons and issues around the world such as civil unrest, war and persecution, human trafficking is a growing problem. It requires proper international attention if we are to address it. When my family and I lived in rural Perthshire a few years ago, a cannabis factory was discovered just down the road from us. It caused great concern and, I have to say, some excitement in the local community. We found cannabis being grown in a very discreet tenement flat—I should say that it was not me personally who found it, but the police. The interesting human aspect was that a young Chinese man was effectively locked in the flat for weeks on end. He was not allowed out because he would have been very obvious in that community. He was kept under lock and key and was not allowed to see daylight, and it was his job to tend the cannabis plants. He of course turned out to be an illegal immigrant and had in effect been trafficked in to do that particular job. Sometimes these issues can seem very distant to us, but that case brought home to me just how close to home some of the incidents can be. Everybody in the community in which we lived was absolutely astonished by what was happening under our noses and that nobody was aware of it. Let us look at some of the causes. John Mason made a very thoughtful contribution about the international causes of human displacement. Last week, I had the privilege of meeting a representative from the Christian church in Pakistan, where the church faces persecution—perhaps not state-sponsored persecution but certainly persecution of some of its members. That is repeated throughout the world. Whether it is Christians in the middle east, gay people in sub-Saharan Africa or the Falun Gong in China, there are groups facing state persecution. It is not surprising that they try to seek asylum and protection elsewhere. This country has an excellent record in international aid. The UK is the second largest provider of international aid in the world. Much of that comes out of the excellent work done by the Department for International Development, many of whose workers are based at East Kilbride. I do not think that we should automatically tie the donation of international aid to demands for civil reforms, but we can ensure that we are buying influence. We should ensure that, when we give aid, it buys us at least a conversation with foreign Governments to say, “You need to try to clean up your act and make things better for the people in your countries.” We should make no apology for trying to spread the benefits of liberal democracy and promote human rights elsewhere in the world. If that makes me a neo-conservative, I will have to live with that label—although I am not entirely sure whether Mr Mason would be happy to share that description. Dave Thompson raised the interesting issue of tax justice. I agree with a lot of what he said. It is a very easy soundbite to say, “Why doesn’t the Government just get companies to pay their taxes?” Of course, those things are all bound up in international trade agreements, the situation with the European Union and the general agreement on tariffs and trade. However, at the top of the agenda for the UK Government in relation to the G8 meeting is the issue of how we ensure that companies pay their taxes, because we all lose out when that does not happen.

Mr Thompson makes some fair points. It might be unkind of me to point out that the party of which he is a member seems to be engaged in a race to the bottom on competitive corporation tax rates within the United Kingdom. Perhaps he is not best placed to take the moral high ground on the issue. There was a broader debate about immigration. Some SNP members could not resist making a constitutional point. I entirely understand that, but the response from Liam McArthur was spot on. The reality is that—even if we were independent—if Scotland pursued a radically different policy on immigration or asylum from the rest of the United Kingdom, the result would simply be that a more solid border was required between Berwick and Carlisle. I am not sure that that is necessarily in our interests. I close on a note of consensus. We should all celebrate the good work done by the Scottish guardianship service and welcome the additional support promised. In particular, I acknowledge the input from charities and the vital work done by those involved at the coalface.

3. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s position is on how an independent Scotland would maintain research funding for universities. (S4F-01440)

We have 8.5 per cent of the United Kingdom population but our universities win 15 per cent of UK public and charitable research funding. A host of figures and bodies have expressed concern that the situation could be put at risk by independence, among them Professor David Bell of the University of Stirling, the Royal Society of Edinburgh, the Royal Society of Chemistry, and Professor Louise Richardson, principal of the University of St Andrews. Professor Richardson said: “If we were cut off from national research councils, it would be catastrophic for this institution”. Without guarantees from the First Minister about the future funding of research in our universities, surely our academics would be better to conclude that we are better together.

6. To ask the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body what reductions in energy usage have been achieved across the campus over the last three years. (S4O-02231)

I very much welcome the progress that has been made over the past three years by the corporate body. Is there room to make further progress? If so, what additional steps might be taken to improve matters further?

I welcome the Labour Party’s scheduling of a debate on student support. This is not the first time that the Parliament has addressed the issue and I am sure that it is by no means the last. The issue is regarded with keen interest by students, people in higher education and parents whose youngsters plan to go to university. Hugh Henry’s motion, which Conservatives are pleased to support, notes the cut in grants for lower-income students. Hugh Henry was quite right to point that out, because the figures are beyond doubt. The amount of money that the Student Awards Agency for Scotland has handed out in non-repayable grants has fallen by 19 per cent, from £127.7 million in 2010-11 to £103.4 million in 2011-12. The Scottish Government will argue—we have already heard it do so—that it is increasing the level of loan support as an alternative. That is what it has done, but such an approach is directly contrary to what the SNP promised in the past, as Hugh Henry said. Because I have been in the Parliament for a long time—sometimes it feels like a very long time—I can remember the debates that we had before 2007. Of course, the cabinet secretary was not here at the time, so perhaps he is excused, but all his colleagues, day after day, lambasted the then Executive for bringing in loans, rather than grants.

The cabinet secretary’s book is my constant bedtime companion; whenever I have difficulty sleeping, it is the first thing that I turn to. At that time, he had very interesting ideas about bringing market forces into higher education, but I will not embarrass him by repeating them in full this afternoon. At the root of this issue is a debate about priorities and whether support should be targeted or universal. The SNP’s clear view is that support should be universal, even if that means that those most in need have to suffer as a consequence. We have more sympathy with Labour’s approach that support needs to be targeted. Of course, as we have discussed before, this issue applies not just to student support but to prescription charges, tuition fees, universal free bus travel for the over-60s—and the list goes on. The important point that goes across all those issues is that a choice has to be made for which a price has to be paid and universal benefit for students comes at the expense of those most in need. I have some sympathy with the SNP in that the Labour motion does not make clear where the money would come from to reverse the cuts in grants for lower-income students. The assumption is that it would come from the students who are currently benefiting but I think that Labour would be more credible on this issue if it spelled that out.

I am sorry, but I have only five minutes. The member will forgive me if I go on to deal with my amendment. My amendment brings in the related issue of improving access to higher education, which the cabinet secretary has touched on. I have on many previous occasions in the chamber highlighted Scotland’s poor record compared with England on access to university for those from disadvantaged backgrounds. There was a time when people disputed my figures, and I am pleased that no one seems to do so now. The latest statistics from the Universities and Colleges Admissions Service confirm that the application rate of 18-year-olds from the most disadvantaged areas is substantially higher in England than it is in Scotland and that Scotland fares worst out of the four countries in the UK on those statistics. I hope that that puts to bed for good the notion that the SNP continually puts around—and which we heard a hint of this afternoon from the cabinet secretary—that the introduction of tuition fees south of the border deters those from less well-off backgrounds from applying to go to university.

All the evidence is to the contrary. In England, applications from those from disadvantaged backgrounds are going up. Why would that be happening in England if the introduction of tuition fees were a deterrent? I say to the cabinet secretary that his claim is nonsense. After all, tuition fees allow generous bursaries to be paid to those from disadvantaged backgrounds. Indeed, Professor von Prondzynski himself has said that we need to get over the idea that “just because the higher education in Scotland is free, ... that somehow supports people from poorer backgrounds—it doesn’t.” He is absolutely right.

I would give way if I had time. I am sure that the cabinet secretary will come back to the issue later. We should be concerned about Scotland’s participation rate. Targeted student support is one way of tackling that and we also need to look at improvements in school education, particularly for those from disadvantaged backgrounds. The SNP seems to be pretending that all is well in higher education, but it is not. It is failing too many from less well-off backgrounds. I am pleased to move amendment S4M-06843.1, to insert at end: “, and believes that both better student support and improvements in the school education system for those from disadvantaged backgrounds are essential if Scotland is to tackle its relatively poor record of access to higher education from this group”.

The cabinet secretary got rather excited earlier about the important issue of whether the introduction of tuition fees in England has deterred people from less well-off backgrounds. Let us bottom out that important point, because the cabinet secretary continually makes a case—without evidence to back him up—that tuition fees have deterred people from the least well-off families. I checked the latest figures. The UCAS publication came out in January this year—I am sure that the cabinet secretary has seen it—and it says quite clearly that the application rate of 18-year-olds in England from the most disadvantaged areas has increased from 10.7 per cent in 2004 to 19.5 per cent in 2013. That is a virtual doubling in a period when tuition fees and top-up fees were introduced. There is not much evidence there of people from less well-off backgrounds being deterred. I quoted earlier Professor von Prondzynski, and from a sedentary position, the cabinet secretary suggested that I was somehow misquoting the professor. I took the opportunity to dig out my copy of the latest Holyrood magazine, which is hot off the press. I should say that there is a very nice photograph of me on page 20. I will quote directly from Professor von Prondzynski’s interview on page 8. He says: “we need to get over this idea that just because the higher education in Scotland is free, that that somehow supports people from poorer backgrounds—it doesn’t.” The professor goes on to say: “I’m not going to argue the case against free higher education, but you have to be aware of the fact that the main beneficiaries of that are the middle classes, not the disadvantaged.” If the cabinet secretary believes that I have misquoted Professor von Prondzynski, he should get to his feet and say that.

The cabinet secretary has had long enough. Given that he made that intervention, I will again quote Professor von Prondzynski, who was equally scathing about the new widening access targets that have been introduced by Mr Russell. He said: “I’m afraid that this will be seen as a substitute for doing the things that actually need to be done.” Far from being an ally of the cabinet secretary, the professor takes a completely different view. Of course, it is not just the professor who holds that view. As Liam McArthur fairly pointed out, Professor Sheila Riddell from Edinburgh university said: “Free undergraduate tuition ... has not markedly altered the pattern of recruitment to Scottish universities.” She went on to say that “universal free tuition is of greatest benefit to those who are already socially advantaged.” Let us be absolutely clear about where we are on this debate. The introduction of tuition fees south of the border has not deterred people from less well-off backgrounds from accessing higher education. The cabinet secretary would do himself more favours if he were to accept that basic point. I took the trouble to check the SNP’s 2007 manifesto. In it, the SNP states that it “will ... replace the expensive and discredited Student Loans system with means-tested student grants”, and goes on to say: “We will remove the burden of debt repayments owed” to the Student Loans Company “by Scottish domiciled and resident graduates.” The SNP has done neither of those things, and its members have the temerity to condemn those in other parties—and the parties in Government south of the border—for the approach that they have taken to higher education, which is delivering better access rates for people from deprived backgrounds. We should be proud of that record, but not of the record of the Scottish Government.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

Not for the poorest students.

Despite what members may think, it is not often that a committee breaks new ground and tackles a topic that has not been considered at some point previously, but I do not think that I am going too far when I say that such was the case when the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee embarked on its recent inquiry into underemployment in Scotland. The committee was also able to demonstrate that—contrary to popular belief—we could conduct a short and focused inquiry and not take four months to agree a report, for which I am very grateful to my fellow committee members. I record my thanks to all those who assisted the committee: our excellent team of clerks, our researchers from the Scottish Parliament information centre and all those who gave evidence. I also thank the staff at Amazon in Dunfermline for their hospitality during the committee’s visit there. Those of us who are customers of Amazon or who regularly drive past its building were fascinated to see what happens inside. It was a very successful visit although, sadly, we were unable to persuade Amazon to pay more of its taxes. We will leave that for another day. The committee inquiry considered three main themes, on which I will expand. First, what is underemployment and why is it increasing in Scotland. Secondly, who does it affect? Thirdly, what are its costs? We are all aware that the Scottish and United Kingdom economies have recently experienced one of the longest periods of economic downturn since the 1930s. What has been unusual about that period in comparison with other periods of negative growth is the behaviour of employment, unemployment and working practices. At the outset of the inquiry, the committee was faced with the following conundrum: why has the dramatic reduction in economic output that has been witnessed since 2008 not been matched by a correspondingly dramatic increase in total unemployment? The answer to that conundrum is in part the increase in numbers of the hours-constrained underemployed—an increase of almost 80,000 since 2008, according to the labour force survey. Just how big an issue is underemployment in Scotland? Let us look at a few statistics. From July to September 2012, 264,000 workers in Scotland were in hours-constrained underemployment. That is almost 11 per cent of Scotland’s total workforce. Women workers are more likely to be underemployed than men, although there have been recent significant increases in underemployment among both men and women. Although underemployment is an issue for all age groups, a third of all underemployed men and a quarter of all underemployed women are in the 16 to 24 age group. The committee is in no doubt that underemployment is a serious issue that adversely affects a significant section of Scotland’s population. We set out to try to find out the causes of underemployment, its impact on individuals and the economy as a whole, and why the phenomenon has increased to such a degree in recent years. Despite underemployment having been an element of the labour market for many years, we found surprisingly little research and statistical data on its causes and effects, and therefore on possible solutions. Underemployment in its simplest form is defined as people being unable to work all the hours that they want to work, and can best be labelled “hours-constrained underemployment”. We heard evidence of another type of underemployment that is probably best described as “skills underutilisation”, in which individuals are overqualified for the job that they are in. That is particularly evident in the case of new graduates who are not able to get graduate-level jobs when they leave university and instead take lower-level employment, at least temporarily.

John Mason has raised a very valuable point. The data that are collected in the labour force survey are quite clear about hours-constrained underemployment. We have very accurate figures on that, as far as we understand. Skills underutilisation is much harder, and Mr Mason is absolutely right that what we say is subjective, to a degree. It is difficult to be definitive about the figures, which led us to the committee’s conclusions about the need for better data collection to better inform the debate. There are a lot of data about hours-constrained employment, which is easier to quantify. Average hours per worker have since 2008 fallen more rapidly than employment levels. The Scottish Government has produced figures that show that since the onset of the economic downturn in 2008, the number of workers in Scotland who are in hours-constrained underemployment has risen by 76,000. Although there are some data, the committee found it difficult to assess fully the extent of hours-constrained underemployment and, therefore, its impact on wider society. The Scottish Government is clearly concerned about underutilisation of skills; it established a skills utilisation leadership group in 2008 to champion the skills agenda. It is clear from the evidence that businesses are also very concerned. Scottish Enterprise has described the skills aspect of underemployment as “critical”, and the Scottish Council for Development and Industry has described it as “a long-term challenge for the economy of Scotland.” Given the distinct lack of research and data on the topic, we found that analysing the reasons why a high number of people in Scotland are working in jobs for which they are overqualified and overskilled is a lot simpler than finding solutions to that problem. We have therefore asked the Scottish Government to collect trend data on skills utilisation in Scotland. I hope that the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth will address that in his remarks. Why is underemployment increasing? There are a number of reasons, some of which are more obvious than others. It is clear that the economic downturn has resulted in a reduction in demand for labour and therefore in increased levels of unemployment and of underemployment, but that is not the whole story. We heard that levels of unemployment during and immediately after the 2008-09 economic downturn were much lower than were initially predicted. In fact, the more flexible nature of the labour market has allowed firms to retain staff during these challenging economic times and has allowed employers to reduce hours rather than headcount and thereby to be better prepared to meet demand once the economy picks up. There is flexibility, but it comes at a price, with an increase in insecure, temporary and part-time work, which leads to squeezed household incomes and a great deal of anxiety for the many families who are affected. Rather than hear that work is a route out of poverty, we heard that because people have been working fewer hours and receiving less pay and have a lower level of skills, a key characteristic of the recent economic downturn has been an increase in the number of people who are experiencing in-work poverty. That is why we think it essential that the Scottish Government’s labour market targets be adapted to reflect an ambition to increase the number of hours that people are in work, to improve the quality of jobs and to improve the types of contracts that are used. We heard about some of the trends that emerged during the recent economic downturn, such as labour hoarding, displacement, increases in part-time self-employment, and the use of zero-hours contracts by private and public sector employers. Labour hoarding has had a dual impact. On the one hand, it has helped businesses to retain skilled staff during the downturn and has therefore restricted the number of redundancies, but it has also, on the other hand, increased the number of people who have been forced into underemployment through reduced working hours. Underemployment and unemployment have both contributed to displacement of lower-skilled workers, as graduates and other highly qualified individuals have been forced to take jobs that are far below their skills level. The resulting displacement leads to the lowest skilled—that often includes young people—being denied access to many labour market opportunities. On the surface, statistics that show an increase in the number of self-employed people are to be welcomed, but we heard that, in reality, many people are in part-time self-employment through necessity and could be experiencing real hardship as a result. That represents a significant new trend in the Scottish labour market, and as such merits further analysis by the Scottish Government. Another trend that the committee highlighted is the reported increase in the use of zero-hours contracts, which are used across various sectors. Workers on zero-hours contracts are not contracted to work a fixed number of hours per week, but should still be available to work if they are required. Indeed, most workers on zero-hours contracts have no guarantee of any work at all in any given week. The Office for National Statistics labour force survey estimated that 117,000 people were on zero-hours contracts in the UK for the period from April to June 2012. Unfortunately, no separate figures are available for Scotland. We heard that zero-hours contracts provide neither job security nor financial stability and are used by both the public and private sectors. However, we recognise that some people like the flexibility of zero-hours contracts, so they are not always to be seen as a bad thing. We understand that the Scottish Government’s forthcoming procurement bill could provide an opportunity to attach conditions to contracts that are awarded to public bodies in order to limit the use of zero-hours contracts by public sector contractors. I would be grateful if the Scottish Government could address that particular point. I turn to those who are most affected by underemployment. The committee heard that two groups in particular have been adversely affected by the rise in underemployment—young people and female workers. There is no question but that underemployment has had a disproportionate impact on young people. The figures are startling: young men aged 16 to 24 constitute 32 per cent of the total number of male underemployed workers, and young women aged between 16 and 24 constitute 25.6 per cent of the total number of female underemployed workers. Those percentages include graduates and non-graduates and are much higher than the percentage for any other group. Worryingly, we heard that the impact on young people can be significant and that it can have a cumulative effect. For example, inability to gain work experience can mean that a young person is unable to acquire the necessary skills and experience to progress in their chosen career, which results in their remaining in low-paid work for longer. That, in turn, impacts on their ability to be financially independent and prevents them from reaching their full earning and professional potential. We also heard that there is a gender dimension to underemployment. Recent statistics show that over 20,000 more female workers than male workers are underemployed in Scotland. That is due to more women being employed in the service sector and in part-time jobs, which is often due to childcare and family commitments. The percentage of part-time workers who are underemployed is more than four times greater than the percentage of full-time workers who are underemployed—the figures are 22.6 per cent and 5 per cent respectively. The potential long-term impact of underemployment on both those groups—young people and female workers—is of particular concern to the committee. Witnesses suggested that a couple of other groups might be disproportionately affected by underemployment. Evidence that was presented to us suggests that disabled people and carers may be experiencing higher levels of hours-constrained underemployment than the workforce as a whole. Older people may also be more likely to find themselves underemployed, due to a combination of the increase in the pension age and financial pressures. As few data are available on either group, that is another area in which the Scottish Government could provide valuable research and analysis. Finally, the committee considered the costs of underemployment. I have touched on a number of ways in which underemployment affects people and its impact on the economy. During the inquiry, we were struck by the human costs of underemployment and its link to health issues and poverty. We heard about the young person who cannot take the first step on the career ladder and develop skills to further his or her career, the graduate who is employed in a job in which they cannot use their skills or expertise, the older person who is suffering financial hardship because they are unable to find work to supplement their income and the woman who would, due to the high costs of childcare, be worse off working more hours. There are also economic costs, such as lower income levels resulting in less spending power, and a workforce with reduced skills and less access to training opportunities, which impacts on productivity levels. In many ways, the inquiry was thought provoking and enlightening, but sometimes it raised more questions than it answered. The committee was left in no doubt about the human and economic costs of an underemployed workforce, but we were less clear about the solutions to the issue. We need to look beyond the headline employment and unemployment statistics to find out what is really happening in Scotland’s labour market. Given the clear lack of information, the first step needs to be collection and analysis of data on underemployment, the groups that it affects and the impact of recent labour market trends. I sincerely hope that the Scottish Government will lead the way by undertaking that work. Although there is an expectation that underemployment will reduce as the Scottish economy returns to growth, the Scottish Government needs to act now to prevent hours-constrained underemployment and skills underutilisation from becoming permanent features of the labour market. Working across all levels of Government and with private companies, schools, colleges and universities, we should be aiming for the increased labour market participation—in the fullest sense of those words—that we want to see. I have pleasure in moving, That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations in the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee’s 6th Report, 2013 (Session 4), Underemployment in Scotland (SP Paper 305).

The debate has been interesting although, rather like Elaine Murray, I regret the rather self-congratulatory tone of the Government motion, because the reality for many people in Scotland is somewhat different. I am sure that the transport minister has seen the popular film franchise, “Back to the Future”. That is exactly what some passengers experience on Scotland’s railways today. If I was travelling between Perth and Edinburgh in 1913, I would arrive sooner than a passenger who was making that same journey today. If I was standing on the platform at Edinburgh Waverley in 1895 to get a train to Dundee, I would arrive in Dundee at least 5 minutes quicker than I would if I made that same journey this afternoon. This is 21st century Scotland and we need 21st century rail links. There is a good case to be made for high-speed rail, but it would be a start to have rail travel that matched the standards of the Victorians. The Scottish Government should bridge the gap between the standard of rail links that are offered in the central belt, which can be very good, and the rail links that serve much of the rest of Scotland. If the country is open for business, efficient rail services are critical in ensuring that we make the most of our economic opportunities. For example, Aberdeen is emerging as the employment capital of Britain, with two jobs to every jobseeker but, as we have heard, travel between Edinburgh and Aberdeen takes 50 minutes longer than the journey between Edinburgh and Newcastle, which is 6 miles longer in distance.

No, because we have had a long discussion on that point. I want to develop other issues. Increasing the connectivity between our major cities will encourage businesses to relocate from the central belt into the more peripheral areas—Perth, Aberdeen, Dundee and Inverness. I therefore make no apology for concentrating my remarks on the Perth to Edinburgh rail service. I find myself in the unusual position of agreeing with much of what Patrick Harvie said. However, I do not agree with him on the nationalisation of the railways. I am old enough to remember British Rail; I am even old enough to remember the British Rail sandwich. I have had a few of those in my time and I do not think that we should go back to those days. Those who travel on the railways have seen dramatic improvements in the intervening period. I agree with Patrick Harvie that better connectivity is needed between our cities and that applies to Perth, too—Scotland’s newest city. Whether it is through digital infrastructure or speedier rail links, we should make Perth a better place in which to do business. As the gateway to the Highlands, Perth is perfectly situated to take full advantage of a variety of economic opportunities but, as I have said, railway journeys between Perth and Edinburgh are slower today than they were before the first world war. By no stretch of the imagination can that be called progress.

I agree entirely. I thank Mr Crawford for that helpful introduction, because I am about to come to my solution to that very problem. A direct rail link between Perth and Inverkeithing was mooted in the 2008 strategic transport projects review. However, significant financial and engineering hurdles were in the way of that. As Patrick Harvie said, an amended plan put forward by Transform Scotland for an intercity express to link Perth to Halbeath would have the potential to reduce journey times to Edinburgh by 35 minutes, and it would be less costly than the originally proposed plan because it would avoid the need for expensive tunnelling between Halbeath and Inverkeithing. That would have a knock-on reduction in journey times to Inverness and the north. Indeed, trains up the east coast to Aberdeen could be rerouted via Perth rather than taking the journey through Fife, with a consequent time saving. Clearly, there would be a capital cost to that plan but, as with any large-scale infrastructure project, economies of scale could reduce the costs. Utilising the expertise used to construct the new Borders railway, to which John Mason referred, could also decrease costs substantially. I would like to see that project being considered for the Scottish Government’s third national performance framework.

I do not suggest that we should start doing that work tomorrow, or even next year—such forward plans are for the long term. However, in planning Scotland’s infrastructure for 10 or 20 years’ time, we should be looking at and seriously costing that project to see whether it is viable, given its advantages. I turn my attention further north. I am not surprised that the Greens oppose dualling the A9 in their amendment, but I am disappointed that we have Highland MSPs who appear to be doing that. I do not think that dualling the A9 or improving the Highland main line rail service is an either/or question. Back in 2008, the First Minister stood up at the SNP conference in Inverness and committed his Government to improving by 2012 the journey time between Inverness and Edinburgh by 35 minutes. That has not happened. It is 2013 and the line is still single track, it is still not electrified and the journey still takes longer than he promised. When will the SNP honour the pledges that it made to the people of the Highlands and improve the Highland main line service? Scotland deserves a first-class rail network, not the second-class ticket that is offered by the SNP.

I thank the minister for his statement and for the advance notice. I thank him also for the invitation to be part of the Scottish coal industry task force. I was pleased to attend the first meeting some weeks ago. I am afraid that, due to other commitments, I could not attend the meeting that was held this Monday, but I am grateful to the minister for the updates about what is happening in that forum. I welcome the interest that has been expressed today by Hargreaves in purchasing the former SRG business. That will provide some assurance to at least some of the former employees of SRG. The minister will remember that at the first meeting of the task force he signed a letter that represented the very strongly held view in that meeting that any buyer should purchase the entirety of SRG’s business, including its liabilities, rather than just cherry pick particular sites. Is Hargreaves interested in purchasing the entire business, as was indicated at that meeting, or is it in the business of cherry picking? If the latter, what might then happen to the remaining parts of SRG that might not be profitable?

2. To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to understand and deal with the increase in the number of schoolchildren with additional support needs. (S4O-02126)

I note what the cabinet secretary says, but he will be aware from the statistics that even before 2010 there was a substantial year-on-year rise in the number of pupils with additional support needs. Although some of that can be put down to better recognition and diagnosis, does the cabinet secretary agree that we need some proper scientific and medical research on whether underlying societal, medical or environmental factors are driving the increases? That could include, for example, looking at the increasing number of youngsters who are identified as being on the autistic spectrum.

I start by acknowledging the generally positive and consensual manner in which the minister has approached the subject. This is the latest in a number of debates that we have had on EMR and there has been broad support across the chamber for both the principles of EMR and the constructive engagement of the Scottish Government in the process. It is indeed a pleasure to see Scotland’s two Governments—one in Westminster and one here in Edinburgh—working so closely together on this issue. I hope that we will see that pattern increasingly adopted across a range of other subjects in the coming months.

I would be delighted to hear about more constructive engagement.

I am not a spokesman for Mr Davey, DECC or, for that matter, the Treasury, but there is always a level of lively and constructive debate in the coalition Government—as there is in the chamber—on aspects of the issue, as Mr Ewing is well aware. I was a little disappointed with the tone of Rhoda Grant’s amendment and some of her speech. I had a very constructive engagement with her Labour colleague Tom Greatrex, the shadow energy minister, when we both addressed the Scottish Council for Development and Industry a few weeks ago. He was much more positive about energy market reform than what we have heard this afternoon. The Scottish Conservatives are pleased to support the Government’s motion. My amendment relates to another aspect of the work that is being carried out by the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets, in connection with the impact of complex tariff structures on consumers. We are all aware of situations in which constituents have been confused by the wide range of tariffs on offer and have found it impossible to draw accurate comparisons between different providers. Indeed, there is more than a little suspicion that the energy providers deliberately create that complexity in order to confuse customers and prevent them from switching to another company. Ofgem’s proposals will ban complex multitier tariffs and limit suppliers to offering four tariffs per fuel type. Dead tariffs, which are not available to new customers, will be abolished. All suppliers will be obliged to provide all their customers with personalised information on the cheapest tariff that they offer and help customers with tariff comparison. That is a very welcome package of proposals to provide greater clarity in the electricity market. If consumers are better informed and better able to make comparisons between providers, they can switch products more easily, which will help to drive down bills. Whether that goes far enough is a moot point, but it is important that that first step be taken and that we monitor its impact closely before we decide whether further measures are required. There is no doubt that EMR is a complex subject. With contracts for difference, strike prices, counterparties, investment instruments and the emissions performance standard, a high level of expertise is required to understand fully exactly what is being proposed. It is important that we get EMR right. A secure source of affordable energy is required to underpin consumer demand and economic growth. We need to increasingly decarbonise our energy supply, but we need to balance that target against the need for security of supply, so we are not reliant on imported gas, for example, and, crucially, the need for affordability for both business and the consumer. We need to incentivise new technologies such as offshore wind, wave and tidal power, and to encourage exploitation of unconventional gas. Balancing all those competing interests is a challenging task, and it is little wonder that the UK Government, in devising its proposals, has had to have such extensive discussions with so many interested parties. The Scottish Government’s engagement in the field has been important and welcome. Inevitably, that has all taken time. While some will cry that it should be done quicker, I argue that it is essential that, given the issue’s importance, we take time to get it right. Even the minister admitted in his speech that the question of strike prices was not an easy one. As we have heard from the minister and will no doubt hear again from SNP members, the time that it has taken to finalise the reforms has caused investor uncertainty. Indeed, Mr MacKenzie referred to that in his intervention on Rhoda Grant, and I will be disappointed if he does not refer to it again in his speech, which I am sure is coming. I simply refer those who make such a case to the words of our Lord in the sermon on the mount: “First cast out the beam out of your own eye and then you will clearly see to take the speck out of your brother’s eye.” Any certainty that has been caused in relation to EMR is as nothing compared with the uncertainty caused by the SNP's plans to separate Scotland from the rest of the UK. Indeed, that case has been made by many in the power sector for a period of time now. It was made very well in the David Hume Institute’s publication by Professor Peter McGregor and two colleagues from the University of Strathclyde entitled “Independence and the Market for Electricity in Scotland”, which came out just last week. I commend that excellent and informative academic report to everyone in the chamber who wants to understand the potential implications of Scottish independence for the electricity market.

I am simply pointing out to the minister that that hot-off-the-press report from esteemed academics at the University of Strathclyde points out the precise difficulties with the electricity market. Far from the milk and honey picture painted by the SNP, the report concludes: “it seems likely that security of supply will prove a greater challenge for Scotland as an independent nation than for Scotland as an integral part of the UK.”

The report also concludes that there is likely to be an increase in the cost of energy in Scotland post independence. It also makes clear that there is absolutely no guarantee that the rest of the UK would purchase Scottish renewable energy when it can develop its own domestic capacity in the form of new nuclear power or large-scale biomass, or can buy cheaper energy from France or Ireland. Again, I commend the report to members on the SNP benches; if they read it, they will be better educated. On that note, I am pleased to move my amendment and indicate that, despite our differences, the Scottish Conservatives are very pleased with the Scottish Government’s work on the issue and its positive engagement with the UK Government. As a result, we will support the Government’s motion. I move amendment S4M-06582.2, to insert at end: “, and welcomes the proposals from Ofgem on tariff reform for energy consumers, which will provide better transparency and help reduce bills.”

More! More!

Given what Mr Ewing has said about listening to people in authority, what is his response to the paper from the David Hume Institute, by Professor McGregor and his colleagues at the University of Strathclyde, from which I quoted earlier, which warned about issues around security of supply and rising costs to consumers in Scotland in the event of independence?

6. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government is doing to increase the uptake of foreign languages in secondary schools. (S4F-01339)

The First Minister did not mention that, since 2008, there has been a 28 per cent decline in the number of those taking a modern language at standard grade level. That alarming decline is causing concern both for educationists and for the business community. We know that foreign language assistants are key to language teaching, so why has the First Minister’s Government presided over a 73 per cent drop in their number between 2007 and 2012? What will he do to restore the numbers to where they were when he took office?

After listening to the previous, very consensual debate, I am filled with optimism and confidence that this debate will be equally consensual as we agree that Scotland needs a balanced energy policy, for the Scottish Government’s current fixation with onshore wind is not only causing consternation in our rural communities but driving up consumers’ bills. I believe that it is time for a new approach to energy policy. I will set out why that policy should be based on the principles of affordability, security of supply and increasing decarbonisation, and why it would be a better way forward for our country and for this vital sector. I start on a note of consensus by welcoming the progress that we already seem to be making. For quite some time, the Scottish Conservatives have been calling for a review of planning guidance for onshore wind farms to better protect scenic areas. Within hours of my motion appearing in the Business Bulletin yesterday, the Scottish Government published proposals to do just that. I warmly welcome the adoption of a Conservative policy and the Scottish National Party’s acceptance of the very important principle that wind turbines are incompatible with scenic areas—a principle that it has vigorously resisted until now. However, the new policy does not go far enough, and without other changes there is a danger that it will just increase development pressure on non-protected areas, but who knows what other aspects of Conservative energy policy the Scottish Government will adopt? Perhaps that will become clear in the course of the afternoon. Scotland has always been a world leader in energy, which is today a key strength of the Scottish economy. One only has to visit Aberdeen to see how well the communities there have coped with the general economic downturn over the past five years, thanks to the vibrancy of the oil and gas sector, the success of which is underpinned by a favourable United Kingdom tax regime. There is also growing potential from offshore renewables. The latest opportunity comes in the development of carbon capture and storage, with the very welcome decision from the Department of Energy and Climate Change at Westminster to shortlist the Peterhead project as one of two schemes in the final round.

I welcome Mr Stevenson’s welcome—what a note of consensus we are striking already in this debate. I have many functions in life, but I am not a spokesman for Mr Danny Alexander, although I am very encouraged by the progress that DECC is making. I am delighted that one of the two shortlisted CCS projects is in Scotland, and I am sure that we will see that progress. All that is good news, but we should not be fooled into thinking that high energy prices, which sustain a vibrant energy sector, are a good thing in themselves. They may be good for the energy industry, but they are bad for consumers and bad for business. Families across Scotland have seen energy bills to soar in recent years, which has put pressure on household budgets, and now nearly 40 per cent of Scottish households are in fuel poverty—a figure that would have been unimaginable a few years ago. There is also an impact on business, particularly heavy consumers of energy. Just last week, I visited the O-I glass factory in Alloa, which is a major local employer with more than 400 workers on the books. That company spends £20 million per year on energy, and rising costs are always a concern. Elsewhere in my constituency, in Fife, even a decade ago the paper-making industry was a major component of the local economy and employed many thousands of people. Today, there is just one paper maker left: Tullis Russell in Markinch. Paper making is a heavily energy-intensive process and Tullis Russell has a forward plan to survive by developing its own energy source, with a biomass plant on site. The pattern is repeated in other energy-intensive industries such as the metal production and chemical industries, where we see steady decline, plant closures and jobs lost. Undoubtedly, part of the historic rise in energy prices comes from increases in the cost of fossil fuels. But today the fastest-rising component of energy bills is not the wholesale cost, but various Government levies to subsidise renewable energy and other projects. It would be wrong to see rising fossil fuels costs as a one-way bet. Last week, we had the very sad news of the Scottish Coal Company going into liquidation as a result of a fall in world coal prices. However, across in the US, we have seen a cut of some 50 per cent in wholesale energy costs as a result of the exploitation of shale gas reserves.

I ask the member to let me finish this point, and then I will give way. That is having a hugely beneficial impact on the US economy, with large-scale manufacturing jobs coming back to the country, whereas in previous decades they had been offshored to China and elsewhere. I am sure that Mr Gibson will welcome that opportunity.

If Rob Gibson had listened to what I said, he would have heard that I said that the fastest-rising element was renewables subsidies. If he listens carefully to what I will say shortly, he will hear why renewable energy is costing so much. Renewables are not just wind power. Hydro, solar, biomass and the emergent offshore technologies play a part, but if the Scottish Government is to meet its 2020 target, the primary component will be onshore wind. It is worth asking whether we need to subsidise a technology such as onshore wind to the current extent. Subsidies should be there to address market failure, but nobody could seriously suggest that there is market failure today in Scotland in onshore wind, when planning departments across rural Scotland complain of being deluged with applications, so attractive is the subsidy regime. In the past five years, there have been more than 44,000 individual objections to wind turbine applications across Scotland; the figure increases year on year, such is the level of public concern. That is why we are calling for a 50 per cent cut in the subsidy to onshore wind. I gently remind those who would argue that that would destroy the industry that exactly the same forecasts of doom were made about the solar photovoltaics sector when its subsidies were cut, nearly 18 months ago. That sector has never been healthier than it is today.

Of course there is a cost in nuclear decommissioning. The projects that are being decommissioned at the moment, particularly at Dounreay, were experimental. They are from very early in the life of the technology and as such they will be very expensive to clean up. New nuclear is nothing like as expensive to decommission. In fact, even the Scottish Government’s own officials told the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee that the lifetime costs of new nuclear, including the costs of decommissioning, were comparable to the lifetime costs of offshore wind. Even the Scottish Government says that there is not a problem with the cost of nuclear. We certainly see a limited amount of onshore wind having a part to play in the energy mix, but we must be aware that that comes at a high cost. The latest research by Professor Gordon Hughes of the University of Edinburgh—a man so well respected by the Scottish Government that it appointed him the chairman of the Water Industry Commission for Scotland—demonstrates a degradation in output from wind turbines over time. The Scottish Government claims that Professor Hughes’s research is flawed—indeed, it has said that it is “fundamentally flawed”—but it has not produced a single piece of scientific evidence to back up that opinion. Professor Hughes’s damning conclusion is that the levelled costs of onshore wind come out at £183 per megawatt hour, not the £86 per megawatt hour that the Scottish Government quotes. That is double the comparable cost of gas. Given the latest figures, surely it is time for us to stop this madcap rush for onshore wind development and think again. As with so much in life, energy policy is an area in which we need moderation and balance. There is a part for renewables to play, a limited role for onshore wind, a role for hydro, a role for biomass, a role for solar and the exciting potential of offshore technologies. However, we also need to take advantage of the cost benefits of utilising fossil fuels, with carbon abatement where that is practical. This week, Westminster’s Energy and Climate Change Committee published an encouraging report on the opportunities for unconventional gas extraction in the UK and what that might mean for energy prices and security of supply. We should embrace those opportunities and make maximum use of the clean, low-carbon technology that is nuclear power, not close our minds—as the Scottish Government has done—to the prospect of a new nuclear plant in Scotland. Scotland needs a balanced energy policy. The Scottish Conservatives’ approach to energy is good for industry, good for jobs, good for the environment and good for consumers, and I commend it to Parliament. I am pleased to move the motion in my name. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the strength of Scotland’s energy sector; acknowledges the vibrancy of the oil and gas industry, which is underpinned by a favourable UK tax regime; recognises the potential of offshore renewables; welcomes the recent decision by the Department of Energy and Climate Change to shortlist the Peterhead Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) Project to progress to the next stage of the UK Government’s CCS commercialisation competition funding, with a final investment decision to be taken in 2015; appreciates concern from consumers and businesses regarding the rising cost of energy impacting on household budgets and economic growth; understands that the volume of onshore wind farm planning applications is causing concern for many across Scotland; calls on the Scottish Government to end its fixation with onshore wind as an energy source to the exclusion of other more efficient technologies, and further urges it to develop a balanced energy policy, based on the principles of affordability, security of supply and increasing decarbonisation, which draws energy from a mix of sources.

What is the cabinet secretary’s answer to the scientific study by Professor Gordon Hughes on wind turbines’ decline in output over their life and the consequent increase in costs? Surely the Scottish Government needs to take that extremely seriously.

Mr Swinney will be aware that, as I said earlier, his own officials told the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee that the lifetime cost of new nuclear, including decommissioning, is no more than the lifetime cost of offshore wind. The advantage of nuclear is that it provides base-load and a degree of efficiency and certainty that does not come with renewables. Surely, if we want low-carbon power, nuclear is a better bet.

Given what Gordon Brown did—what a cheek!

I welcome the minister’s announcement of the creation of a task force, which will be appreciated by my constituents in Fife who are affected by the liquidation of Scottish Coal. Does the minister acknowledge that we are in a bizarre situation in which we have sky-high energy prices hitting industry and driving nearly 40 per cent of households into fuel poverty at the same time as we have an abundant low-price source of energy in coal? What ideas does the Scottish Government have to try to square that circle?

I congratulate David Torrance on securing the debate and lodging the motion, and I join members in congratulating the Save Wemyss Ancient Caves Society on all the great work that it does. It is fair to say that the vast majority of Scots are completely unaware that Wemyss plays host to the greatest cave grouping in Britain and northern Europe. Indeed, I was basically unaware of that myself until the topic of the debate appeared among the list of motions. I hope that, simply by being held, the debate will bring some much-needed public awareness of this somewhat undiscovered attraction in Fife. David Torrance is to be commended for highlighting it. As Mr Torrance said, it was after vandalism destroyed the swan carving in 1986 that the Save Wemyss Ancient Caves Society was set up, with the remit to preserve and promote cave carvings that date back some 3,500 years. The society’s volunteers stage seven open Sunday events between April and September, as we have heard. They are an opportunity for members of the public to take part in expert-led guided walks and other activities to learn more about the caves. Such is the appetite for the events that visitors travel from all four corners of the UK and from further afield to take part. I am sure that members of all parties will acknowledge the hard work, dedication and determination of all the volunteers who, for the past 31 years, have helped to stage the open Sunday events. The 12 individual caves play a special role in Wemyss’s culture. The name of the nearby town, East Wemyss, comes from the old Scots word “weem”, meaning cave. The significance of the caves was underlined in 2004, when a “Time Team” documentary was filmed at the site. During that film, Douglas Speirs, the head archaeologist at Fife Council, said: “The archaeological study of the internationally important Wemyss caves has the very real potential to revolutionise our understanding of the Pictish period. Something of extreme importance was happening at these caves during the Pictish period but only excavation can explain what this was.” Despite that, we are still very much in the dark when it comes to understanding the Pictish culture and way of life. However, the caves hold great significance, because they represent the drawings and feelings of ordinary Picts who were not among the elite classes. Deciphering of those symbols could unlock the mystery of those early Scots. Because of the caves’ national importance, more needs to be done to secure their long-term sustainability. As has been mentioned—it was also mentioned in the documentary to which I referred—coastal erosion threatens their existence. Although the option of erecting coastal defences was ruled out several years ago, partly due to cost, technology has improved in the meantime and such an approach could be feasible in the future. A briefing from the Scotland’s coastal heritage at risk project demonstrates the pressing danger of natural erosion. It will be difficult to stop erosion, but contingency plans must be drawn up to save the cave drawings if natural forces cannot be turned back. I echo the call that David Torrance made regarding the feasibility of a visitor and heritage centre. A Fife coastal path report of 2007 estimated the annual number of path visits to be between 480,000 and 580,000, generating between £8 million and £10 million for the local economy. A visitor centre could profit from that footfall and generate funds that could be used to preserve the caves. The financial benefits that a visitor centre could bring to the local economy would also be significant. To that end, I encourage the Scottish Government to engage with the Save Wemyss Ancient Caves Society and to consider the feasibility of creating a visitor centre that could act as a focal point for the caves. It would also, of course, provide the area with a tangible economic legacy. I hope that we will hear positive things from the minister in response to the debate.

The cabinet secretary should be aware of the concern in the Stirling area about potential traffic congestion in and around the Bannockburn site during the 700th anniversary event because of the lack of parking facilities in the area. What plans does the Scottish Government have to support park-and-ride facilities to avoid disruption to local residents?

The Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee scrutiny focused on the energy and business sections of the draft RPP2. The inquiry was short and focused, unlike our previous effort on renewable energy. Before I comment on the substance of the committee’s report, I record my thanks to those who gave evidence to the committee, to my fellow committee members, to our clerks and to the Scottish Parliament information centre researchers who supported us. I will deal first with some general issues. We heard some concern from witnesses about the difficulties in reading across from RPP1 to RPP2 and in identifying whose responsibility it would be under RPP2 to take action. We have recommended a number of ways in which the draft RPP2 could be improved. Those include providing a clear update on progress and how it is monitored through the inclusion of indicators and milestones; identifying whether policies are Scottish, UK or EU; identifying who is responsible for the costs associated with policies, whether that is the Government, business or consumers; and identifying the potential wider economic, social and environmental benefits of implementing the policies and proposals. Specifically, we ask the Scottish Government to undertake a broad range of consultation and engagement exercises in advance of the publication of the draft RPP3 and to ensure that it publishes future draft RPP reports prior to publishing its draft budget. It would be helpful if the minister, when summing up the debate, could confirm whether he agrees with those general areas of improvement that we would like to see. The committee considered whether the proposals and policies outlined in the draft would enable the climate change targets to be met. In the brief time available, I will address one or two key issues that we considered. First, there is the question of reducing carbon emissions. A significant area of interest for the committee was the energy emissions abatement targets. We heard about a number of risks and unknowns, which have the potential to impact on the targets’ achievability. The committee heard that the setting of a 2030 target for decarbonising the electricity sector is an important signal for the energy sector. As the target was announced at the same time as the draft RPP2 was published, we could not examine it in detail. We look forward to seeing the detail of how it will be achieved in the final version of the report. The committee heard concerns about the Scottish Government’s decision to agree to a UK-wide emissions performance standard of 450g per kWh until 2044. We understand that a UK-wide standard is necessary to secure electricity supply, but given the high level and lengthy timescale, we run the risk of not meeting the 2030 decarbonisation target. We also heard concern that the agreed EPS would reduce the incentive for power stations to fit carbon capture and storage. CCS accounted for an important part of the evidence that we heard. We heard many calls for a quick decision on CCS schemes. Such is the influence of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee that no sooner had we agreed our report—and even before it was published—than the UK Government announced that Peterhead would be one of the preferred bidders for CCS, with a final decision to be taken in 2015. I am sure that members welcome that. However, witnesses were concerned that the high cost of CCS could mean that it might not proceed on the scale that has been envisaged, which might mean that targets will not be met. Witnesses expressed serious concern about the impact of the EU not adopting a 30 per cent emissions reduction target. We asked the Scottish Government to say how it would mitigate the risk in that regard, in relation to achieving its emissions reduction targets. It would be helpful if the minister, in his closing speech, said how the Government plans to do that. Good progress towards meeting renewable energy targets has undoubtedly been made, but less progress has been made on renewable heat. Witnesses agreed with the Scottish Government’s assessment that more needs to be done. We heard concerns about how the Scottish Government will address the promotion and funding of community district heating schemes, the raising of public awareness, assistance to off-gas-grid and rural properties, and the promotion of investment in large industrial facilities. Given that a variety of areas need to be addressed, we recommended that the Scottish Government include in its final report the recommendations of the expert commission on district heating. The committee considered measures to reduce energy demand. The draft RPP2 contains a number of Scottish and UK energy efficiency schemes that aim to reduce demand for households and businesses. Witnesses welcomed the national retrofit programme, which focuses on tackling hard-to-treat properties, but asked for further detail on how schemes will achieve the desired emissions abatement levels. Witnesses also requested that future draft RPPs be accompanied by an updated energy efficiency plan; it would be helpful if the minister could advise the Parliament whether that is the Scottish Government’s intention. Concern was expressed about the level of funding for the national retrofit programme. Witnesses questioned whether the £135 million per annum that is expected from energy companies can be achieved and asked how an expected quadrupling of carbon abatement as a result of the NRP can be achieved at a time when the Scottish Government’s budget line remains flat. We heard a lot of concern about building regulations and the potential financial impact on businesses of meeting carbon emissions targets for existing buildings. In particular, we heard that the targets might be onerous for small and medium-sized enterprises. I would be grateful if the minister said how the Scottish Government plans to assist SMEs in improving their buildings’ energy efficiency, so that they do not bear an undue financial burden. The Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee is of the view that the report, “Low Carbon Scotland: Meeting our Emissions Reduction Targets 2013-2027—The Draft Second Report on Proposals and Policies” provides the necessary framework but could be improved on if some of the detail that I have mentioned were included. It is essential that the final report provides confidence that it contains the right proposals and policies to achieve the legally binding targets in the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009.

CAP reform is a serious issue that is of great importance to our farming constituents. I commend the Liberal Democrats for bringing this timely debate. It was an opportunity to build consensus, so it is a pity that many SNP members saw it as an opportunity to sow division, grandstand and make constitutional points in the context of a seemingly never-ending referendum debate that has already gone on for too long.

No, I have only four minutes and would like to make some progress. I say gently to the cabinet secretary that, although he is generally well regarded by the farming community in Scotland, he need not think that that will continue if he adopts the confrontational approach that we have seen from some of his members today. Farmers want to hear that the Government in Scotland is working constructively with the Government in the UK to pursue their interests. The SNP’s amendment states as fact that an independent Scotland would have “significant additional CAP funds”, but that is simply assertion. As Jayne Baxter pointed out, we do not know what the terms of accession would be for an independent Scotland seeking to join the EU. The SNP has admitted that that would be a matter of negotiation, and it is dishonest to suggest otherwise. We do not know what the position of an independent Scotland would be, and it is wrong to suggest that it is clear cut. I say to Annabelle Ewing that she knows well that Owen Paterson was due to come to Scotland to speak to the NFUS annual general meeting but that his participation in the pan-European discussion on dealing with the horsemeat crisis meant that he was unable to attend. Perhaps she thinks that the horsemeat scandal was not an important matter for the UK secretary of state to deal with. I do not think that that view will be shared by the Scottish agricultural community. Alex Fergusson’s amendment makes a serious point about the divergence in the rate of single farm payments received in Scotland by farmers compared with those in the rest of the UK. We recognise that Scottish farmers are at a competitive disadvantage due to historical reasons. The way forward is for the UK and Scottish Governments to work together to ensure that that gap is bridged. Rather than simply try to score points and blame the UK Government for the difference in payments, we want the Scottish Government to engage constructively with Westminster in order to secure equal benefits for Scottish farmers. We will support it if it adopts that approach. In Perth and Kinross, the average single farm payment stands at €115 per hectare compared with the European average of €196. That pattern is repeated across Scotland, which is why we are calling for a more equal distribution of subsidy across the UK. There are a number of other key areas in the proposed reform that will cause concern. I agree with Stewart Stevenson that greening is one such aspect. Scottish farmers are supportive of commitments to make farming more environmentally friendly, but that must be done correctly. We must resist moves to take productive land out of active use given its scarcity and value. In an era of food shortages, fertile land must be put to the best possible use, and that means producing food for Europe. Scottish farm incomes are in decline—they declined by £111 million last year. We must be careful in these difficult times not to make the position more difficult. There should be a great deal of consensus in the debate; we should be united in fighting for Scottish farming interests. What a pity that the SNP would rather divide us for their own narrow partisan interest.

6. To ask the First Minister what plans the Scottish Government has to reform the school education system. (S4F-01225)

The glowing picture that the First Minister paints is rather contradicted by this week’s publication from the commission on school reform, on which one of his party’s councillors, Paul McLennan, from East Lothian Council, served. How will the Government take forward the report’s key recommendations, which are that greater school autonomy and greater diversity of provision are required to improve standards and, in particular, help those who are being failed by the current system?

Philip Hammond’s announcement yesterday on moving troops to Leuchars was warmly welcomed by Fife Council and Fife Chamber of Commerce. Why are we hearing negative carping tones from the Scottish Government today when local representatives are so positive? [Interruption.]

I start with a confession. I am really rather fond of the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing. I was fond of him when he was convener of the Enterprise and Culture Committee, I was fond of him when he was the housing minister, I was fond of him when he was the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment, and I am still rather fond of him. As well as that, I admire the cabinet secretary’s courage. I admired his courage on Friday when I heard that he had gone into the lion’s den of an operating theatre to witness an operation—I believe that it was a kidney transplant. Imagine my distress and concern when I heard that he had been taken unwell. What was my relief when I found out that he had recovered having been fed simply a glass of water and a chocolate biscuit? If only all those who are suffering in the NHS could be revived so easily, we would at a sweep do away with many of the problems that we face. As well as being fond of the cabinet secretary, I have started to feel rather sorry for him, because he has been left to pick up the pieces that were left behind by his predecessor, Nicola Sturgeon, who has swanned off to her new position as cabinet secretary for breaking up Britain. He has been left to sort out the mess in the Scottish health service as, week after week, we get new revelations about all the terrible things that happened and were covered up by his predecessor. Now, all Nicola’s skeletons are coming dancing out of the closet and poor Mr Neil is putting on his bravest face as he tries to put them all back in and force the closet door shut. Talking of Nicola Sturgeon—I am sorry that she is not here to defend herself—I gently remind Jamie Hepburn, in relation to his speech and his exchange with Jackie Baillie, that some of us have been in the Parliament for long enough to remember when Nicola Sturgeon was in opposition, sitting where Jackie Baillie is sitting now, and was never done raising the cases of individual constituents in the chamber with the then Scottish Executive. Perhaps Mr Hepburn should reflect on that. I will touch on the situation that has been exposed by the recent Audit Scotland report as it affects my constituents—first, those in Forth Valley. The Audit Scotland report showed that, although NHS Forth Valley had shown good practice with its electronic waiting list system in relation to information recording, there were also notable instances of poor practice, such as people no longer employed by NHS Forth Valley having access to electronic waiting lists and the extended use of the incorrect local code “Aware of breach—willing to wait”, which was eventually dropped in 2012. Forth Valley also had a Scotland-high discrepancy between reported and actual waiting times of 35 per cent, so there were quite serious issues at NHS Forth Valley. Those issues are not entirely its own fault—after all, it has seen a reduction by 97 in the head count of nurse and midwife staff since September 2010. As the RCN pointed out in its briefing for the debate, reduced resources will result in mistakes as staff toil under greater pressure and strain—that appears to be a national trend. NHS Tayside was highlighted along with NHS Lothian in the Audit Scotland report as indicators of a failing system. Nearly 25 per cent of NHS Tayside unavailability levels were classed as inappropriate. Let us remember that behind those statistics are individual patients who are left without care. On the new ways guidance failures at NHS Tayside, the report states: “Whilst some of these appeared to be based on misunderstandings, for 17% of the 367 transactions tested, unavailability appeared to have been systematically applied to prevent patients being reported as not meeting their treatment guarantee date”. An NHS Tayside internal investigation found that there was no evidence of an intentional manipulation of waiting time figures. Although the First Minister has emphasised the lack of deliberate wrongdoing, it is clear that the current system lends itself to bad practice and errors. Moreover, the complete failure to have an adequate whistleblowing system has been noted. Staff must be allowed to identify errors without fear of reprisal. As Jackie Baillie said, the A and E waiting time figures make for the worst reading. When questioned on the issue, the First Minister blamed seasonal weather for lower than expected compliance figures. Whatever excuse comes to mind—bad weather, good weather, too much sun, too much rain—unfortunately, the buck has to stop with his Administration. In NHS Forth Valley in December 2007, there was a 98.1 per cent compliance rate with the A and E target of being seen within four hours. Last year, in December 2012, that figure was only 85.6 per cent—a substantial reduction by anyone’s standards, bearing in mind the target of 98 per cent. At NHS Fife, the figure was also down in the same period by nearly 8 per cent. Of course, every statistic hides a person who is waiting too long to be seen in A and E, often in a very distressed state. As Jackie Baillie pointed out earlier, the Scottish Government has secretly slashed the A and E target and not bothered to tell anyone about it—at least not publicly. That is not good enough.

I surely cannot be alone in the chamber in having difficulty in understanding the distinction between those targets. Perhaps, rather than sneaking the new target out in a newspaper report, the cabinet secretary would be better coming to Parliament with a ministerial statement on the issue, when he can explain in great detail to those of us who are slow learners exactly what the difference is between those two points and we can ask suitable questions. I am still—just—an admirer of the health secretary, but he needs to get a grip on the health service in Scotland or it will take more than a chocolate biscuit to revive his career.

At the outset, I thank all the members from different parties who have signed the motion, which allowed me to secure the debate. The debate is on the broad topic of conservation, and the motion refers to the year of natural Scotland 2013. It is very much a composite motion that covers different topics. There is something in it for everyone, so I am sure that members who wish to contribute can find an issue that they want to address and others that they might wish to avoid. There is no better time than the year of natural Scotland to evaluate our strategies to conserve wild land and endangered species. I will start by talking about two species in particular that are under threat. The first of those species is the Scottish wildcat. For 9,000 years, the wildcat has lived and thrived in Scotland. However, despite the efforts of hard-working conservation charities such as the Scottish Wildcat Association, Cats Protection and the highland tiger group, the pure-bred cat faces imminent extinction. The SWA has released figures suggesting that only 35 pure-bred cats are left living in the wild. My motion refers to 150 breeding pairs but, in fact, the true situation could be much worse than that. The Cairngorm wildcat project trialled measures aimed at encouraging the growth of wildcats in the Cairngorms. Its recommendations included raising greater awareness, encouraging responsible domestic cat ownership, fostering partnerships with estates and conducting thorough research and monitoring. An extensive captive breeding programme should be added to that list. However, in the immediate future, those actions may not be enough—and desperate times often call for desperate measures. I recently asked whether the Scottish Government would consider cloning as a means to save the wildcat. Although that suggestion did not immediately get a positive response from the minister, the storage of frozen gametes should be taken as a necessary precaution—only a multifaceted approach will save the wildcat, and we do not want the species to die out without a means of recreating it. The red squirrel is another native species that is under threat. It is the pin-up species of natural Scotland but, thanks to the spread of the grey squirrel, its numbers are under threat. I have raised the plight of the red squirrel in previous members’ business debates, and I have been pleased with the positive actions that the Scottish Government has taken on the issue. There is more than sentimentality at stake when protecting this iconic species.

Claudia Beamish makes a good point. A whole range of measures can be taken, and looking at vaccines is important. However, there is the difficult question of how they would be administered to squirrels. I dare say that we could find some volunteers if that was required. The point that I was going to make about ancient woodlands is that grey squirrels cause irreparable damage to conifers and broad-leaved trees. They strip outer bark, with the result that vital nutrients are unable to travel up trees, which often consequently die. Grey squirrels are also thought to be the carriers of diseases, including one that kills Japanese larches. They certainly carry the squirrel pox virus, which is not lethal to grey squirrels but is to red squirrels with which they come into contact. In many parts of Scotland, the red squirrel population is dying out as a result of its contact with grey squirrels that carry squirrel pox. We also know that grey squirrels kill woodland birds and damage arable crops, telephone wires and electricity cables. Invasive non-native species cost the British economy £1.7 billion a year and it is estimated that the grey squirrel alone costs it £14 million per year. In Perthshire, in the part of Scotland that I represent, there is a front line between red and grey squirrels and strong measures are needed to stop grey squirrels encroaching on the reds’ territory. It is clear that, in the past 10 years, grey squirrels have moved further and further north and we are seeing battleground areas in places such as Perthshire. There are similar situations in Aberdeenshire and the Borders, where there are red and grey squirrels in the same areas. As a consequence over time, the reds are being driven out into more and more remote areas. I pay tribute to the Perth and Kinross red squirrel group, which I met recently. It is working incredibly hard to raise awareness of the threat. Of course, the efforts of voluntary organisations, although important, can only go so far. I would like to hear from the minister about what more the Scottish Government can do to support the conservation efforts of foresters, landowners and conservation charities, including the European Squirrel Initiative. Habitat protection, trapping and the creation of grey squirrel exclusion zones should be set up. It is not just that animal species are being threatened. Wild land is disappearing—and disappearing fast. According to Scottish Natural Heritage, between 2002 and 2009 the amount of land free from visual interference or built development declined from 41 per cent to 28 per cent. If we had up-to-date statistics, I am sure that we would see that the situation has deteriorated further. Those statistics are worrying, and action must be taken to reverse the trend. In a recent BBC article based on forthcoming research from David McCrone, our landscape was chosen as the most important aspect of our culture, ahead of music and the arts. A 2008 SNH study found that 92 per cent of Scottish residents felt that wild places were important and a recent public perception survey of wilderness in Scotland found that 60 per cent of respondents believe that wild areas are under threat. There is a substantial financial case for protecting wild land. Nature-based tourism contributes £1.4 billion to the economy and spending on nature-based activities is worth 40 per cent of all tourist spending. A simple click on the VisitScotland website shows headlines that highlight Scotland’s scenery. What can be done to save wild places in Scotland? The John Muir Trust is calling for a specific wild land designation. That approach should certainly be looked at, but we would need to have some caution in implementing such a strategy. After all, what is wild land? Wild land is often a managed asset. The rolling, heather-clad hills that we have in Scotland are actually a carefully managed landscape, which supports jobs in the form of stalking and grouse shouting. Any designation must ensure the sustainability of that important rural industry. One area in which the Scottish Government could practise greater responsibility is its approach to planning. Pylons, telephone masts, wind turbines and bulldozed hill tracks are all-too-common sights on what people would see as wild land. In this debate, I do not want to go into the detail of concerns over the cost, viability and effectiveness of wind turbines, but if we are to have renewable energy projects, it is clear that we have to be very careful where we site them. Scotland is home to 10 per cent of the world’s blanket bog resource. Peat bogs are a natural carbon sink that helps to absorb harmful carbon gases. Due to their national and international significance, surely peat bogs should be exempt from turbine developments. SNH has estimated that 39,000 jobs rely on nature-based tourism, which is an awful lot more than the 11,000 who are estimated to be employed in renewable energy. We should be concerned about further losses to wild land, because of the impact on those who live and work, particularly in tourism, in the Highlands. In the year of natural Scotland 2013, saving endangered beautiful wild land and endangered species should be a priority. I urge the Scottish Government not only to get behind wildlife charities but to put in place measures to save wild land before it is too late.

I am also the champion of the juniper—that might be something to do with the fact that it is a key ingredient in a popular drink.

I am grateful to the minister for that explanation. As I quoted earlier, the figures show that there has been a decline in wild land in Scotland over the past decade or so. Is that not indicative of the fact that the planning policies to which he refers perhaps need to be revisited?

3. To ask the First Minister what action is being taken to reduce the cost of NHS medical negligence claims. (S4F-01213)

I thank the First Minister for his response, but the rising cost of medical negligence claims must be a concern, not least because it means that there is less money to spend on front-line services. The Scottish Government’s proposed no-fault compensation scheme would certainly have benefits, but it could lead to a 50 per cent increase in the cost of claims. At current figures, that would represent an extra £18 million per year, or the equivalent of the salaries of 840 nurses. In light of that, will the First Minister look seriously at all options for addressing the issue, recognising that many of those who suffer bad treatment at the hands of the NHS simply want an explanation and an apology rather than financial compensation?

7. To ask the Scottish Government how many wind turbines will need to be erected to meet its target of providing 100 per cent of Scotland’s electricity needs from renewable sources by 2020. (S4O-01825)

What is the Scottish Government’s response to the recent academic study that was published by the eminent scientist Professor Gordon Hughes of the University of Edinburgh? The report reveals that although newly erected wind turbines have a load factor of 28 per cent, the load factor falls by half, to 15 per cent, after 15 years of life, which means that to meet renewable energy targets we would need twice as many wind turbines as are currently proposed. Surely the research drives a coach and horses through the Scottish Government’s energy strategy.

6. To ask the First Minister what strategies the Scottish Government has to combat obesity. (S4F-01186)

Will the First Minister assure me that any Scottish Government approach to tackle rising levels of obesity will be based on the principle of personal responsibility, that he will not implement barmy proposals such as a punitive tax on fizzy drinks or chocolate bars, however eminent their advocates might be, and that he will help protect those of us who enjoy the odd can of juice or Mars bar from meddling, nanny-state policies?

I congratulate David Stewart on securing this debate and I thank him for bringing this important matter to the chamber. This is one of those happy issues on which there is a degree of unanimity across the chamber. I find it difficult to disagree with anything that we have heard from the previous three speakers—although if the Greens had troubled themselves to turn up we might have heard a different perspective. As David Stewart has made clear, the UK Government is reviewing the 40mph speed limit for HGVs over 7.5 tonnes, with the proposals subject to an extensive consultation process, and I believe that we should be doing the same in Scotland. It has been said that the A9, which is in my region, would benefit from an increase in the single carriageway speed limit for HGV; I certainly feel the same way and believe that, until the A9 is fully dualled, it will continue to have the reputation of Scotland’s deadliest road. Accidents on the A9 are caused by a number of reasons. There are dangerous junctions, confusing switches between dual and single carriageways and the phenomenon of platooning, which has already been mentioned. When they look in their mirrors and see long queues of cars behind them, HGV drivers sometimes feel pressured by those motorists to travel over the speed limit. If they keep to the recommended 40mph, long queues often form and driver frustration can lead to dangerous overtaking manoeuvres. Any HGV driver caught doing 47 mph risks a fine and three points on their licence. In an industry in which a person’s licence is their living, that is causing a great deal of strain. As a result, increasing the HGV speed limit could reduce the number of fatal accidents caused by platooning and, in the interim period before the A9 becomes a full dual carriageway, such temporary solutions could provide the answer to preventing serious head-on collisions. I understand the consternation of some road safety campaigners who, as Anne McTaggart mentioned, believe that increasing speed limits results in more accidents. However, until a trial is put in place, we will never know. At the very least, Transport Scotland should be trialling a 50mph speed limit on the A9 that, if successful, could predicate a permanent shift in that direction. We should also look abroad to countries where an increased speed limit is in force for ideas, evidence and figures on road safety. For example, when in New Zealand the speed limit for HGVs over 7.5 tonnes was increased to 56 mph, there was an 18 per cent reduction in accidents. As well as highlighting the safety elements of increasing speed limits, we can also make a substantial business case for such a move. Shorter, more efficient delivery times would give hauliers an advantage, and the Department for Transport has claimed that between 1.1 million and 2.4 million driving hours per year could be saved. The A9 is the main trunk road connecting the Highlands with central Scotland, so improving transportation on that main artery could be a major boon to businesses operating to and from the Highlands. There is an additional road safety element in legislating for a speed limit change, because tired hauliers who drive over their allotted hours are a road safety danger. Increasing the speed limit on single carriageway lanes could see a reduction in hauliers’ testing the limits of their endurance; faster delivery times would result in fewer exhausted drivers. Further, HGV drivers currently operate in a corridor of uncertainty relating to speed limits. As Anne McTaggart said, figures show that 70 per cent of all HGV drivers currently break the speed limit and that those who travel at or below the speed limit are faced with slower transportation times, which can put them at a competitive disadvantage. We should also understand that the current speed limit was introduced decades ago and has remained unchanged since then, despite improvements in technology, HGV design and stopping distances. The move that the motion proposes would be good for the economy, for drivers, for the environment—there is evidence that it would lower carbon emissions—and, most importantly, for road safety. For those reasons, I think that we should set the wheels in motion for at least a pilot increase in HGV speeds on the A9.

In January 2012 the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee agreed its approach to a short, focused inquiry on the achievability of the Scottish Government’s renewable energy targets. After 11 months of taking evidence, we published our report in November. Some members might infer that the timescale indicates poor convenership on my behalf; what it actually reflects is the seriousness and rigour that committee members—some of whom I see are applauding my last remark—applied in examining the Scottish Government’s ambitious targets for the development of renewable energy technologies by 2020. Before I comment on the substance of the committee’s report I want to place on record my thanks to everyone who gave evidence to the committee, whether they did so in writing, in person or during a committee visit. The committee is grateful for their time and contributions, which helped to shape the conclusions and recommendations in our report. I also thank my fellow committee members for their patience and support throughout the lengthy process. We had a number of changes of personnel during the period and I am aware that there was a particular challenge for members who were asked to approve the report when they had not directly heard the evidence. I thank our very competent team of clerks, who supported us efficiently and with good humour. In particular, I thank Joanna Hardy, who had the difficult job of drafting the report. Thanks are also due to Scottish Parliament information centre staff, in particular Alasdair Reid, and to the Parliament’s media office for handling so well the arrangements for Donald Trump’s appearance before the committee. Whatever our views on his contribution, that was a good day for the Parliament. In a 13-minute speech I cannot do justice to all the areas that the committee scrutinised and commented on. I will focus on areas that I think are key to achieving the Government’s ambitious targets. It is worth making the point that this was a report into not the desirability but the achievability of the targets—had it been the former, it might have been even harder to get a consensus around some of the report’s conclusions. Members will be aware that I have views on certain aspects of renewable energy policy, in particular the expansion of onshore wind, which—in my usual understated, shrinking-violet fashion—I occasionally air publicly. However, in this debate I speak as convener of the committee, so today, at least, I will leave it to others to make those arguments, if they wish to do so. As the committee learned during its inquiry, the renewable energy sector is a rapidly evolving policy area. During the committee’s consideration of our draft report and after its publication there have been a number of policy announcements at Scottish and UK levels. I will endeavour to comment on those, where they are relevant. First, let us consider the big question. Are the Scottish Government targets achievable? In relation to the target of generating the equivalent of 100 per cent of electricity consumption by 2020, yes. The committee agreed that, on balance, the evidence that we heard is that the target is achievable, but—and this is crucial—it will be achievable only if a number of issues are addressed. I will say more about those issues later. What about the target for renewable sources to provide the equivalent of 11 per cent of Scotland’s heat demand by 2020? There was a more mixed result in that regard. We recognised that the interim target had been met, but the committee received evidence that there is a risk that the 2020 target might not be met. Finally, a target has been set for local and community ownership of 500MW energy by 2020. We have doubts about the level at which the target is set and we recommended that separate targets for local and community ownership be established. I return to those issues that need to be addressed if the 2020 target of generating the equivalent of 100 per cent of electricity consumption is to be achieved. We believe that one of the most challenging issues is planning. As we learned, uncertainty, time delay and complexity within the current planning regime increase the levels of risk and therefore expense for developers, which in turn could place in jeopardy the Scottish Government’s ability to meet its targets. We also heard from many objectors, particularly those who were opposed to inappropriately sited wind turbines, concerns about the way in which the current system works. As members will be aware from the media, an increasing number of renewable energy applications are being submitted to local authorities for determination. The distribution of those applications across local authorities is resulting in some councils experiencing very high volumes of applications. Combined with the pace at which renewable energy technology is evolving, that can leave councils facing the significant challenge of balancing national priorities with local interests. The committee heard that the pressure had become so great that some councils, such as Aberdeenshire Council and Fife Council, had called for a temporary moratorium on onshore wind-farm applications to allow their planning teams to cope with the volume of work. One potential remedy for the squeeze on resources that the committee considered is the introduction of higher planning fees to enable an expansion in staff numbers. As members are aware, an increase in planning fees was the subject of a recent Scottish Government announcement, which stated that, subject to parliamentary approval, planning fees will be increased by 20 per cent in April 2013.

I do not recall that that issue was specifically addressed in the evidence. I would need to go back and check what the witnesses said to us, but I suspect that the issue is a symptom of the broader squeeze on local authority budgets. Perhaps I could come back to the member later if I get the opportunity. The committee supports the Government’s proposed fee increase for larger-scale planning applications where those will not disadvantage community developers. However, we are clear that, in return for higher fees, planning authorities should look to address duplication of effort for developers and to improve efficiency. One example of removing duplication of effort that we highlighted is that planning authorities could gather information on cumulative visual impact from their own records rather than require each developer to undertake that task separately. We welcome the minister’s confirmation that the Government, along with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, will look at proposals to link performance with the wider reform of planning fees. We also welcome the fact that the Scottish Government is working with stakeholders to identify and pilot good practice on a proportionate approach to the provision of information to support planning applications. However, it would be helpful if the minster could confirm when that pilot will be completed and evaluated. Another issue that I want to mention relates to environmental impact assessments, which are required for planning proposals that are likely to have a significant effect on the environment by virtue of factors such as size, nature and location. As the committee learned, planning authorities are tending to err on the side of caution in requesting such assessments for medium to small-scale projects, as they are aware that the absence of an environmental statement is open to challenge by objectors. We therefore recommended that the Scottish Government should clarify to local authorities those circumstances under which it is acceptable not to provide an environmental statement. In its response, the Government explained that the requirements derive from European directives, which the European Commission is currently reviewing. We would welcome information on how the Government is engaging in that review and on how the Government is working with local authorities to ensure that they are not overly cautious in interpreting the circumstances in which an environmental statement is required. It is a source of frustration to planning authorities that developers ignore spatial plans and put in speculative applications to councils for determination. Spatial plans identify the areas appropriate for siting turbines and provide clarity for developers and local residents on the preferred areas for development contained within the plan. We were extremely disappointed by the progress made by local authorities in producing spatial plans. In its response, COSLA explained that a short-life working group on onshore consents had been formed during the committee’s inquiry and that the working group would look to take forward some of those matters. Although the committee welcomes that consideration, it remains concerned by the speed of progress in providing spatial plans, which are crucial to informing developers and the public what they might expect in relation to renewable developments in their area. In our report, we also urge developers to play their part in reducing planning authorities’ workload by paying due cognisance to the local spatial framework and areas of search, where those are available. Throughout the inquiry, the committee heard a strong message from potential investors that strong political leadership and a robust, reliable and predictable investment climate and subsidy regime are crucial if the Government’s targets are to be met. A range of funding is available to support the development of renewables, including the renewable energy investment fund, the Green Investment Bank and the community and renewable energy scheme. However, the committee heard that small and medium-scale projects faced distinctive difficulties in attracting lending from banks, with some banks withdrawing from the market segment supported by feed-in tariffs, which tends to be the smaller developments. Given that small-scale installations have a valuable contribution to make towards achieving the Government’s targets and that they are more affordable for farmers, landowners or community groups, it is important that such developers are able to access lending. We therefore regret the reluctance of banks to lend in that sector, but we welcome the commitment of the renewable energy investment fund to support community and rural business projects. We would welcome an indication from the minister of any projects that will be financed by the fund. I will touch briefly on the question of infrastructure. In addition to the question of transmission and distribution, another issue that arose was the ability of the grid to reach areas where renewable energy resources are most abundant. Infrastructure—or the lack of it—also impacts on Scotland’s capacity to export spare energy. Scottish islands such as Orkney best illustrate the issue. Orkney’s connection to the mainland is at full capacity, but there is no project big enough to provide the critical mass that would provide a return on the investment in a new cable. Although we heard from some witnesses that there was a strong case for transmission network operators going ahead and increasing capacity in advance of increased demand, the Office of the Gas and Electricity Markets’ duty is to ensure that investment does not place in advance of need, in order to protect the consumer from the cost of an asset that is not used. Although we welcome Ofgem’s announcement in April last year that it would fast-track the business plans of Scottish transmission network operators to hasten upgrades to capacity and greater interconnection, we remain concerned that Ofgem is not taking a proactive approach to grid development. We will also watch with interest the outcome of the Scottish island renewable generation steering group, which was set up by the United Kingdom Government in October 2012 to advise on the barriers to faster connection of Scottish island renewables. The committee was strongly supportive of grid-connected test facilities, such as the European Marine Energy Centre in Orkney and the proposed European offshore wind deployment centre at Aberdeen Bay. We were fortunate enough to see the test centre and the impressive array of other renewables facilities in Orkney and the Pentland Firth. Test facilities are critical to Scotland being at the forefront of newer technologies, proving the case for investment and helping to drive down costs. I will close by commenting on one of the most contentious issues relating to renewable energy—its potential impact on tourism and Scotland’s rural and remote areas. I do not doubt the strength of feeling on the issues. At the time of reporting, the committee had received no robust, empirical evidence indicating a substantial negative impact. However, given its importance, it is vital that VisitScotland and the Scottish Government continue to gather and take account of evidence from visitors to Scotland and other research in the area, and we welcome the Government’s commitment to do so. Since concluding our evidence taking, I am aware that at least one more study—from the John Muir Trust—into the area has been published. I am sure that there will be more. The inquiry into the achievability of the Scottish Government’s renewable energy targets may not have ended up being short and focused; nonetheless, I hope that it was valuable. I hope that our recommendations will be helpful to the Government in developing future policy, and that the report will be a useful contribution to the on-going and lively debate about the development of renewable energy in Scotland. I move, That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations in the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee’s 7th Report, 2012 (Session 4): Report on the achievability of the Scottish Government’s renewable energy targets (SP Paper 220).

Will Roderick Campbell give way on that point?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

Earlier in the debate, my colleague Liz Smith set out why the Scottish Conservatives came to the conclusion some years ago that we supported a graduate contribution towards the cost of higher education. At that time, we did not envisage the contribution being on the scale that was applied south of the border, but we accepted that there was a need for additional funding in the sector and that that was one way of providing it. Scottish universities have a strong international reputation, but they will need additional funding if they are to maintain that. Given the pressure on the public finances, it is simply not realistic to expect the taxpayer to put in more and more money, unless we take the advice of Joan McAlpine, who revealed earlier that she supports Scandinavian levels of taxation. I dare say that she will be getting an urgent summons to John Swinney’s office later today. The danger is that, if we cannot find the additional cash, our institutions will be left behind in a global competition for excellence. Already, Scottish universities face pressure from their high-flying staff being attracted away to better funded institutions and better salaries south of the border. We have to ensure that we are on a level playing field across the UK. I would like to concentrate on the social justice aspect of tuition fees. Proponents of free education argue that it is essential to provide access for all, but not only is that claim not supported by the available evidence, but in fact the evidence is that maintaining free education in universities actually hurts those from less well-off backgrounds who are seeking to better themselves.

I would like to develop my point. I will give way later if I have time. We know that one way in which the SNP protected the higher education budget was to raid funding for FE colleges. Even though John Swinney found additional money in the budget two weeks ago to reduce the level of cuts, our colleges are seeing their overall budgets slashed by £50 million in the next financial year and the one after that. Members on the SNP benches who cheered that destruction of the college budget should be ashamed of themselves.

I will let the cabinet secretary justify that destruction.

Presiding Officer, I hope that you will allow me some extra time for giving the cabinet secretary a third speech in the debate. I wish that he would focus on what is happening in Scotland because, whether we like it or not, there are more students in our universities from middle-class backgrounds than from working-class families. Conversely, many of those from less well-off backgrounds will go to college to get the training and skills that they need. Transferring money from the college budget to the universities sector is therefore a redistribution of wealth in reverse. It involves taking from those who are less well off and providing a subsidy to the middle classes. SNP members who claim to be interested in social justice will have to work hard to justify their support for such an approach. The other mantra that we hear continually from the SNP benches—we heard it from the cabinet secretary today, and we heard it from other SNP members—is that tuition fees or a graduate contribution will deter those from less well-off backgrounds from accessing university education. As I have pointed out in the chamber before, that claim is simply untrue. It is without foundation and the evidence is to the contrary. NUS Scotland is clear about where matters stand. In its publication “Unlocking Scotland’s Potential: Promoting Fairer Access to Higher Education”, it states: “Scotland continues to have the poorest rate of access to university in the whole of the UK for students from poorer backgrounds.” That was after the introduction of tuition fees south of the border. The latest UCAS figures show that applications from students from poorer backgrounds are at their highest level in England, Wales and Northern Ireland despite fees of up to £9,000 per year. The sad fact is that Scotland has the lowest proportion of students from the poorest backgrounds attending university compared with the other parts of the UK, despite the provision of so-called free education. The proportion of Scotland-domiciled students from socioeconomic classes 4 to 7 who are participating in higher education is 29.6 per cent. The equivalent figure for England is 30.7 per cent. Let us look at individual participation rates for the most deprived areas. The University of Oxford attracts 2.5 per cent. That is nowhere near high enough, but it still beats the University of Aberdeen, whose figure is 2.2 per cent. The University of Cambridge attracts 3.1 per cent. That is nowhere near enough, but it still beats the University of St Andrews, whose figure is 2.6 per cent. The London School of Economics attracts 3.7 per cent. Again, that is nowhere near enough, but it is better than the University of Edinburgh, whose figure is 3.4 per cent. Also, the drop-out rates are higher in Scotland. The evidence on this is absolutely clear and uncontestable: tuition fees in England and Wales are not putting off people from poorer backgrounds. The reason for that is simple: the quid pro quo for the introduction of tuition fees and top-up fees was the implementation of generous bursary schemes for those from poorer families—schemes that are denied to people in Scotland, so that those from poorer families are not getting access to education on the cabinet secretary’s watch. If we had a graduate contribution in Scotland, that is what we could be doing. SNP members need to stop distorting the truth. They need to stop making false claims about the impact of fees on graduate contributions and they should recognise that the track record in England and Wales in this area—and in many others—is better than it is in Scotland. There is no point in the cabinet secretary shaking his head—facts are chiels that winna ding.

What a dismal and pathetic intervention from a man who is driven by ideology and so blinded by it that he cannot see among the haze of figures the facts that make it clear that students from poorer backgrounds in England and Wales get better access than do those in Scotland—on his watch. What a dismal record. On the issue of stigma—

Well, I have taken two very long interventions from the cabinet secretary, as you know, Presiding Officer. In closing I wish to address the nonsense about stigma attaching to those who get their fees paid. In 1983, I went to the University of Aberdeen, as the son of a car mechanic, on a full grant. I did not feel stigmatised. The full grant, in those days, was a badge of pride, not a sign of stigma. I do not think that it held me back in my career. We should stop the nonsense and listen to the facts.

Will the member give way?

Does the member blame the Westminster Government for the fact that the participation rates in Scottish universities for people from less well-off backgrounds are poorer than they are in England and Wales? Whose fault is that?

Who controls the Parliament?

Across the western world, Governments are having to deal with difficult financial situations as a result of excessive borrowing in the past and the economic crisis of 2008, and they are having to make tough choices. Despite his protestations, John Swinney is actually better off than most, if not all, of his contemporaries. In cash terms, the Scottish Government’s budget this year is higher than it was last year, albeit by a mere £7 million. Nevertheless, it has increased, and we need to see it in that context. We have heard from SNP members that Mr Swinney is to be congratulated on delivering a balanced budget. They seem to forget that that is a legal requirement for the finance secretary. It is a bit like congratulating him on paying his taxes on time or driving at the speed limit. I am sure that, as a responsible citizen, Mr Swinney does both those things, but they are not causes for congratulation. Mr Kevin Stewart made an interesting point about the need for the Opposition to bring forward alternative budgets. I know that he was not in Parliament when the SNP was in opposition but, before he made that comment, he might have checked with his front bench what the SNP’s custom was in the Parliament when it was in opposition. Unfortunately, he has dug a rather large hole for himself as a result of not doing so. Mr Swinney said that the budget is about assisting economic recovery and supporting business. He is right to say that the recovery will come only through a growth in business. That is why it is so important to listen to businesses’ concerns. If he had listened to businesses’ concerns in drawing up the budget, he would have heard them say that this is not the time to increase the tax burden. The retail levy will raise an additional £30 million from the business sector, and the reduction in empty property rates relief will raise an additional £18 million from it. There is a proposed increase in business rates revenue of £400 million across two years, and a rates revaluation has been put back two years, to 2017. That will leave businesses paying rates on valuations that were set for 2010, when the economic situation was much better, of course. Before any member mentions the comparison with England, I gently point out that England and Wales have a transitional relief scheme, of course, and that such a scheme does not exist in Scotland. Let us consider the vexed issue of capital spending. The SNP would be on stronger ground in demanding additional money for capital spending if it were able to demonstrate a stronger track record with the money that it has had. Over the past few weeks, the failures of the NPD private finance model so beloved of Mr Swinney have been exposed. In the current year, instead of spending £353 million on vital projects, the SNP has spent just £20 million. Last year, it promised to spend £150 million, but it spent nothing, so at least things are getting better. That means that, in the current year, £119 million has not been spent on new schools, £65 million has not been spent on colleges, and £27 million has not been spent on roads. A couple of weeks ago, the First Minister told us that it was all the fault of the Aberdeen western peripheral road. We know now that that is not the case. It is extraordinary that the Scottish Government is always lecturing us on the need for more capital spend, but it fails to deliver vital projects with the cash that it has. Mr Swinney’s own paper to the Finance Committee said that the delays had cost 6,700 jobs in the construction sector. Much-needed and much-hoped-for jobs in construction have not been delivered because of the failures of his particular project. Before he demands more money for capital projects, he must demonstrate the ability to spend the money that he currently has. At a time of economic difficulty, it is vital that colleges are properly funded. That is important because young people are leaving school and looking for the training that they need to get into the workforce. Many of them are not able to find jobs and are therefore looking for an alternative. People who are being made redundant and people who are underemployed are looking to retrain and get skills to get back into the workforce, so we need a good deal for colleges. Mr Swinney said that the Government has delivered the best possible deal for colleges. He has reduced the size of his cuts. That is what he has done. In 2013-14, the cuts will be only £25 million; the year after that, they will be only £26 million. Never have savage cuts been announced with such flourish to such acclaim from the SNP benches as they have been today. The issue of where to cut is entirely a political choice by the SNP. I am not surprised at the negative reaction from Robin Parker of the NUS. I imagine that he will be getting a call from the First Minister before the day is out. The Government has more money to spend than it had last year and it has made the wrong choices. It made a choice to make savage cuts to the further education budget. It made a choice to tax Scottish businesses more. It has presided over the dismal failure of the NDP funding model for capital projects—

The NPD model. It has failed to deliver the 6,700 jobs that could have made a difference to improving the Scottish economy. The SNP has made the wrong choices today and the Scottish economy will be poorer as a result.

Will the minister give way?

I get the impression that the minister is coming to the end of her remarks, but she has not yet said much about the international situation. Can she say something about the role that the First Minister has taken in promoting human rights internationally—for example, when he visits places such as Qatar that have somewhat dubious human rights records?

It has been an interesting and diverse debate. We have had some thoughtful contributions and I was very taken by what Iain Gray had to say, although I do not necessarily agree with all of it. I am sure that everybody here and pretty much everybody in the population agrees in principle on the importance of upholding human rights, both at home and abroad. There is very little in the ECHR with which people will disagree. Basic rights to life, freedom from torture and ill-treatment, freedom from slavery, the right to a fair trial, the right to private and family life, and freedom of religion, expression, assembly and association are all key rights to which we believe everyone should be entitled. We should also accept that there will be areas of disagreement. As Annabel Goldie said fairly, there will on occasion be conflicts of rights between individuals—for example, where a crime has been committed and there is a conflict of rights between aggressor and victim. We need to be careful how we interpret human rights. Many people think that the courts have gone too far in interpretation of those rights—for example, by paying compensation to prisoners for slopping out or, indeed, giving them the right to vote. As Annabel Goldie pointed out, a recent YouGov poll showed that 75 per cent of the population thinks that the Human Rights Act 1998 had gone too far and was being used too widely to create rights that it was never intended to protect. However, I wish to spend most of my speech looking at the international situation, because I believe that we have a duty to promote human rights internationally, using our influence and power as a trading nation. It is worth examining the record of the UK Government and, indeed, of the Scottish Government in this field and looking at a couple of examples. The first example is China. In it we have a very important trading partner, but one in which freedom of speech, of the press, of movement, of religion, of sexuality and of politics are all strictly forbidden. Executions and torture are regularly used by authorities there against those who question the state, and between 5,000 and 8,000 people are executed every year. As members might expect, the UK Government has been very vocal on the issue of Chinese human rights. In 2010, on his first state visit to China, David Cameron made clear his concern about Chinese human rights and established the human rights dialogue between the two Governments, which started in January 2011. That approach won respect from the Chinese. The First Minister made a state visit to China in 2009, describing it as “the greatest country on earth.” He has since made two visits and I can find no record of him on any occasion speaking out about human rights issues in China. Famously, the Scottish Government played down the Dalai Lama’s recent visit to Scotland. The First Minister cold-shouldered him after supposedly coming under pressure from the Chinese authorities. Who mentioned hypocrisy? The second example is Qatar—a country in which migrant workers are oppressed and homosexuality is illegal and punishable by up to five years imprisonment. Human Rights Watch says that the football world cup that is to be played in Qatar in 2022 will be “a crucible of exploitation and misery” for poorly paid and migrant workers. The Amir of Qatar is an active supporter of the Muslim Brotherhood, and it is widely believed that he also funds dissidents in Mali. When the location of the 2022 world cup was announced, the Prime Minister made it clear that football is for everyone and that no one should be excluded based on their race, religion or sexuality. However, when the First Minister visited Qatar, he was full of praise for the country and the “remarkable similarities” between our nations. Again, there was no mention of oppression or human rights. Who mentioned hypocrisy?

There is nothing wrong with promoting international trade, and it will be distasteful for us to deal with some of the countries that we deal with, which gives us the added responsibility of speaking out when we see that. The First Minister’s track record on these issues so far has been dismal, so I hope that the Minister for External Affairs and International Development’s remarks will indicate a change of direction.

As the minister will know from my speech, that self-same UK Government has spoken out clearly against human rights abuses in Qatar. I searched in vain for any comments from the First Minister on human rights during his visit to Qatar. Can the minister correct the record by telling me what the First Minister said about human rights in Qatar? Where can I find that reference?

So-called!

I am grateful to the member for giving way. On the point about constitutional power over energy policy, does she not accept that the banding for renewable energy is in fact a devolved matter, as indeed is the whole question of planning for development? There is a whole range of powers within the gift of the Scottish Government that it could use if it wished to.

It is clear from the debate that we have a substantial and rising problem with fuel poverty across Scotland. In December, the Scottish Government released the latest fuel poverty figures, which are from 2011. At that stage, the number of fuel-poor households was 684,000—nearly 29 per cent of the total. However, as we heard during the debate, Energy Action Scotland estimates that the current figure is closer to 900,000, which would be 40 per cent of the total. The problem is huge, and it is growing. We should not forget that the Scottish Government has a target to eliminate fuel poverty in its entirety, in so far as is reasonably practicable, by November 2016, which is less than four years away. One does not need to be Einstein to work out that, in the current circumstances, that is a very ambitious target. There are principally two reasons for the increase in fuel poverty. The first is that household incomes are, generally, not increasing; if anything, they are static or in decline due to the economic backdrop. The second reason is that fuel prices and costs have been increasing dramatically.

Whatever—[Interruption.]

I hope that Jamie Hepburn will join me in welcoming the action that the coalition Government is taking to increase the tax breaks for the least well-off in society, who will pay less tax on their income. Of course, as Liam McArthur fairly said, we have heard no alternative to welfare reform from SNP members, and they have proposed no ideas about where the money would come from if savings are not made. Would they borrow more money or would they cut spending elsewhere? We simply do not know. There has been a rich irony in the debate, with SNP members on the one hand having to rely on high oil prices to fill the fiscal black hole that would exist in an independent Scotland and on the other realising that high oil prices cause fuel poverty. They cannot have it both ways, and they should stop passing the blame on to Westminster. We cannot have this debate without looking at the cost of energy and the sources of energy. I commend to the chamber the excellent work of the economist Professor Gordon Hughes from the University of Edinburgh, who has looked at the relative costs and different means of producing electricity. It is clear from that work that intermittent wind power carries a high cost—a cost that has to be borne by the consumer. The Scottish Government’s obsession with wind-based energy policy is not only blanketing our countryside with wind turbines, but contributing to fuel poverty. Every electricity bill includes a rapidly increasing levy to pay for the subsidies for wind turbines. Every time we hear someone evangelising on behalf of the wind power industry—we hear that all the time from those on the SNP benches—let us remember that that industry is built on increasing fuel poverty. Every time we hear wind farm developers talking about the sums that they pay out in community benefit, let us remember that every penny of that community benefit is being robbed from the public, many of whom can barely afford to heat their own homes. The UK Committee on Climate Change looked at the impact on bills in the long term based on different technologies. According to a recent report, electricity costs could go up 68 per cent by 2050 if we rely on gas, and by 210 per cent if we rely on renewables. It goes without saying that there is, of course, an unpredictability to fossil fuel costs, but the United States has seen a substantial fall in the cost of gas, with wholesale prices falling by more than 50 per cent as a result of the exploitation of shale gas and consequent reductions in household bills. Moreover, in the States there has been a reduction in CO2 emissions because of the displacement of coal as a means of producing electricity. There is a cost to the SNP Government’s fixation with wind power policy. What else can be done to tackle the problem? The UK Government is to be commended for the approach that it has set out in the Energy Bill, which would require energy companies to help customers get on the best energy tariff and to promote energy efficiency through electricity demand reduction. We know that there are far too many different tariffs available and that the picture is far too confused. John Wilson delivered a very good speech in which he highlighted that particular problem. The issue needs to be simplified, and the UK Government’s action on that front is welcome. Like Liam McArthur, I welcome that as a major step forward. The Scottish Government has responsibilities in that area, too. During its evidence-taking sessions on the Scottish Government’s draft budget, the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee heard that £200 million each year is required to meet the 2016 target. As we have heard, the Scottish Government has allocated £65 million—one third of the required sum—and expects the rest to come from the energy companies. It is unclear to what extent the various measures that the Scottish Government is proposing are being targeted on the fuel poor as opposed to those who simply wish to reduce their fuel bills and improve energy efficiency. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth ducked the issue in his response to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee’s budget report, so we need greater clarity from the Scottish Government about what exactly is on offer. Much more needs to be done to promote energy efficiency. That is covered in the UK Energy Bill. The cheapest energy of all is that which is not used. A wide range of programmes are currently available to consumers, but the landscape is confused and much more needs to be done to simplify it. In addition, there is the green council tax discount, which the Scottish Conservatives were instrumental in having introduced, but its take-up rate is woefully low and there is very little public awareness of the scheme. Much more needs to be done to encourage local authorities to make use of it, and to incentivise householders to improve the energy efficiency of their homes. It is simply not good enough for the Scottish Government to give Westminster all the blame for the lack of progress. Through the Energy Bill, Westminster has already signalled that it is taking action in this area. The Scottish Government now needs to pull its weight, end its fixation with wind power, clarify its contribution to fighting poverty and promote energy efficiency. Under the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001, it has a statutory duty to eradicate fuel poverty. It need not think that it will get itself off the hook by trying to blame someone else.

I thank Adam Ingram for securing the debate. I enjoyed listening to his opening speech and found myself agreeing with most of it, although he rather lost me with his final line. There is something of a misunderstanding about the coal industry in Scotland. Many people assume that, with the closure of the deep pits, the industry no longer exists. I do not want to get involved in a historical dispute, but I say gently to Dr Elaine Murray that the person who did most to close the deep mining industry in Scotland was not Margaret Thatcher but Arthur Scargill. There are still huge reserves of coal in Scotland. It is a valuable source of energy that we should use. In recent years, it has become rather the ugly duckling of energy generation, but despite that, the industry is still key to our energy future. As in life, when it comes to energy, balance is crucial. An overreliance on gas—or, indeed, renewables—could handicap the future profitability of businesses and threaten us with spreading fuel poverty. As Adam Ingram set out, in Scotland, the coal industry contributes more than 4,000 jobs and generates more than £450 million for the economy. In the main, those jobs are permanent and stable and the wages can be higher than average. In some cases, they can be up to three times the wages of people who work in supermarkets. In my region—in Fife and Stirling—the coal industry supports hundreds of jobs. Scotland’s largest supplier of solid fuel, Fergusson Coal, operates from Stirling and alone sustains 200 jobs. Despite coal currently being responsible for 54 per cent of the UK’s energy mix, its future is uncertain. Adam Ingram and Elaine Murray referred to the opencast mining company ATH, which announced just before Christmas that it was falling into administration, which has placed question marks over the 300 jobs that it supports—some of them in my constituency. Cheaper foreign coal is also threatening the industry’s survival in Scotland and industry leaders tell me that the burden of regulation is also hindering its competitiveness. The industry needs assurances on its future from the UK Government and the Scottish Government. There needs to be a strategy for coal just as there is a strategy for gas. It would be good to hear the minister publicly commit to the future of coal within Scotland’s energy mix.

Yes. I will address that point if time allows, but the point that I want to make to the minister is that prospective investors need assurances about the future of coal and will invest only if they believe that its future is secure. I will address the point that the minister made. There was some good news for the industry last week, because the Office of Rail Regulation postponed the introduction of new freight charges. It chose the lowest increase and to phase the full cost over three years, which means that the industry has more time to adapt. However, I recognise that there are still concerns for Scottish coal producers, and that coal travelling long distances from Scottish mines to English power stations will face higher charges. It is a matter of balance between what the industry pays and what the taxpayer pays. We need to be aware of that. Coal means security of supply. There are between 100 and 300 years of coal left in Scotland. It is also cheap—it is the cheapest form of energy. It costs £25 per megawatt hour compared to £140 per megawatt hour for offshore wind. Coal has a role to play, but we cannot ignore the emissions issue. Coal is not clean, but it can be clean. Intensive scrubbing and other measures are greatly reducing pollutants, but the future must be carbon capture and storage. I join other members in the debate in hoping that the opportunities at Peterhead and Grangemouth for experimental CCS plants will get the go-ahead. With those, we could have clean coal and this vital industry and the jobs that it supports would have a bright future.

Is the member really telling us that a megalomaniac hard-left union leader exploiting ordinary coal miners to try to bring down a democratically elected Government is something to be celebrated?

7. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with the A9 safety group on speed limits for HGVs on the A9. (S4O-01655)

The minister will know that, on single carriageway sections of the A9, slow-moving HGVs are an issue. Long lines of vehicles build up behind them, leading to driver frustration. In some cases, the issue is the cause of accidents. Will the minister look seriously at increasing the speed limits for HGVs on the A9, which could help to remove driver frustration and improve the accident rate on one of Scotland’s deadliest roads?

I am grateful to the Finance Committee for its report and for its recommendations, which I read with great interest. There is an overlap between some of the committee’s work and some of the work of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, which tomorrow starts taking evidence in our inquiry into underemployment in Scotland. We will hear from Professor David Bell, whose remarks were reported in The Scotsman yesterday, as Roderick Campbell said. Much of what is in the Finance Committee’s report will be helpful in providing a base for some of the work that the EETC will do. It was interesting to see how much overlap there has been between the Finance Committee’s work and some of the EETC’s past work. I was taken with the section on soft skills, which is a constant refrain for members of the EETC. Employers tell us that people—particularly young people—come into the jobs market with the technical skills for a job but lacking the soft skills that they are looking for. By “soft skills”, I mean the ability to communicate and to relate to other people in the workforce, a proper work ethic, so that the person can turn up on time, present well and dress appropriately, and other things that people who have been in the workforce for a long time might take for granted. It is fair to say that much of the evidence in that regard is anecdotal and that the issue might be overstated. Nevertheless, it is something that we hear from employers and a similar refrain seemed to emerge in the evidence to the Finance Committee from companies such as Asda, Social Enterprise Scotland and Cruden Building & Renewals. The message came through quite loud and clear to the Finance Committee that there is an issue to do with a lack of confidence among young people, in particular. That is one of the soft skills that it is difficult to teach; the issue needs to be worked on to a much greater extent. A little over a year ago, when the EETC took evidence on the tourism industry, we dug into the issue in some detail. It is an interesting and sometimes quite worrying aspect of the tourism sector in Scotland that many of the people who are working in our tourist establishments are not Scots but come from eastern Europe. When we ask people in the industry why that is the case, they say that they cannot get youngsters in Scotland interested in jobs in the sector or that the youngsters who come forward do not have the soft skills that they are looking for, which is sad, and that they can find more enthusiasm and willingness to work among people from elsewhere in Europe or perhaps Australia, South Africa and New Zealand. There are excellent Scottish companies that employ people from within Scotland, but it is clear that the issue to do with soft skills must be more vigorously addressed. I was interested to see that that point was made in the Finance Committee’s report. The only way that someone can get the skills that they need for the workforce is by gaining experience, which is why workplace schemes are so important. Much good work is going on in that regard. I was interested to learn about the new property plus project in Perth and Kinross, which is aimed at getting 16 to 24-year-olds into work. Through the project, disadvantaged youngsters who have been through a community payback scheme enter into a paid work programme of 13 weeks, during which they help to repair void council houses, upgrading the properties so that they are ready to take new tenants. The scheme provides a group of youngsters with employment and training, under supervision. It gives them all the things that they need to help them to get back into the workforce and it provides the council with an asset that it would not have had otherwise, in the form of a property that is available to re-let. There are currently 15 youngsters in Perth and Kinross taking part in that project, with another 15 due to join it this month. The project is being run by the council in partnership with the charity Action for Children. It is a worthwhile project and, if it is a success, similar projects should be rolled out elsewhere in the country. We need to do more to develop work experience in schools. We have come a long way as a country—when I was in school many years ago, no work experience was available. It is now routinely available for youngsters in secondary 4 upwards but there are barriers. We need to do much more to remove some of the red tape. In previous years I have offered work experience, as many other members do, to youngsters from a local school. That offer has been taken up and some good young people have come forward to work in my office. However, I remember a few years ago, as part of that, being sent a health and safety form to fill in by the local council that ran to a large number of pages—I cannot remember how many, but it seemed like 20 pages. It was all so completely irrelevant that I refused to fill in the form. I phoned up the council and said that I was happy to take a youngster but that I was not taking two hours out of my life to fill in the form. The council was understanding and, because of the workplace environment, it said that that was fine and I did not need to complete the form. Imagine somebody with a small business, a joiner or a small builder or someone with a car workshop, who is faced with that problem—they might well say that it was not worth their while filling in that form and as a result that opportunity would be lost. There is an issue around some of the bureaucracy and paperwork. That is not to say that health and safety is not important, but we need to be proportionate in how we approach some of the issues. We need to look at the question of graduate employability. The University of Melbourne has employability built into every degree. It has a programme whereby students are taught how to market their skills. All universities and colleges need to look at better employer-student relations, mandatory CV-writing seminars and interview preparation tutorials, and inbuilt employability modules such as work experience within degrees. A lot of good work is already going on in places such as the universities of Sussex, Newcastle and Lancaster, which are working with the private sector to develop courses so that those who are coming out are perhaps more ready for the workforce than would otherwise be the case.

The energy skills academy is a welcome initiative and I am interested to see how that develops in the coming months and years. This is a valuable report and I hope that—unlike, perhaps, some of our parliamentary committee reports in the past—it will be acted on and not just left on a shelf to gather dust.

6. To ask the First Minister what action is being taken to minimise disruption from industrial action over the festive season. (S4F-01074)

If a week is a long time in politics, the three days since I lodged that question on Monday have proven to be a very long time in industrial relations. Will the First Minister join me in welcoming the resolution of the industrial dispute between ScotRail and the National Union of Rail, Maritime and Transport Workers and, in the spirit of the season, will he join me in wishing all travellers and those working for them in the sector a safe journey and a very happy Christmas?

I do not think that the minister got round to answering the third question from my colleague Mary Scanlon, so perhaps I could give him another opportunity to address the point. Will a similar package to that which is being offered today to Remploy employees be offered to disabled staff from many other social enterprises or supported businesses, who also face an uncertain future?

I very much welcome this debate on the role of scientific evidence and advice in public policy, and I welcome the minister to his place. I am sorry that the cabinet secretary has departed; he stood in valiantly for the minister in the minister’s absence. I am not sure what it is about the cabinet secretary, but I always find him much more agreeable when he delivers somebody else’s speech, rather than his own. I found little to disagree with in the cabinet secretary’s speech and in what we just heard from Mr Findlay. Excellent contributions about the role of science have been made. I preface my remarks by saying that scientists are not always right. We should always approach scientific advice with a healthy dose of scepticism. I will give two examples of what I am talking about. If we went back 80 years, we would find that eugenics was viewed as a respectable science in the scientific community. That scientific theory reached its hideous end point at the Nazi concentration camps. We would not find a respectable scientist today who would admit to believing in eugenics and yet, in living memory, it has been a widely held scientific belief in society. Similarly, in relation to climate change and global warming, we are told today that there is a scientific consensus about the impact of human behaviour on global temperatures. However, we do not have to go back far—only 40 years or so, to the 1970s—to find that the self-same climate scientists told us that we were about to enter another ice age.

I do not want to depart into a debate about climate science. I was simply making the point gently—although I seem to have hit a raw nerve with Mr Harvie in doing so—that the strong scientific consensus in the 1970s was that we were heading for another ice age. I refer him to the scientific articles, which I can produce for him if he wishes, that said that at the time. We should always be wary when a scientific consensus is claimed and we should always challenge and debate such matters. I will raise a couple of issues on which we could do with a bit more science in the debate, despite what we have heard from the Scottish Government about scientific evidence and advice. The first issue is genetically modified crops. It is widely believed throughout the world and the scientific community that such technology offers great opportunities and has the ability to feed the world’s growing population. If any member has not had the opportunity to do so, I strongly recommend that they visit the excellent James Hutton Institute in Invergowrie, which is doing world-leading research in the subject but which is held back by the Scottish Government’s approach, which does not permit the institute to do field trials of GM crops. I understand the pressure that Governments are under and I understand that the public are concerned, that there is a lot of pseudo-science out there on the internet and that there are concerns about tabloid headlines that refer to Frankenstein foods. I simply say to the Scottish Government that it should have more courage and listen to people such as Anne Glover, the former chief scientific adviser to the Scottish Government and the current chief scientific adviser to the European Union, who said just this year: “There is no substantiated case of any adverse impact on human health, animal health or environmental health, so that’s pretty robust evidence, and I would be confident in saying that there is no more risk in eating GMO food than eating conventionally farmed food”. I am sure that members will recognise that the strong belief among scientists is that we should not close the door on GM crops. The Scottish Government should listen to that scientific advice. The second issue is energy policy. The Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee has just done an extensive inquiry into renewable energy. In the breadth of the evidence that the committee took, it was interesting to note how the weight of the scientific and technical evidence was sceptical about the overfocus on intermittent forms of energy, particularly onshore wind. When we looked at the evidence from bodies such as the Institution of Engineering and Technology, which sent the committee a joint submission from Sir Donald Miller, the former chair of Scottish Power, and Colin Gibson, the former power networks director of National Grid, we saw that they all expressed the same concerns. On the other side of the debate, we received evidence from lobbyists such as WWF, Friends of the Earth and Scottish Renewables, which all said that there was no problem. We should listen to the scientists and the experts, not the lobbyists, and we will get better policy as a result. I am grateful to the cabinet secretary for indicating his support for my amendment. Education is vital: no matter how good our scientific advice is today, we need to ensure that we train the next generation of scientists so that they can continue to provide the necessary advice. There are skills gaps in that regard. Any member of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee will be aware, from the evidence that is regularly presented to us, that there is a concern—particularly in areas such as engineering and science—that the flow of new entrants to the industry is not sufficient, which is an issue that Neil Findlay addressed in his speech. There is a problem at college level with cuts in STEM courses. According to a parliamentary written answer that I received just a few weeks ago, there has been a 41 per cent decline in the number of places in science and mathematics at further education colleges since 2008-09. That is not surprising at a time of squeezed college budgets, which I will not go into today as we have discussed that enough in the past few weeks. However, when colleges are under financial pressure, it is easy for them to make cuts in the courses that are expensive to deliver and labour intensive, and which require a lot of space. Those courses will be in science, technology and engineering, as it is much cheaper to deliver courses in a lecture theatre where a lot of students can be packed in. We need to be careful about that and ensure that those college courses are available. We also need better careers guidance—

Too often, the committee heard the message that youngsters are not getting proper advice about the opportunities that are available in new industries and in areas such as oil and gas and renewables. Much more needs to be done in that field, as we need a new generation of scientists. I move amendment S4M-05154.1, to insert at end: “, and believes that, as the next generation of scientists and engineers is vital to informing decision making and government policy in the future, there needs to be a greater focus from the Scottish Government and all those involved in the delivery of education at all levels on promoting science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) subjects for study and on presenting the advantages of careers in science and engineering to all.”

7. To ask the Scottish Government how it ensures that companies setting up or expanding activities in Scotland comply with the conditions attached to any financial assistance it has granted. (S4O-01562)

When Amazon came to Fife last year, it received more than £8 million in support from the Scottish Government. At that time, Amazon promised to create 750 permanent jobs but, to date, only half of them have been delivered, with many other workers on short-term or casual contracts. What is the Scottish Government doing to ensure that companies such as Amazon not only pay their taxes but, more importantly, keep their promises?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to ensure that national health service boards do not manipulate waiting time figures in order to meet targets. (S4T-00151)

Yesterday, we learned that two top executives in NHS Tayside have been suspended following the Audit Scotland investigation to which the cabinet secretary referred into discrepancies in waiting time figures. That follows allegations of behaviour in NHS Grampian to massage waiting lists and, of course, the fiasco earlier this year in NHS Lothian. Will he now accept that there is an endemic problem with manipulation of data in NHS boards across Scotland? What urgent steps is he taking to sort out the situation?

I think that most reasonable people would think that two out of 14 to date is a pretty serious failure rate for the NHS boards. We have had cause to question the Scottish National Party Government’s figures in other areas and we have found them wanting. Now we are wondering whether we can trust its NHS waiting times and waiting list figures. Given the seriousness of the situation, will the cabinet secretary request time for an urgent statement to Parliament so that we can have the matter fully discussed and debated?

Was Peter Hain persecuting the disabled when he closed 29 Remploy factories under a Labour Government?

I am grateful to the member for giving way again. Will she set out in detail what steps the Labour Government took when it was in power to avoid tax evasion by large companies such as Starbucks?

We should remember that the debate is about people and that the people who are affected are the committed staff of Remploy, who face a difficult and uncertain future. Whatever the outcome of the debate, it is important that we do all that we can to maximise the help for those who face that difficult time. It is no consolation to the Remploy workers, but they are not alone in the Scottish workforce in facing a difficult and uncertain future. We have recently seen the closure of Hall’s of Broxburn, with the loss of 1,500 jobs, while those working for the remainder of the Vion Food Group face an uncertain time. We need to be conscious of that when we approach debates on such issues. The background to the debate is the Sayce review, which was headed by Liz Sayce, the chief executive of Disability Rights UK and the former director of the Disability Rights Commission. She concluded, after an extensive review, that employment services should be focused on disabled people themselves rather than on institutions, to enable disabled people to access mainstream jobs in the same way as everyone else does. I think that that general approach commands widespread support, and I think that Dennis Robertson acknowledged that very point in his powerful speech.

I will come on to that point. The Sayce review concluded: “In relation to Remploy factories there was a total consensus among disabled people’s organisations”—

Will the member let me finish quoting from the review? It concluded: “there was a total consensus among disabled people’s organisations and charities that the factories were not the model for the 21st Century, and that Government funding should be invested in effective support for individuals, rather than subsidising factory businesses.” Bob Doris said that the closures are ideologically driven. If that is the case, the ideology seems to have a lot of support among disabled groups.

I will come on to that. I can say only that I was quoting from the Sayce report and the work that Liz Sayce did.

No. I have taken two interventions and if I take another I will have no time to say anything at all. I ask Mr Brodie to take his seat, please. A few harsh words were said about the UK Government’s record. Let us get some facts on the record. The UK Government has protected the £320 million per year budget for specialist disability employment. It is a fact that, for the cost of one job in a factory such as a Remploy factory, four jobs can be provided in mainstream employment, with adequate support. It is also a fact that the Remploy employment service has been an undoubted success, with 35,000 disabled and disadvantaged people supported into work during the past two years.

No, I am sorry. I need to make progress. I will give way to Mr Robertson later, if I have time. As Mary Scanlon said, there is nothing new about the process. It was Labour minister Peter Hain who closed 29 out of 83 Remploy factories back in 2007, and more jobs were lost then than are threatened now. At that time, Peter Hain put the rest of the Remploy network on notice. Let me quote from Hansard. Peter Hain said: “We have managed to keep open 55 sites only on the basis of very stretching procurement targets and a tough forward plan. It will be up to everyone with an interest in Remploy—Government, management, trade unions, local MPs and other political representatives—to pull together to ensure that those factories meet their ambitious targets, otherwise they, too, could be put at risk.”—[Official Report, House of Commons, 29 Nov 2007; Vol 468, c 449.] There seems to be collective amnesia on the part of Labour members. They do one thing when they are in government and they say something quite different when they are in opposition. They should pay attention to their record. Fergus Ewing started the debate by setting out a positive and measured approach and focusing on what needs to be done. It is unfortunate that some SNP back benchers could not resist the temptation to make party-political points or, worse, constitutional points. Many Labour members forgot their record in government, but at least Patricia Ferguson offered practical suggestions, and we heard good speeches from Graeme Pearson, Sarah Boyack and Helen Eadie, who made good points about co-ops. I welcome much of what is being done. I welcome the PACE team support that is being given to employees. I welcome the minister’s undertaking on changes to the procurement process, to make maximum use of reserved contracts for supported factories and businesses. As Mary Scanlon said, the minister’s predecessor in the previous session of Parliament, Jim Mather, promised that and it is good to see the measure being delivered. I also welcome the Scottish Government’s announcement of additional financial assistance for redundant workers. Those things are all welcome, but we should not lose sight of the bigger picture. The Remploy model is losing money that could be better employed in supporting more disabled people in different ways. That is the important point to be made in the debate. As we go forward, we need to concentrate on how we learn lessons from this situation. As my colleague Mary Scanlon has said, we are happy to pass on to our colleagues at Westminster points made on the process. I return to the key issue, though, which is to support the people involved. The minister, Fergus Ewing, said that he wanted a positive debate about what we can do now. That should be our focus—helping the workers in this unfortunate situation and doing what we can to help them back into employment.

6. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government is doing to ensure that the 2014 year of homecoming is a success. (S4F-01003)

I thank the First Minister for his response. He will be aware that the gathering 2014, which was to be the centrepiece of the year of homecoming, has been cancelled by Stirling Council for perfectly understandable reasons. He may also be aware of concerns that North American visitors are less likely to come to Scotland in June to attend an event at Bannockburn than they would be to attend a clan gathering event in July or August. How will the Scottish Government and its agencies ensure that we have enough attractive events in 2014 to make up for the cancellation of the gathering, so that the large number of American visitors that our tourism industry is hoping for will still come here?

This welcome debate has been largely consensual. All members have recognised the value of business tourism, which, as the Government motion says, contributes £2.9 billion to the Scottish economy. That is vital, particularly in these difficult times. Indeed, although business tourism is by no means recession proof, aspects of it—in particular, conference organisers that deal with public sector organisations and various associations—have perhaps ridden out the recession better than some other areas of commercial activity. As we heard in the debate, the main market for Scottish business tourism is the rest of the UK. There is a key issue that we need to address, which I raised in the briefing that we had at lunch time. We need to encourage those who are perhaps coming to take part in a conference to extend their stay to participate in other activities or visit other parts of the country. Of course, we can do that only if we get to them before they make their bookings and commit to their flights. There is a question of co-ordination there, which I know that the minister and his officials are working on. I welcome the conference bid fund that the minister referred to and the success that it is having in attracting visitors from elsewhere. On the subject of finance, I was interested that a number of SNP members called for a reduction in VAT for the sector. Of course, that call is made by many in the tourism and hospitality industry, which is not surprising. It is a certainty in life that if you ask someone in business whether they would rather pay lower taxes, the answer is invariably yes. Although I am not surprised that people make that call, it is curious that the SNP would rather focus its attention on a tax that is controlled elsewhere, than a business tax that is controlled by this Government—business rates.

I will make this point before giving way to Mr Robertson. I am sure that if people in the tourism sector were asked whether they would welcome a cut in business rates, they would endorse it enthusiastically. I am surprised that SNP members did not call for that, but I give Mr Robertson the opportunity to do so.

I am sure that that would apply equally to business rates, but of course SNP members would rather concentrate their fire on a Government and a Parliament on which they have little influence, as opposed to one over which they have, I suspect, a great deal of influence. That is my only discordant note in this debate.

So as not to disappoint Christine Grahame, I will make some references to my local area, and in particular Perth and Kinross, where we have some great assets. Gleneagles hotel is a conference venue where the G7 was held and, with Stephen Leckie in the gallery, I cannot fail to mention Crieff Hydro. I would be surprised if there was a single member in the chamber who had not at some point been to a conference at that wonderful establishment. Elsewhere, we have Pitlochry Festival Theatre, which is an excellent conference venue that is well served by local hotels. In the city of Perth—Scotland’s newest city—we have the marvellous facility that is the concert hall, which opened in 2005. In the 2010-11 year, 19,000 conference delegates attended events at the concert hall over 54 days. Conferences have been held there by the Conservatives, the SNP, the Scottish Trades Union Congress, the Educational Institute of Scotland and many others. In 2008, which is the last year for which we have figures, the economic benefit was worth £1.3 million annually, and I am sure that it is much greater today. The feedback from those who have attended conferences there is extremely positive. There are, however, challenges for the city. First, although we have some very good-quality hotels in Perth, there is a need for a high-quality—perhaps four star—large hotel close to the city centre to serve the conference market. I know that Perth and Kinross officials are working on trying to attract such an operator. Secondly, good conference destinations need to be underpinned by an academic and research community. In Perth, we have Perth College, which is part of the University of the Highlands and Islands that contains the excellent centre for mountain studies, which helped to attract the global change and the world’s mountains conference in 2010. It would be good for that centre to be expanded if possible, so that we can attract yet more conferences. There is a challenge around connectivity. For example, we need better transport links. I am always banging on about the rail link between Perth and Edinburgh and how it can be improved. Stephen Leckie would not forgive me if I did not mention broadband, because people who attend conferences at the Crieff Hydro expect to have high-quality access to fast broadband, and the connection is not good enough at present. That should also mean access to 3G and 4G, as it is being rolled out, so that we do not leave rural areas behind. We need high-quality skills in hospitality, which is an issue that members of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee have touched on a great many times in the past year. Perhaps business tourism throughout the year can help to tackle the seasonality issue, which is key to driving up standards in hospitality and to upskilling the workforce. The debate has been very positive, and I commend the work that the Government is doing. Equally, I commend the work that the private sector is doing in attracting business tourism. I am happy to support the Government’s motion and the Labour amendment.

10. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to address any health inequalities between manual and non-manual workers. (S4O-01468)

I thank the minister for his very comprehensive reply. He will be aware of recent figures showing that the health divide between manual and non-manual workers in Scotland is among the worst in Europe. What is the Scottish Government doing to support initiatives such as the British Heart Foundation’s hearty lives programme, which targets health advice and assistance at people from less-well-off backgrounds?

This week, we saw the latest extraordinary twist in the cabinet secretary’s war on Scotland’s colleges. As far as we know, the facts are as follows. In a meeting at which there were some 80 to 100 people, the chair of a college board recorded the cabinet secretary’s speech for future reference. On hearing that, the cabinet secretary apparently had a tantrum. He ejected his toys from the pram, called the chair of the college to a meeting, was apparently reluctant even to shake his hand, and demanded his head. Those are not the actions of a responsible minister maintaining an arm’s-length relationship with the sector; they are the actions of a school playground bully, and they are all too typical of a cabinet secretary who is used to throwing his weight around and getting his own way on slashing budgets and forcing mergers, and now in petulantly demanding resignations. That typifies the SNP’s contemptuous approach to the education sector and, in particular, Mr Russell’s attitude. A few weeks ago, the cabinet secretary came to the chamber and had the grace to stand up and say in relation to another matter that he was wrong. Would that he had the same grace and self-awareness to do the same today. We are here to discuss the important issue of widening access in further education. That agenda is under threat from unprecedented cuts to the sector. There is a £73 million cut to the teaching grant across two years.

I do not know whether the member has noticed that we are in the Scottish Parliament discussing the actions of the Scottish Government in relation to Scotland’s colleges. I wish that SNP members would focus on their responsibilities and those of their Government and their cabinet secretary. [Interruption.]

We all know about the concerns about the cuts. Concerns have been expressed by the Educational Institute of Scotland, Scotland’s Colleges and the National Union of Students. We know the consequence of the cuts on the widening access agenda. The figures are absolutely clear. The participation rate in further education in Scotland of the 20 per cent most deprived cohort has fallen from 83.3 per 1,000 in 2007-08 to 72.5 per 1,000 in 2010-11. The latest trends suggest that that rate will decline still further, of course. As we have heard throughout the debate, there has been a disproportionate impact on women and older learners. As Liz Smith pointed out, since 2006-07 there has been a 26 per cent cut in the number of female learners, as opposed to a 13 per cent drop for men. The number of female learners is therefore falling at twice the rate as that for men, and the indications are that the changes that are going through will make things still worse. We also know that, because of the focus on providing education for those in the 16 to 21-year-old age range, older learners—many of whom have been in the workforce, have been made unemployed and are trying to retrain—cannot get college places, as those places are being allocated to 16 to 21-year-olds. There are real issues for the widening access agenda. A number of SNP members have legitimately questioned refocusing the budget and where we would find the money. We are clear where we stand on that, and I will spell it out for the benefit of SNP members: we know that the FE college budget has been cut—it was raided to fund the universities—and we make no apology for saying again that we favour a modest graduate contribution in order to put funding into the university system. All the SNP is doing is providing free university education for the better off at the expense of those from less well-off backgrounds who cannot get college places—those are the facts. We had the SNP mantra again today that university tuition fees deter those from less well-off backgrounds. Well, I checked the figures—

Oh, yes—I would be delighted to give way.

The problem for the cabinet secretary is that he is talking absolute nonsense—as ever, it is assertion and not fact. I know that because I checked the figures before I came to the chamber. The participation rate at universities by the poorest 20 per cent in England and Wales is 10.6 per cent; in Scotland, the comparable figure is 9.1 per cent. The participation from those from less well-off backgrounds in England and Wales is higher than it is in Scotland, notwithstanding tuition fees. Despite the continual assertion by the cabinet secretary and his colleagues that tuition fees will deter people from less well-off backgrounds, that idea is utterly false—[Interruption.]

The idea is utterly false because the graduate contribution was brought in with generous bursary schemes for those from less well-off backgrounds—that is undoubtedly the case, given the latest figures. The other consequence that we know of—I will mention this only briefly, in view of the time—is the 18.5 per cent cut in places for the STEM subjects since 2007. To build the Scottish economy, we need people to train in science, technology, engineering and mathematics. We should be building up places in those areas, not cutting them. It is time for the cabinet secretary to end his war on further education in Scotland and it is time, frankly, for some humility from him in this chamber.

I am grateful to the cabinet secretary for giving way. Can he explain why we are returning to this issue, when we debated it just a few weeks ago—is it because the Scottish National Party took such a hammering in the debate that it has now come back for round two?

This debate has been a rerun of a debate that we had a few weeks ago. The SNP’s scheduling of the rerun tells us that Johann Lamont has—credit to her for it—got under the SNP’s skin on the issue and that, in the debate five weeks ago, the SNP took a hammering. It has had to come back on to the pitch to try to redress the balance. The home team was 0-3 down at half-time and has limped back on the pitch, but without its star striker, who so disappointed in the previous debate. The Deputy First Minister has been left in the dressing room, so who, instead, has come on, but the super-sub? Well, the sub, anyway—the shiny new health secretary, Alex Neil. He will be recognised by Aberdeen Football Club fans of a certain vintage as the John Hewitt of the SNP Cabinet. He comes on, gets the ball, dribbles it up the pitch then blooters it over the bar. We have heard in the debate nothing new from the SNP—not from Mr Neil or anybody else. No arguments have been made that we did not hear five weeks ago and I struggled to hear a single SNP member come up with a new angle on what we heard five weeks ago, with just two exceptions. One was the cabinet secretary, who told us—I wrote it down, because it was so interesting—that the answer is higher taxes. “If we do not have enough money, we will put up taxes”. Members can check the Official Report on that. The second point—I wrote it down, too—was from Mr Doris, who told us that, since the SNP Government introduced means testing for the central heating scheme, that scheme has “gone from strength to strength”. There we go—SNP back benchers say that the way to improve public services is to bring in means testing. Let us deconstruct—if we can—the SNP’s motion. It presents universality as a matter of principle. That is clearly incorrect—a point that Willie Rennie and others made perfectly fairly. There are areas—even in the NHS—where people must already make contributions, including dental treatment or optical charges. People might get free eye tests, but when they need glasses or contact lenses, they must meet a proportion of the cost, and that contribution is means tested. The same applies in audiology and elsewhere. At the same time as the SNP is telling us about universality, it is bringing in means testing. It has already done that in the central heating scheme.

I will give way in a second. As we speak, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice is extending means testing in the legal aid budget. Universality is not a matter of principle, but a question of where the line is drawn.

I distinctly remember Mr Neil, when he was the Minister for Housing and Communities, saying something along the lines—I would have to check the record to be sure—that the right approach is to target resources better at those who are most in need. That is how the situation was approached: abandon universality and target those who are most in need. The minister can correct me if I have misinterpreted what he said.

Yes, please.

The resources were targeted at those who were most in need. That is exactly what I thought Mr Neil said. The debate is all about choices. We know that bringing in free prescriptions for people like me who can afford to pay for them will impact elsewhere in the NHS. That point was made by Audit Scotland, by Crawford Beveridge—the First Minister’s hand-picked chief economic adviser—in the report that he prepared for the SNP, by Professor Charlie Jeffery in the report for Age Scotland, and by the British Medical Association. The most laughable part of the motion—it is so laughable that the cabinet secretary made little attempt to defend it—is the part that refers to voting for independence as being the only way to protect universal benefits.

No. I need to explain this point. If there is time, I will let Mark McDonald come in. I did not hear a single SNP back bencher explain the link between the two; it is an extraordinary non-sequitur. Even Patrick Harvie, the yes campaign’s leading light, accepted that that was the case. As Gavin Brown fairly said, the demographic challenges that face us will face us regardless of the constitutional future that we chose—unless the SNP has something up its sleeve that it has not told us about. If we become independent, the choices that we make will depend on who is elected and in power at the time. The SNP is telling us that it would be in power for ever in an independent Scotland. Would the First Minister go on and on and on and on, like a Scottish version of Robert Mugabe or Fidel Castro? I see that that dismays SNP members as much as it dismays the rest of us. We need “a fully informed and measured debate on the subject of universal services”. We make that call in our amendment—a call that is echoed by the Royal College of Nursing’s submission for the debate. To inform the debate, we are calling on the Scottish Government to publish “forecasts for spending on universal services in Scotland for each of the next 10 years.” What could be fairer than that? What a reasonable request it is; to know, whether or not we become independent, where we are going and what the challenges are. I hope that the minister, when he winds up, will agree to accept the amendment, and to that reasonable request. That is how we will progress the debate—not on a ridiculous proposal in a ridiculous motion from an increasingly ridiculous Government.

I declare an interest: I am a member of the Scotland Malawi Partnership. This has been a good debate, with excellent speeches from members of all parties. The debate has been consensual and was none the worse for that. Like other members, I welcome Humza Yousaf to his new post and congratulate him on his debate debut as a minister. My only regret is that now that he is a minister he seems to have less time to tweet as regularly as he used to do, which I am sure is a great disappointment to his many followers. As the minister and several members said, next year is the 200th anniversary of the birth of David Livingstone. Bruce Crawford, Christina McKelvie, James Kelly and other members talked about David Livingstone’s legacy in Malawi. David Livingstone was a childhood hero of mine for his exploits in and exploration of Africa. He was the first European to see the Victoria falls, which of course he named for the queen of the day. I had the pleasure of spending part of my honeymoon at the falls many years ago, although not quite as long ago as when David Livingstone visited them. What is interesting about David Livingstone’s legacy, as a number of members said, is that he is still revered in Malawi, more than 150 years after he visited the area. That is unusual in the context of the European legacy in sub-Saharan Africa. He had two great passions: the promotion of Christianity, and opposition to the slave trade. Anyone who goes to Malawi, as the minister said, will recognise the huge importance of Christianity to people in the country. People in Malawi trace that back to David Livingstone and the missionaries who followed him, whose contribution they very much value. He also led his crusade against what was then the Arab slave trade, which was ravaging the population in that part of central Africa. It is that unique dual contribution that has led to him still being celebrated in Malawi today. In the post-colonial period, many African states were changing the European names that had been given to their towns and settlements to African names. It is striking, and tells its own story, that, in Malawi, the name of the principal city—Blantyre, named after David Livingstone’s birthplace—was preserved as a European name, as was the name of the town of Livingstonia. That demonstrates the affection that modern Malawians still have for David Livingstone. Of course, that connection continues today on many different levels, not least in the links between the Church of Scotland and the Church of Central Africa, Presbyterian in Malawi. When I was in Malawi in 2006, I had the privilege of attending two CCAP services. Apart from the much more enthusiastic singing that one hears in Malawi, I could almost have been at a Presbyterian Church of Scotland service back home. A number of members referred to the various groups, charities and churches in civic society in Scotland that are involved in developing links with groups in Malawi. Jamie McGrigor and others referred to the excellent work that is done by Mary’s Meals. Patricia Ferguson, Claudia Beamish and others referred to some of the political changes in Malawi, in particular those that have happened since the inauguration of Joyce Banda as the new President. Joyce Banda has made it her goal to increase economic prosperity by developing trade, not aid, as the long-term goal. We should think about how Scotland can increase its role as a trade partner, even if, like Stewart Stevenson, we want to purchase less tobacco from Malawi. When I visited Malawi in 2006, the shortage of teachers at primary and secondary levels was striking. At that time, twinning links with Scottish colleges, schools and universities were being mooted as a means of increasing the transfer of knowledge to Malawi. That is a positive move, and one that we want to develop further. I am aware of a number of Scottish teachers who have gone on secondment to Malawi, taking their skills with them and helping to raise the standard of teaching there. We have a lot to learn from one another. Jamie McGrigor and others referred to malnutrition. Apart from education, that is one of the biggest challenges facing children in Malawi. Up to 47 per cent of Malawi’s children suffer from stunted growth. That is an appalling statistic. In itself, malnutrition prevents many children from developing in education as fully as they should. Given the time available to me, I will close by offering some thoughts on international aid. A lively debate is going on about the level of international aid that we in the UK provide and whether we can afford that these difficult times. My view is that the UK Government is to be applauded for, at a time of great budget stringency, ring fencing and preserving the international aid budget. I accept that there are always issues about how that spending is allocated, and there is a big debate going on right now about the allocation to India. However, the principle of preserving the level of help that we give to other countries is absolutely vital. No matter how bad things are for people in this country in these difficult times, even the poorest people in our society have a standard of living that is the envy of many people in countries such as Malawi. Just as we are global citizens, as the motion says, we have a responsibility that goes beyond our own borders and into the wider world. The Scottish Government’s contribution to Malawi and to countries further afield might be a modest one, even on a UK scale, but it is worth while. It makes a real difference on the ground and should be applauded. I am pleased to support the motion.

In the Scottish Government’s draft budget for 2012-13, spending on science is to be cut from £6 million to £3.6 million. How does that cut fit with the minister’s warm words and his commitment to science?

Why does he not answer the question?

4. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with NHS Tayside regarding patient transport between Perth and Dundee. (S4O-01389)

As the cabinet secretary may be aware, NHS Tayside took the decision in the summer to reduce the vital 333 bus service between Perth royal infirmary and Ninewells hospital in Dundee. The link is used by patients, relatives and staff—in particular by staff who work evenings, who have been put to real inconvenience by the service reduction. Will the cabinet secretary, when he next meets NHS Tayside, impress on it the need for a full reinstatement of that vital link?

I wonder whether Stewart Stevenson, in his collection of election leaflets, has any of the SNP leaflets promising to cut class sizes to 18 in primary 1 to 3, pay off the debts of every graduate in Scotland and replace student loans with student grants. What happened to those leaflets? I have two astonishing revelations, the first of which is that I agree with most of what Patrick Harvie said. An even more astonishing revelation came earlier in the debate when we heard something that none of us thought we would ever hear in the chamber—Michael Russell saying he was wrong. The manager of Bargain Books will be rubbing his hands at the prospect of the few remaining dusty copies of “Grasping the Thistle” flying off the shelves, such is the resurgent interest that has been created by Johann Lamont. I am sure that Mr Russell is looking forward to the royalties.

I hope that Mr Findlay’s intervention will be better than his earlier one.

I advise Mr Findlay to be more careful with his money in future. I welcome the debate. Labour might be late to the table in highlighting these concerns, but its new focus is timely and welcome. I should also say that in much of this debate SNP members’ speeches have been based on a false premise. This is not about the principle of universality versus means testing. As Hugh Henry fairly pointed out, the SNP is entirely happy to support means testing in a whole range of areas and has not proposed any changes in that respect. SNP members beginning with Nicola Sturgeon and ending with Kenny Gibson said time and time again that the NHS should provide everything for free, but even they must know that that is patent nonsense. As has been pointed out, NHS patients contribute to the cost of their dental treatment and under the SNP are subject to a means test. With regard to optical care, eye tests are free but patients who need glasses or contact lenses have to pay for them and, again under the SNP, are subject to a means test. It is a similar story with hearing aids, which are also subject to a means test under the SNP. The list goes on. Over the past 11 years, I have heard not one SNP member say that all those services should be provided free of charge. As a result, it is rank hypocrisy and opportunism for SNP members to come along today and try to claim that they are the champions of free universal health provision. There are no absolutes in the debate. There is no straight choice between universalism and targeted support. There is simply a spectrum, as Jackie Baillie, Willie Rennie, Malcolm Chisholm and other members pointed out. Where we place ourselves on that spectrum depends as much on financial and economic pressures as it does on great points of principle. The SNP should abandon its conceit and accept that it has set up a false debate. After all, back in 2010, its own independent budget review report—written by none other than the First Minister’s handpicked chief economic adviser, Crawford Beveridge—raised serious questions about the affordability of certain universal benefits. It concluded: “The Panel believes that the continuing provision of a range of universal services on the same basis as at present is unlikely to be affordable in the face of the projected financial challenges. Alternative approaches should, therefore, be considered as a matter of urgency.” Back in 2010—two years ago—the SNP’s chief economic adviser was saying: “Alternative approaches should … be considered as a matter of urgency”, and it is to the SNP’s shame that it has done nothing to address those serious questions in the meantime and, instead, continues to bang on about budget cuts. The chief economic adviser to the SNP is not alone in saying that. An Age Scotland report written by Professor Charlie Jeffery questioned whether it was right that all people over 60, including wealthy ones, would get concessionary bus travel when it meant that other people would have to pay more for demand-responsive transport. It also asked: “If it is legitimate to target policies in some areas, like fuel poverty, onto the most disadvantaged, why is it not in other areas?” On university funding, the Scottish Chambers of Commerce proposed a graduate contribution, as did the SNP’s favourite think tank Reform Scotland. Audit Scotland questioned the long-term affordability of a range of policies, including free prescriptions, free eye tests and concessionary travel. Even the British Medical Association Scotland called for an honest and open debate about what we can or cannot afford in the NHS. A cloud of witnesses testifies to the fact that there is a serious problem, and that problem will exist whatever constitutional arrangement exists in Scotland post 2014. There is a consequence to the choices that the SNP makes, because providing benefits to all whether they are in need of them or not simply means that there is less money to spend elsewhere. To maintain university funding, colleges’ budgets have been slashed when more and more young people need to access training courses. The housing budget has been slashed when it could be helping the construction sector.

I think that I am in my last minute. There is rationing in the NHS—for example, in access to in vitro fertilisation treatment or the supply of orthodontic treatment to children—as a consequence of giving free prescriptions to all. There are resources that could be better spent. The debate is important and needs to be properly informed. Gavin Brown said that we need to have the information about the challenges that are ahead. We need the information to inform the debate, and I am delighted to support his amendment.

6. To ask the Deputy First Minister how the Scottish Government will ensure that patients in Scotland with heart conditions receive treatment that is comparable with that for those from the rest of the United Kingdom. (S4F-00881)

Notwithstanding what the Deputy First Minister had to say, she will be aware of the criticism that Professor Oldroyd of the Golden Jubilee hospital made earlier this week that Scotland is lagging behind the rest of the UK in introducing new drugs and techniques. As she will know, one technique that is of vital benefit to heart attack victims is cardiac rehabilitation, which is an inexpensive treatment with a proven track record in prolonging life. Will she commit to protecting and increasing funding for cardiac rehabilitation for Scottish patients?

Have any other NHS boards restricted access to IVF treatment for smokers, or is this just a cunning ploy by NHS Fife to reduce its already very long waiting lists?

6. To ask the First Minister how the Scottish Government will ensure that colleges are in a position to respond to the rise in demand for student places. (S4F-00841)

This week, we have heard the news that more than 10,000 students are on waiting lists for college places. According to John Henderson from Scotland’s Colleges, the First Minister’s Government cut the college teaching budget by 8 per cent last year and 10 per cent the year before. Larry Flanagan, general secretary of the Educational Institute of Scotland—the First Minister is fond of quoting him—said: “It is clear there has been a reduction in funding to colleges and no amount of sleight of hand on the part of the Government can alter that”. Given the soaring demand for college places, will the First Minister ensure that the colleges budget is protected from any further cuts?

The minister will have seen the terms of the Labour amendment in the name of Rhoda Grant. One concern that we in the Conservative Party have is that we do not support the socialised system of transmission charging, which we fear would increase costs to consumers, particularly in remote areas. Can the minister assure us that, in supporting the Labour amendment, we would not be committing ourselves to that approach?

In addition to the submission from WWF Scotland, did Mr Stewart read the submission from EDF Energy? It said: “Companies such as EDF Energy are planning to bring forward investment in new nuclear build, renewables and high-efficiency gas (through CCGT)”. Perhaps the situation is not as bleak as Mr Stewart paints it.

I commend Fergus Ewing for the consensual manner in which he approached the debate. Energy market reform is a complex and technical subject, in which I think few of us would profess great expertise. It was curious how few members were prepared to debate the relative merits of having different counterparties to contracts for difference—Iain Gray came closest to getting into the technicalities, as perhaps befits a former physics teacher. I do not think that there are great differences between political parties in what we are trying to achieve, with the exception of some more contentious areas, such as new nuclear power, about which I will say more if time allows. We heard some good speeches. Stewart Stevenson, in his return to the back benches, made a well-considered contribution to the debate, and John Wilson made excellent points, which I agree with, about the need to put the consumer at the centre of the policy and address growing concern about fuel poverty by attempting to keep energy bills down as much as we can. Conservatives had some concerns about the terms of the Labour amendment, which brings in the separate but related issues of transmission charging and project transmit. When we debated the issues just before the summer recess, the Scottish Conservatives made clear our concern about a move to a socialised system, which would spread the cost of transmission across all consumers and, according to figures from Ofgem, result in a substantial rise in bills for consumers in remote parts of Scotland, particularly in the north. We made it clear that that was not an approach that we could support. I am grateful to the minister for the clarity that he provided in his speech and to Rhoda Grant for clarifying that the amendment does not propose a socialised approach. On that basis, we are happy to support the Labour amendment. As members said, the purpose of energy market reform is to remove our current system of subsidies through ROCs and feed-in tariffs and replace it with a new system, which will be based on contracts for difference. I think that a person would need to be something of an expert in economics and finance to be able to explain exactly how that might work in practice, so I will consider the principles behind the approach rather than the detail. I think that all members agree that there is a need to decarbonise the electricity supply. DECC has stated its intention to improve security of supply, recognising the rising demand for electricity and a general upward trend in prices. So far, so good. I think that we all recognise that the cheapest form of electricity is that produced by burning fossil fuels. If costs were the only factor to be borne in mind, we would simply continue to do that. However, I do not think that any member thinks that that is sensible, partly because of the impact of carbon on the atmosphere and partly because of issues to do with security of supply. That means that we must look at lower-carbon sources of electricity. It means that we can continue to burn fossil fuels, with the addition of carbon capture and storage—although, of course, that increases costs and reduces efficiency. It also means that we can go for nuclear power, which I have always supported as a low-carbon source of power, although I accept that other members take a different view. Although nuclear is more expensive than conventional generation, most experts consider it to be cheaper than renewables. John Wilson talked about the “prohibitive” cost of nuclear—I think that I quote him correctly—but he was at the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee when we heard a briefing from Scottish Government officials, whom I would not expect to have a pro-nuclear bias, who told us that the lifetime costs of nuclear, including decommissioning, are comparable with the lifetime costs of developing onshore wind. On the hierarchy of costs, the costs of onshore wind, which is the most mature renewable technology, are reducing, but they are still substantially more than the costs of conventional generation, which is why onshore wind continues to be subsidised. Indeed, we heard earlier in the minister’s statement that levels of subsidy, albeit marginally reduced, will continue. Even more expensive is offshore wind, which energy market reform is seeking to encourage. It is clear that what is being proposed by DECC is only the start. There is a lot more discussion to be had, but I hope that we can agree on the general principles, as the minister’s motion appears to do. I agree with the many members who talked about the need for greater certainty. It is clear that the investment community is scared off by uncertainty about future levels of support—I was interested in the number of SNP members who were prepared to make that point. They also completely missed the related point that there is another level of uncertainty. That, of course, is about the future of our energy market across the United Kingdom, and it is based on our constitutional future. If members had read the submission from Scottish and Southern Energy to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee precisely on that point, they would have seen that there is as much investor uncertainty about that point as there is about the future of energy market reform.

I do not think that it is a question of collaboration. The question is that, if we are to develop renewables in large numbers and they require subsidy, and if we are to become a country of 5 million rather than 60 million consumers, we will need to consider carefully where that money will come from. If we could enter into forward contracts with the rest of the United Kingdom in advance of separation, that might work, but we need to see that in practice and there is no sign of that emerging. However, I know that the UK Government and DECC have been engaging constructively with the Scottish Government, and I hope that that continues. An interesting point that nobody has mentioned about the proposed bill is the UK Government’s proposal that local authorities keep business rates paid by wind farm operators. That is clearly of great interest in many parts of Scotland, not least in Perth and Kinross in my own area, and I hope that the Scottish Government is prepared to look at that approach. I am sure that my colleagues on the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee will be interested in it. The bill deals with the need for tariff reform. It is vital to drive down bills, make it easier for consumers to switch companies and make lower tariffs more transparent, as Rhoda Grant fairly pointed out. We need greater efficiency. On that—I do not say this often—I agree with Patrick Harvie. The cheapest form of energy is that which is not used at all, and we need to do much more on demand reduction, rather than leave ourselves having to produce ever more electricity at ever increasing costs. There is a lot of detail to go through but, in spite of the differences, there is much common ground. I hope that the UK and Scottish Governments can work together to find solutions.

I am most grateful to the minister for giving way. If the operators of that wind farm are going to pay £2 million per annum, is he able to tell us the profits that they will make in order to afford such a very generous sum?

Let us be clear on one point. When Mr Swinney calls for the UK Government to increase capital spending, he is calling for greater borrowing—is that not the case? [Interruption.]

I welcome the Deputy First Minister to her new role as Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure, Investment and Cities. There have been some interesting contributions to the debate. I enjoyed listening to Helen Eadie although, as usual, I did not agree with much of what she had to say. I thought Linda Fabiani made an excellent speech about the need to improve procurement. Concern about the state of the economy has been the subject of the contributions to the debate and it is true that the country faces real economic challenges. We are not alone in that. As the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth fairly acknowledged at the start of the debate, the whole western world is facing a difficult economic situation. Indeed, the UK economy is better placed than that of many of our European neighbours. There has been much discussion about the UK Government approach. It is worth repeating what Mary Scanlon said. The UK Government strategy is endorsed by the IMF, the OECD, the Bank of England, the CBI, the Institute of Directors and the British Chambers of Commerce. I appreciate that it is opposed by the Labour Party and by the Scottish Government, but I know whom I would rather listen to. It is the approach of the UK Government that has seen our market interest rates hit record lows. That has delivered a historic low mortgage rate for ordinary families across the country and low borrowing rates for businesses—all very important in these troubled times. The latest figures show that the UK economy has risen from tenth to eighth place in the World Economic Forum global competitiveness report.

I will give way to Mr Brodie, but I hope he will take the opportunity to disprove the outrageous slur by Mr Sillars that all that SNP back benchers are capable of is dumb loyalty.

I was hoping for better from Mr Brodie. As Mr Sillars said, “These are not sheep. If they were they could be forgiven.” As Mr Brodie knows, the Government is doing its best to improve the market situation for everyone. We have created 900,000 new private sector jobs since 2010. I will repeat that figure for the benefit of Colin Beattie: 900,000 new private sector jobs. Last week, the chancellor announced a new tax break of £160 million for the oil and gas sector. I agree that there is much more that can and will be done but we should not fail to recognise the measures that are being taken. The response from the SNP is the single simple solution of one silver bullet to kill all ills, and that is to call for more capital spending. It is the easiest thing in the world for Mr Swinney to call for somebody else to spend money or to give him the money to spend when he does not need to find it from his own budget. He proposes that the UK Government should increase borrowing in order to fund capital expenditure. To be fair to him, Mr Swinney accepted that point. However, high and reckless levels of borrowing by the previous Labour Government got this country into precisely the situation from which we are now trying to recover. Calling for yet more borrowing at this time is like proposing putting out a house fire by pouring on paraffin—it is unlikely to deliver the desired outcome. I live in hope that in this intervention Mr Hepburn will disprove Mr Sillars’s remarks.

I suggest that Mr Hepburn listens to the IMF, which commended the British Government’s deficit reduction strategy. Too much borrowing would put at risk the vital AAA credit rating, which keeps interest rates low and puts money into the pockets of ordinary families for whom I hope Mr Hepburn has a concern. In the debate, SNP members have argued that they need to have their hands on more levers of power to deal with the current economic situation, but the independence that it proposes passes those levers to someone else. The SNP wants to see an independent Scotland retain the pound sterling. That will mean—I hope that Stuart McMillan is listening—that our interest rates, borrowing limits and spending limits are set by a foreign country. We will have not more but fewer levers of power. That cannot be independence in anyone’s book; it simply does not make sense. It is good to see that at least Margo MacDonald gets it, even if the SNP back benchers do not. The problem for the Scottish Government is that it already has substantial levers to use, but it is pulling them in the wrong direction. The retail sector is hit hard, so what does the Government do? It brings in a specific retailers’ tax. The commercial properties sector is hit hard, so what does the Government do? It brings in a specific empty properties tax that will result in more business bankruptcies and liquidations. We are seeing college budgets slashed at precisely the time when we should have more training opportunities, and we are seeing the housing budget cut when we need more jobs in construction. Why would we trust the Government with more powers when it is using the powers that it has not to grow the economy, but to damage business and choke off recovery? We do not need more borrowing. We need to stop increasing the taxes on business and look at delivering economic reforms to improve our competitiveness.

I congratulate the new ministers who were appointed today and I pay tribute to Bruce Crawford, Stewart Stevenson and Brian Adam for their service to the Government. To see a Government’s purpose revealed, we must look at its legislative programme. What does the First Minister’s statement on the Government’s programme tell us about his Government? I think that Johann Lamont put it rather well yesterday when she said that the country is “on pause” while the First Minister pursues the one thing that interests him, which is his constitutional agenda. We heard about some worthy measures in the legislative programme but, overall, it looks devoid of big ideas to take Scotland forward and address the people’s priorities. If we needed confirmation of that, it came today when we saw the Deputy First Minister, the most senior member of the Government bar the First Minister himself, moved away from the health service—a people’s priority—to the SNP’s priority, which is constitutional change. I welcome some of what was proposed yesterday. I welcome more focus on early intervention, which is something for which we Conservatives have been calling for years. I welcome more emphasis on childcare, which is also something for which we have been calling for years. However, I note that, even with what is proposed, what will happen in Scotland will not match what is happening south of the border. Of course, what is happening on childcare was promised not just in last year’s SNP manifesto but in the SNP manifesto of some five years ago, so it is five years late. Where are the other bills to cover what was promised by the SNP five years ago? Where is the bill to reduce class sizes to no more than 18 in primaries 1, 2 and 3? Where is the bill to pay off the debts of Scottish students? Where is the bill to replace student loans with student grants? Where is the bill to bring in a first-time buyer’s grant of £2,000 per household? Maybe we will have to wait until next year before those come forward. The claim from the SNP, as we have heard from a lot of its back benchers yesterday and today, is that there is no money to pay for those things, but it seems that the SNP can find the money when it suits it to pay for the things that it wants. There is more money for students, early intervention and childcare. There is nothing wrong with that in itself, but it shows that there is plenty of money for the SNP to do what it wants. Maybe those Westminster cuts do not look so draconian after all. The First Minister touched on the economic aspects of the Government’s programme yesterday. He talked a lot about improving Scotland’s economy and he made much of Scotland’s economic performance compared with that of the United Kingdom as a whole, forgetting to mention that that might have something to do with the relative size of the public sector in Scotland or the relative strength of the oil and gas sector in Scotland. However, I remind the SNP that 1 million new jobs have been created in the private sector across the UK since 2010—more than double the number of jobs that have been lost in the public sector. We have heard a lot from the SNP about the need for greater capital spend. The UK Government has said that it will consider that but, if we are to pay for more capital spend only by borrowing more money, we must remember that that is precisely what got this country into the mess that it is in in the first place. Further, more capital spend will do little good if all the money goes overseas. Anybody who has been out there talking to people in the business community—as some of my colleagues and I did just last week in Fife—will have heard the constant refrain that too many public sector contracts are awarded to overseas contractors, which means that the money goes out of the country. Large infrastructure contracts are awarded to Irish companies that bring in labour from overseas, who then live in portakabins, with the result that hardly any of the spend goes into the local economy. Therefore, more capital spending does not automatically deliver an uplift in economic performance. That is why the procurement reform bill is so important and needs to be scrutinised closely. I appreciate that there is a difficulty with EU procurement rules. I would be the last to advocate any breaking of EU rules on anything, but we have to get this issue right. Other countries seem to get round EU procurement rules and ensure that their home companies get a fair crack of the whip, so things can be done within the law. That issue is vital.

I have so much choice. I give way to Mr Stewart.

I know that Mr Stewart has had a bad day and that he did not get the phone call from the First Minister that he was hoping for, but there is no need to take it out on me. As Mr Stewart well knows, the coalition Government is working hard in the EU on those issues. Of course, the SNP has powers on the economy, but it has used them to penalise business. One of the hardest-hit sectors of the economy is the retail sector, with retail figures down again yesterday, but the SNP has brought in a specific tax to hit the retail sector. The property sector is in difficulty, with landlords unable to rent their properties at any cost, but the SNP has brought in a new tax on empty properties. Rather than bleat about the need for more powers, the SNP needs to start using its existing powers to help business, not hammer business.

No—I need to make progress. Only one bill caused any excitement among SNP back benchers yesterday, and that, of course, was the bill to bring forward a referendum on independence. We still have no detail on the timing, no question and no detail on the franchise. Five years on, we have no more detail or information and we still await the consultation outcome that was promised us by the end of the summer. We need to know all that so that we can get on with the real debate and move away from process and on to the issues. The more that people look at the real issues, the more convinced they are that we are better together. Even SNP members are coming round to that view. It seems that an independent Scotland will be so much like the UK that no one will notice the difference. We are going to keep the Queen, the pound, the Bank of England and common financial regulation, and we may even keep NATO. On that point, I have something to say to the rebel SNP back benchers. That is not a term that we hear very often in this chamber, so let me repeat it—the rebel SNP back benchers. I have a list, Presiding Officer.

They are Jamie Hepburn, Jean Urquhart, John Finnie, Dave Thompson, Gordon MacDonald, Sandra White, Marco Biagi, John Wilson and John Mason. I am sorry if I missed anybody out. They are the notable nine, although I note that none of them was put up for promotion today by the First Minister. I ask them to keep up the good work and keep the rest of us entertained. I hope that Joe FitzPatrick knows what he has let himself in for because—whisper it—if we stay in NATO, how long will it be before we say that we are going to keep Trident on the Clyde?

It is not so much independence lite; it is more, “I can’t believe it’s not Britain.”

I congratulate Ken Macintosh on securing the debate and not only commend his motion but commend Oxfam Scotland for its valuable work in developing the humankind index. As other members have mentioned, the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, which I have the pleasure of convening, has already done some work on the issue. Katherine Trebeck and Dr Dan Barlow from WWF came to the committee’s business planning day the other week to explain more about the background to the humankind index. We intend to take the issue forward and we are inviting Joseph Stiglitz to speak to the committee, which I hope he will do later this year. The background to the issue is, as Ken Macintosh fairly said, a recognition of the imperfections of GDP as a measure of success. The point has been made that, because of how GDP is constructed, it will demonstrate an increase when events occur that might not otherwise be regarded as beneficial. For example, an oil spill in international waters that requires to be cleaned up will demonstrate an increase in GDP, but few people would regard that as a positive outcome. The purpose of the humankind index is to find other ways of measuring economic success. That is being recognised not only in Scotland but much more broadly. As Ken Macintosh quite fairly acknowledged, the Prime Minister himself referred back in 2010 to the need to develop new ways of measuring happiness. In a speech that he made at that time, he said: “The point is that all of life can’t be measured on a balance sheet, and no one put that better than Robert Kennedy more than 40 years ago, in a fantastic speech. He said that GDP ... ‘does not allow for the health of our children, the quality of their education, or the joy of their play. It measures neither our wisdom nor our learning; neither our compassion nor our devotion to our country; it measures everything, in short, except that which makes life worthwhile.’” The Prime Minister went on to say: “Just as the GDP figures don’t give a full story of our economy’s growth, but give us a useful indicator of where we’re heading. So, I believe a new measure won’t give the full story of our nation’s wellbeing, or our happiness or contentment or the rest of it—of course it won’t—but it could give us a general picture of whether life is improving, and that does have a really practical purpose.” I do not always agree with the Prime Minister, and many members in the chamber will agree with him even less than I do on most occasions, but I am sure that we would all agree that that objective is worth pursuing. The United Kingdom Government has already developed the idea of general wellbeing. It was measured for the first time this year, and members may be interested to know that nationwide we have an average happiness level of 7.4 out of 10. We in the chamber can reflect how much happier we are than others elsewhere, although I believe that people in Scotland’s island communities are much happier than the rest of us. The humankind index is not without its issues. It is inherently subjective and is based on the things that people come forward and say are important to them. In looking at some of the detail of what was presented to us, it seemed to me that there was some overlap between different categories, particularly in relation to topics such as work and financial issues. Because of the way in which the index is constructed, it would be difficult to make comparisons internationally with how other countries are performing. Nevertheless, the humankind index is a valuable piece of work. It is also important to stress that it is intended not to replace GDP but rather to complement it. Ken Mackintosh’s motion states that the humankind index is intended to spark debate. I am not necessarily convinced that it is the answer, but I think that we should have a debate about it and about the broader issues. On that basis, I am happy to endorse the motion.

Will the minister give way?

No sooner did Mr Neil get to his feet than the witch finders arrived in the gallery. Does Mr Neil accept that Mr Obama does not have the euro zone to contend with as his largest market? Perhaps if he did, he would find economic growth harder to come by.

I thank Nanette Milne for moving the motion and allowing a debate on one of the biggest issues that Scotland faces today. As Richard Simpson said, the debate has been largely consensual. We even had sight of one of the rarest creatures to be seen in the chamber—a consensual and non-partisan speech from Kenneth Gibson. However, I dare say that those who, like me, pine for more party-political knockabout will have to wait only a few moments until the next debate, when I am sure that normal service will be resumed. Unfortunately, drugs are widespread throughout Scotland. People in all age groups take drugs, and they are in our cities and our rural communities. Some people take drugs recreationally; some people, sadly, are addicts and have their lives consumed as a result. Drugs can and do ruin lives, leading to isolation and cutting people off from their family and friends. As we have heard, addiction to drugs can lead to a rise in crime levels as individuals resort to theft in order to pay for their habit, thus having an impact on the law-abiding citizens who are victims as a result. Drugs impact on the whole of the victim’s family and on the wider community. We could take up a whole week’s debating time in debating drugs, the problems that they create for society and how we should combat them better, but today we are concentrating on rehabilitation and support for the families that are affected by drugs. I was impressed to hear from Nanette Milne of the life-changing work that is done by the Grampian Family Support Forum in her parliamentary region. It is clear from the speeches of other members from the north-east who have come across that group just how much its work is valued. I join other members in congratulating the forum on its successful participation in the third phase of the Parliament’s community partnership project. We can learn lessons from the good work that is being done in Grampian. There is a groundswell of excellent work being done throughout the country, involving voluntary groups in collaboration with local authorities and health boards. In Mid Scotland and Fife, we have groups such as the Drug and Alcohol Project Limited, which offers one-to-one counselling, support, information and advice to individuals and families who are affected by substance abuse and who live in Fife. The Drug and Alcohol Project Limited has experienced workers who provide an essential service to families that are affected by drugs, which is free and confidential. There is also the community alcohol and drug service for the Forth valley, which offers services, help and advice, and the Perth drug and alcohol service, which is run jointly by Perth and Kinross Council and the national health service, does a great deal of vital work in the local area and provides support to families. Those are just some of the tremendous groups in my area that carry out vital work for individuals who are addicted to drugs and give personal support to families who can otherwise feel helpless as they see a loved one consumed by addiction. The message is clear: support for families who are affected by drug abuse is crucial in a national drugs strategy. We need a national drugs strategy that works and makes a real difference for individuals who want to stop taking drugs, and I welcome the minister’s comments, which show that the Scottish Government recognises that. Roseanna Cunningham touched on the question of waiting times. Each year, the Scottish Government agrees a number of national NHS performance targets that are known as health improvement, efficiency, access and treatment targets. NHS boards and the Scottish Government monitor boards’ progress against the national HEAT targets and the progress is published on the Scottish Government’s Scotland performs website. I welcome the openness of the targets, as it is important that we all have the opportunity to measure how well individual health boards are doing. On drug recovery services that are delivered by the NHS, the HEAT target states: “By March 2013, 90 per cent of clients will wait no longer than 3 weeks from referral received to appropriate drug or alcohol treatment that supports their recovery.” Between October and December 2011, the Scotland average for meeting the HEAT target was 84.9 per cent of individuals waiting no longer than three weeks from referral to receive treatment. That is impressively close to meeting the target fully. However, the picture in different parts of the country is not so good. In NHS Tayside, in the area that I represent and where Roseanna Cunningham is based, only 65.9 per cent of patients wait no longer than three weeks from referral to receive “appropriate drug or alcohol treatment that supports their recovery.” Only NHS Lothian has a worse record. It is important that all health boards put in place the necessary resources and expertise that will bring about improvements in waiting times. If we are serious about pursuing this agenda, it is essential that individuals who seek or need help should not have to wait any longer than three weeks from referral to receive treatment. One of the first acts towards recovery is wanting to recover. However, when people make that decision and that choice, the necessary services to help them and their families must be available. To the one or two SNP members who raised the issue of welfare reform and its consequences, I gently make the point that they should perhaps look first at the areas in which the Scottish Government has control and responsibility before looking at areas that are outside its remit. Neil Bibby and Mark McDonald raised the important issue of tackling stigma. Too much stigma is attached to drug addicts, and that has an impact on their families. We must work much harder to address that, because that can often be a barrier to people coming forward and seeking help. Neil Bibby and Liz Smith raised the important issue of kinship care. Liz Smith was clear that we have failed to deliver on the promises that have been made to kinship carers. We must all work harder to make better progress on that issue. We must assist families who are affected by drug abuse, and we must ensure that children who are affected by a parent or parents who have a drug problem are properly supported. Drug addiction is a social ill, but it is also a complicated and a serious issue. It is easy for us to stand up in this chamber and say that we must help individuals to get off drugs and provide support to their families. It is much harder to ensure that that happens in practice. Groups such as the forum in Grampian are on the ground and are doing some of the hardest, most rewarding and most important work in Scotland. That is why I commend the motion and the amendments to the chamber.

3. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s response is to the recently published Audit Scotland report, “The National Fraud Initiative in Scotland”. (S4F-00746)

I am sure that the First Minister will join me in commending Audit Scotland for its work, which has uncovered £78 million-worth of fraud and overpayments over the past 10 years. However, the report highlights that a number of public bodies are not using or integrating the national fraud initiative. Given that this is an area of financial policy over which the First Minister does currently have control, can he tell us how those bodies will be encouraged to make greater efforts to save vital public funds?

The survey to which Mr Lyle referred shows an improvement in the job vacancy position in the whole UK, not just in Scotland. Mr Swinney is a fair-minded person, so I am sure that he will be happy to acknowledge that the improving prospect across the UK must be down to, at least in part, the efforts of the UK coalition Government to improve the economy.

I start by declaring my interest as a member of the Law Society of Scotland. Amendment 6 and amendment 7, which is also in my name, originate with the Law Society. They do not make any political points but rather seek to address a problem that has arisen because the practice of the keeper of the registers of Scotland is out of step with the established understanding of Scots property law. As members will be aware, an inhibition is a charge that is registered against a property that means that it cannot be sold without the creditor being repaid. It has always been understood in Scots property law that an inhibition would not be effective if it was registered after the date of completion of missives for the sale. That is because the conclusion of missives is in effect the creation of a contract. The subsequent grant of a disposition of the property by the seller is therefore, in effect, an involuntary act. That understanding of the law is confirmed by Professor George Gretton in his seminal text book, “The Law of Inhibition and Adjudication”. Unfortunately, some confusion was caused by section 160 of the Bankruptcy and Diligence etc (Scotland) Act 2007, which has led the keeper to have a policy of excluding indemnity in land certificates that have been issued to a purchaser where an inhibition has been registered against the seller after missives have been concluded. That has caused problems for purchasers in that situation and their lenders. Amendment 6 seeks to clarify that section 160 of the 2007 act does not alter the common-law position. Accordingly, inhibitions registered against the seller after missives are concluded remain ineffective, as the seller is already contractually bound to dispose of the property. That will allow the keeper to change the current policy, which is causing difficulties for purchasers and inaccuracies in the land register. It is important to stress that no one will lose if amendment 6 is agreed to, as the holders of inhibitions would be in no worse a position than they were previously. However, the purchaser will get a clear land certificate, instead of potentially having to face an application to the Lands Tribunal for Scotland to achieve that result, which is the remedy that is currently available. As well as the support of the Law Society of Scotland, the amendment has the support of the Council of Mortgage Lenders in Scotland. I have pleasure in moving amendment 6.

I am grateful to the minister for his detailed response. He rather argued against himself, because he accepted and, I think, understood the point in law that I made about inhibitions being ineffective after the date of conclusion of missives, but he did not justify why the keeper’s practice does not reflect that understanding of Scots law. Having said that, I welcome the minister’s assurance that he will work with the Law Society of Scotland to try to find a solution to the problems. In drafting the amendment, the Law Society took academic opinion from Professor Robert Rennie, who I am sure the minister will know is an expert on such matters. In view of the minister’s assurance that he will try to find a way forward, and given that the amendment does not have the Government’s support, I ask to withdraw my amendment. Amendment 6, by agreement, withdrawn. Section 111—Land register rules

Amendment 7 is another that has originated with the Law Society of Scotland and, like amendment 6, it seeks to clarify the law to deal with a situation in which the keeper’s policy causes purchasers undue problems. It seeks to provide clarification that section 26 of the Conveyancing and Feudal Reform (Scotland) Act 1970 will operate to remove from the title sheet any remaining prior ranking or pari passu securities following a sale of repossession, even if the calling-up procedure did not comply with the interpretation of the statutory requirements in the Supreme Court decision on RBS v Wilson. In Scots property law, the established position has always been that where a standard security is called up and the property is repossessed, then subsequently sold by the first security holder, subsequent or pari passu securities are treated as having been automatically discharged. However, the keeper’s current policy when processing applications for registration of a dealing that is affected by the decision in RBS v Wilson is not to remove from the relevant title sheet any additional securities on the property that rank as pari passu with, or postponed to, the security that has been called up, unless they have been formally discharged. It is also the keeper’s policy to expressly exclude indemnity in respect of loss arising from rectification to delete such securities, or from the subjects being found not have been disburdened of them under section 26 of the 1970 act. The consequence of that policy is that land and charge certificates that are issued to the purchasers in such circumstances indicate that the title is still subject to pari passu or postponed securities granted by the previous owner, and that such securities rank ahead of any new security that is granted by the purchaser, for example for a mortgage. That situation causes serious difficulty to purchasers, lenders and solicitors. There is academic opinion that states that the keeper’s policy is incorrect, but if amendment 7 were to be agreed to, it would put the matter beyond doubt and would allow the keeper to change policy to ensure that the purchasers of repossessed properties are not put at a disadvantage. Amendment 7 has the support not only of the Law Society of Scotland but of the Council of Mortgage Lenders, which is keen that the issue be resolved. I also record that if a property that has been repossessed is sold, any excess sum that is left over once the first security holder has been paid will be accounted for by the second, or subsequent, security holder. As a result of that, no individual or institution would suffer any loss. Amendment 7 will represent a real benefit to many purchasers who are caught in this unfortunate situation as a result of the RBS v Wilson judgment, which suggests that the keeper’s practice is unfortunately out of step with general understanding of Scotland’s property law. I have pleasure in moving amendment 7.

The minister fairly identified that there is a problem that is a result of the keeper’s interpretation of the consequences of the RBS v Wilson case, which I believe affects the purchasers of several hundred properties. Can the minister assure me that he and his officials will work with the Law Society of Scotland and with the keeper’s office to find a resolution to the difficulties that have been presented to that group of individuals?

I very much welcome the assurance that the minister has given me. The purpose of amendment 7 was to resolve a difficulty that has arisen because of the keeper’s practice. The minister has fairly indicated that he and his officials will work with the keeper and the Law Society to find an alternative way of resolving the difficulty. In view of that, I do not intend to press amendment 7. Amendment 7, by agreement, withdrawn.

I may have beaten Mr Harvie to asking the same question. The minister hopes that 80 per cent of properties will be registered by 2017. What proportion of the land mass of Scotland does that represent?

I declare my interests as a member of the Law Society of Scotland and the convener of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, which was responsible for stage 1 scrutiny of the bill. I acknowledge that many of the issues that the bill deals with are highly technical. Even though I have a background in property law, on more than one occasion I struggled to grapple with some of what we had to deal with. I therefore pay tribute to all my fellow committee members, some of whom are in the chamber today and none of whom had, unlike me, a professional background in law. Nevertheless, they all did an excellent job in producing the stage 1 report and dealing with the bill at stage 2. I put on record my thanks to our team of clerks, to SPICe and to our committee adviser, Professor Kenneth Reid. It is fair to say that this has not been the most exciting piece of legislation that we have ever dealt with, nor is it the most politically controversial. The bill represents a much-needed update to, and extension of, existing legislation. As the minister pointed out, the bill will allow faster completion of a land register and eventually the closure of the register of sasines so that we will not have two parallel systems of title registration in Scotland, as we have had since 1979. As the minister pointed out, that should mean a simpler process for the conveyancing of property. The minister also said that the legislation would lead to a cheaper system. I know from my experience of lawyers—I am sure that the minister would agree—that while that might be true in theory, it remains to be seen whether it will necessarily be the case in practice. As many people involved in the legal profession know, most of the costs that are involved in property transactions are around not the title transfer, but the conclusion of the missives and negotiating the terms of the sale. The transfer of the title represents a very small part of the work involved in a property transaction. However, I share the minister’s high hopes that the bill will lead in due course to a reduction in costs for the consumer. The bill permits modernisation of procedure, such as an acceleration of the move to e-documents. Ken Macintosh made a fair point about the increasing use of new technology. It is something of an irony that we can now go on the internet and look up Google Earth or similar websites and see an excellent aerial view of virtually any property in Scotland. We have not really kept up with that technology when it comes to producing title documents. The committee was concerned about a number of issues, which it addressed in its stage 1 report. Probably the most controversial of those was around section 108, which is intended to tackle mortgage fraud. The Law Society of Scotland was extremely concerned that the section was too broad in its scope. I lodged a number of amendments at stage 2 to try to address that but, unfortunately, I was unable to attract much support for them from my committee members. Despite that, there are still concerns about how the provisions in section 108 will operate in practice. I hope that the minister will ensure that there is very close engagement with the Law Society on how the provisions will be implemented. It is important that the new offence will not mean that those who simply make a genuine mistake will find themselves on the wrong side of the law. Another issue that was dealt with at stage 2 was the settlement of boundary disputes. From their casework and surgeries, all members will be familiar with disputes over property boundaries, in which just a few feet or inches can cause a great deal of heat between the parties involved. At present, the only way in which to resolve such issues is through the courts, which is a very expensive way of addressing the matter. At stage 1, the committee recommended that the Lands Tribunal for Scotland should have a greater role in resolving such disputes, in an effort to reduce costs to the parties involved. Mike MacKenzie lodged an amendment at stage 2 to that effect, which was agreed unanimously. That is a great improvement to the bill and will mean that, in the future, we will have greater scope for using the Lands Tribunal to settle such matters. There will, however, be a resourcing issue for the Lands Tribunal, and I hope that the Scottish Government will consider that. Earlier this morning, I spoke to two amendments originating from the Law Society, which tried to deal with situations in which the keeper’s practice has become out of step with the established understanding of property law. Although I did not press those amendments to a vote, they deal with issues of serious concern and I welcome the minister’s assurance in both cases that he and his officials will consider how those matters might be resolved. There is also concern among some in the legal profession about the keeper’s approach to a number of similar issues. There is a perception that she is a law unto herself in the way in which she interprets the law and devises her practice accordingly. The keeper will obtain her own legal opinion on matters and refuses to share that with others. I understand that that is the policy across the Government as a whole. Nevertheless, when legal opinion from learned professors of conveyancing takes a different view it is disappointing that the keeper appears to be digging herself in on issues. I hope that we will see a more open approach in the future. The bill will be welcomed not just by property lawyers, but by all those who have an interest in the ownership of Scotland’s land. With a complete land register, eventually, it will be far easier to identify who owns Scotland, which will no doubt make my good friend Andy Wightman very happy. However, the committee was not able to support at stage 2 amendments to change substantially the law on prescription, in which I know that he has a particular interest, so perhaps his joy will be a little muted. Despite our minor misgivings, this is an important, welcome and necessary piece of law reform, and the Scottish Conservatives will be pleased to support the bill at stage 3 at decision time.

The First Minister previously said that an independent Scotland would have just one airbase. Would that one airbase be at Leuchars or elsewhere?

I commend Christine Grahame for lodging her motion and congratulate her on securing the debate and on her excellent speech. Indeed, all the speeches in the debate have been excellent. They demonstrate that history is never simple, because there are so many different perspectives. We do not spend enough time in the chamber discussing the history of Scotland. It is important that we do so, for what happened in our past will surely shape our future as a nation. I am therefore all the more pleased to contribute to the debate. I should declare an interest. As Jamie McGrigor kindly pointed out, I am writing a book based on the rivalry between James Graham, first Marquis of Montrose, and his great adversary, Archibald Campbell, the Marquis of Argyll. I am hoping to have it published next year, at which point I am sure it will be available in all good bookshops at a reasonable price. As Christine Grahame and other members pointed out, the first Marquis of Montrose was undoubtedly one of Scotland’s great heroes. He is best remembered for championing the cause of Charles I during the Scottish civil war of 1644-45. In the course of a year, which is often referred to as the year of miracles, Montrose defeated no fewer than six armies of the covenanters and made himself the military master of the kingdom. On the battlefield, he displayed genius as a general, ably assisted by his loyal lieutenant the Ulsterman Alastair Macdonald, or Mac Colla, or Colkitto as he is sometimes known. Their partnership swept all before it in a military campaign that is probably unsurpassed by any in Scottish history. Although Montrose was an outstanding success on the battlefield, it is worth remembering that he was a failure in the field of politics, at least in his lifetime. The cause that he championed was not a popular one with the majority of the Scottish people, particularly in the lowlands, who remained loyal to the covenanting cause. Indeed, Montrose’s employment of Irish Catholic troops and the barbarities for which they were responsible, including the horrific sacking of the city of Aberdeen, which other members have mentioned, served to decrease sympathy for the king among the populace. By the time of Montrose’s eventual defeat by the covenanting General David Leslie at Philiphaugh in September 1645, far from being regarded as a hero, he was undoubtedly viewed as a villain and his defeat was a cause of celebration. There is always a tendency for us to view history in black and white terms. Every story must have a hero and a villain. Montrose was both a hero and, on occasion, a villain, just as his rival the Marquis of Argyll fulfilled both roles. After Charles I’s defeat and subsequent execution at the hands of the English parliamentarians, Montrose pledged his sword to his son, who was crowned Charles II. While negotiating with the covenanters, Charles II licensed Montrose to make war against them in his name as a means of cynically enhancing his negotiating position. Montrose was defeated at Carbisdale in Sutherland, betrayed by Neil Macleod of Assynt, delivered to his enemies and then taken to Edinburgh for execution. He received no support from the king to whom he had been so loyal. Having been stripped of his titles, Montrose was not even allowed the benefit of being beheaded by the maiden, but rather was hanged as a commoner. His head was cut off and put on a spike on the Tolbooth outside St Giles and his limbs were cut off and distributed to four parts of the kingdom by way of a warning to others. It was only on the restoration to the throne of Charles II, 11 years later, that he was given a proper burial, on 11 May 1661. By that point, his great rival the Marquis of Argyll had been imprisoned by Charles in Edinburgh castle for treason and would soon face his own execution by the maiden. His severed head was placed on the very spike that was recently vacated by Montrose’s. Right or wrong, winner or loser, Montrose was undoubtedly a great Scottish hero who should be celebrated today. I look forward to joining Christine Grahame and others at the memorial service in St Giles on Monday, which will be hosted by the 1st Marquis of Montrose Society, and I hope that future generations will learn more about our great history as a nation.

This has been a useful debate. With a few exceptions, there has been a great deal of consensus. Several contributors recognise that there is a balanced argument around this matter. It is not all black and white, as some speakers might indicate. There is a general principle in relation to electricity generation that any engineer can confirm—Mr Brodie, who did not seem to understand this point, should listen to it. The principle is that energy generation is most efficient when it is located close to the point of consumption, because the further away the point of generation is from the point of consumption, the greater the loss of efficiency and the more power is lost in transmission. That is an undeniable fact of engineering. In addition to that, there are costs of transmission—both capital and running costs—that have to be factored in.

No, I want to make some progress. Ken Macintosh made a fair point when he gave us a history of the current regime that we have for transmission, which is based on an old model that involved centralised points of power generation dispersing around the country. We are now moving to a different model, which is why we are adopting a new approach. I understand the arguments that were put forward by the minister and by many members who have spoken, including those on the SNP benches and Liam McArthur, about why the proposals from Ofgem do not go as far as they would like in terms of incentivising the development of new technologies off the coast of Scotland and our islands. I do not intend, in the time available, to reopen the debate around onshore wind developments—we would be here for a while if I did—but I think that we would all agree that there is great potential for wave and tidal projects off Scotland’s coasts and the coasts of our islands, and we should be looking at how we can change the regulatory regime to ensure that they can be connected to the grid in an affordable manner.

I am delighted to agree with the minister. We, too, want a better solution. My issue with the motion and with the contributions by some members is with the idea that a socialised regime is a positive move.

No. I have already taken an intervention and as I have only two and a half minutes left, I need to make some progress. The postage stamp model, to which many members have referred and for which the motion says that there are strong arguments, is not ideal. I shall give an example. Let us imagine that someone were to propose a tidal project somewhere to the west of the Hebrides, such as Rockall, and they considered recovering from the electricity bill payer the transmission costs of connecting the project to the grid. In those circumstances, Ofgem would be entirely right to say that that was not justifiable and affordable. Therefore, this is an issue not of principle but of balance. Ofgem has to balance the potential for developing renewable energy offshore with the cost of paying for it. In the socialised model that some have proposed, the cost would be an additional £7 billion, which would mean £25 to £30 a year on consumers’ bills. As my colleague Mary Scanlon pointed out, according to Ofgem’s figures, even in 2012 the increased cost to a consumer in the north of Scotland of such an approach would be £11 a year, whereas those in the south of England would see a reduction in their bills of £2 a year. We cannot support an approach that will penalise consumers in the north of Scotland and subsidise those in the south-east of England. I am surprised that the SNP is proposing that. That is on top of a situation in which existing fuel costs are rising because of base costs and green levies. As many will acknowledge, it is also against a background of an increase in fuel poverty. We should not be looking to exacerbate that. We need a balanced approach. That is why we agree with the thrust of what the Scottish Government is trying to do, and we are sorry that it has got bogged down with dogma in the motion. Mary Scanlon made a fair point when she said that, given that the proposals that will come forward on 4 May will go to further negotiation, they do not represent the end of the story. We need to continue to have those discussions. The minister is looking for consensus in the debate. I say to him that there is little that divides us. It is a pity that the SNP Government did not draft a better motion, around which consensus could have been reached. I support the amendment in Mary Scanlon’s name.

Will the minister give way?

Does the minister accept that most disability charities believe that the sheltered factory model that Remploy has pursued is now out of date and that the money could be better spent elsewhere? That fact was reported in no less a paper than The Guardian just two weeks ago. If the Scottish Government’s position is that those factories should not close—from listening to the minister, that appears to be its position—will it step in and make up the funding?

I welcome the tone of Mr Macintosh’s speech and I find his arguments interesting. Did he raise similar arguments and concerns when Peter Hain in the previous Administration at Westminster announced the closure of 28 Remploy factories in 2007?

Will Mr Brodie give way?

When I read in the Business Bulletin that we would be debating this issue today, I wondered whether the SNP Government had run out of ideas for issues to debate that lie within its control, given that this is the second debate in two days on a matter that is reserved to the Westminster Government. However, I was pleasantly surprised by the tone of the debate, at least during the early part. In particular, I welcomed the tone of the ministerial contribution. Mr Ewing was, as ever, extremely reasonable in setting out his arguments, and that was reflected by the other opening speakers. Even Helen Eadie, who never misses an opportunity when she gets one to bash the wicked Tories, was extremely reasonable. I pay tribute to the sincere and deep interest that Helen Eadie has taken in the plight of the Remploy factories over many years. That is well respected across the chamber. It is a pity that that consensual and positive tone was not reflected in some of the later speeches, which I will come to shortly. I noticed that the Scottish Government, despite all its complaints about what is being done by the Westminster Government, made no proposal to step in and make up the shortfall in funding. As the minister said, and Mary Scanlon reflected, the background to the debate is the Sayce review. Liz Sayce is a hugely well-respected campaigner for the rights of disabled people. I did not think that any member would stoop so low as to question her good faith, but of course I was disappointed because, right on cue, along came Mr Brodie. It is deeply disappointing that people attack Liz Sayce’s recommendations, because they have been strongly supported by the responses to the UK Government’s consultation and by leading disability organisations across the country. In my intervention on Mr Ewing, I referred to the article in The Guardian of a few weeks ago that quoted the organisations that are in support. I note that Third Force News, which came out this week, referred to a number of organisations such as the Royal National Institute of Blind People Scotland being supportive of the reforms. It also quoted, as did Mary Scanlon, Chris Price from the Glasgow Centre for Independent Living, saying that “the decision to close Remploy was uncomfortable but the right one.” He said: “It is uncomfortable but it is the right thing to do. If it is the right message, we should not be shy about saying it, just because it upsets some people.” I appreciate that some members will disagree with those comments, but they are the comments of leading disability organisations and we should be prepared to listen to their views, even if we disagree with the majority view that has been expressed.

Mr Eadie will know from having studied the issue that the bulk of the responses are clearly in support of the Sayce review. The Government would rightly have been criticised by all those disability organisations if it had said no to the Sayce proposals.

No, I need to make progress, but I will come on to Mr McDonald in a moment. I entirely understand the concerns of the workforce at Remploy, who face an uncertain future. Everybody recognises that. Mary Scanlon mentioned the £8 million package of support that is being made available for employees. Mark McDonald made a fair point about the challenges of the transition from supported employment. That is precisely why there is an offer of individualised support from the DWP for up to 18 months for those who are involved.

If Mr McDonald will forgive me, I will not, because I am short on time and I have two more points to make. As I said, the tone had been constructive throughout much of the debate, but I am sorry to say that some SNP members lowered the tone. Annabelle Ewing, Chic Brodie, Clare Adamson and Bob Doris missed no opportunity to turn the debate into a party-political or constitutional battlefield. They tried to blame Westminster Governments of whatever hue for what is happening and completely disregarded the views of the disability rights organisations to which I referred. I say gently to those members that, if they are so concerned about the issue, why does not their Scottish Government do what it did in the case of Glencraft in Aberdeen and step in to provide money? When Blindcraft in Edinburgh closed, where were the SNP councillors calling for more money from the City of Edinburgh Council’s budget? They were nowhere to be seen.

There have been far too many SNP comments in the debate already, so Mrs Ewing can sit down. I have to say that there was a contrast between Mrs Ewing’s tone and that of her brother on the front bench. Perhaps that explains why he is a minister and she is not. Most of the speeches from Labour members were extremely positive. I gently remind John Pentland that it was Peter Hain who closed 28 factories because they were not viable. I do not remember motions from the Labour Party expressing deep disappointment about that being debated in the Parliament at the time. We should focus on the positives and the way forward. We should consider initiatives to develop alternative business models. I welcome the minister’s comment that he will work with the DWP and that the DWP will work with the Remploy board to find ways forward and alternatives, such as social enterprises. On that, I agree with Helen Eadie. Change is difficult. Our focus should be on supporting the employees, not on scoring party-political or constitutional points.

They are not here.

19. To ask the Scottish Executive what the benefits of Perth having city status would be for the local and national economy. (S4O-00817)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his response. If we may proceed on a note of consensus, I echo his expressions of thanks to the provost and the lord lieutenant, Mel Jameson. I am sure that the cabinet secretary will agree that now is an excellent time to be associated with the city of Perth. I hope that the Scottish Government is looking forward to working with Perth on its growth strategy as our newest city.

I declare my interest as a member of the Law Society of Scotland. As convener of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, I mention that the committee recommended to Parliament that it should agree the general principles of the bill. As the minister did, I acknowledge the work that has been done by the Scottish Law Commission—initially by my old friend Professor George Gretton—in its comprehensive consultation on the first draft of the bill. I thank all those who gave oral evidence or submitted written evidence to aid the committee’s consideration, and I thank the committee’s clerking team for all their assistance on what is a very technical subject. I also thank the committee’s adviser, Professor Kenneth Reid, who was able to put in layman’s terms, for the benefit of committee members, some of the issues that are addressed in the bill. Last, and by no means least, I thank all the committee members for their hard work and engagement on the bill. It is fair to say that for the non-lawyers on the committee—which means everybody apart from myself—the prospect of dealing with the bill was probably not greeted with the greatest of enthusiasm at the outset, but as we got into the subject, some of the issues stimulated some debate and, I hope, interest. As the minister said, the bill represents a much-needed update to, and extension of, existing legislation. Although it is comprehensive and very technical in parts, there are some areas that are of real interest to people in Scotland. There is much to be commended in the bill; for example, the move to the use of e-documents, the closure of the register of sasines so that we have one land register rather than two, and the introduction of advance notices. However, the committee considered that a number of areas of the bill could be improved upon. I will comment on those in the time that is available to me. My first point relates to the key policy aim of the bill, which is completion of the land register. The key powers that are aimed at increasing land registrations are, first, increased triggers for first registration of land and, secondly, voluntary and keeper-induced registrations. We know that only about 21 per cent of the land is currently on the land register and that there has been slow progress since the Land Registration (Scotland) Act 1979, so the committee welcomes the powers to increase land registration, but we have some concerns about how the powers might work in practice. A key method of increasing land registration is voluntary land registration. The committee heard a lot of support for voluntary registration and heard that a similar method of registration has been used successfully in England and Wales, where a reduced fee has been used as an incentive. Given that the approach would be key in achieving the objective of a complete land register, and given that we learned that Registers of Scotland has reserves of about £75 million, the committee asks the minister to consider introducing incentives to encourage voluntary registration, particularly in complex cases. Keeper-induced registration will give the keeper the power to register land without an application from, or notification to, a landowner. The committee had concerns about how that might work in practice. Which land would be subject to keeper-induced registration? When would registrations begin? What fees would be payable? I am grateful to the minister for the clarity that he has provided on some of those issues. Another issue is that even if there is no fee, expense will be occasioned to landowners in checking the land register and the work that has been done by the keeper. It must be borne in mind that even with a zero fee the exercise is not without cost to landowners.

The minister has made a fair point. In his opening speech he mentioned the proposal to introduce time-and-line fees. Higher costs would potentially act as a disincentive, so he is right to say that the current arrangements are more beneficial and might encourage voluntary registration. It is worth bearing it in mind that the biggest landowner in Scotland is probably the Scottish Government, through its various agencies. Many public agencies and charities also hold large tracts of land. When we talk about landowners, we are not necessarily talking about people who have large resources at their disposal. The committee considered the high cost to the public of trying to resolve disputes, given that the keeper cannot adjudicate where there are competing claims. The committee heard a lot of evidence about the high costs to the public of having to resolve land registration disputes through the court system. I was interested to read in The Scotsman this morning that our erstwhile First Minister, Lord McConnell, has been embroiled in a court action with his elderly neighbour over ownership of a coal shed in the boundary of his garden, which perhaps demonstrates how issues can get blown out of proportion and the cost of resolving them through the court system can be disproportionate to the value of the land involved. The committee suggested that a lower-cost option would be to use the Lands Tribunal for Scotland to consider boundary disputes.

That is a fair point, although I am sure that when Mr Ewing was in practice he was very reasonable in the fees that he charged—as, indeed, was I. The offence in section 108 probably caused the most heat in the evidence that the committee heard. The committee heard that it is a significant additional measure to tackle serious and organised crime, specifically in relation to mortgage fraud, but we also heard a lot of evidence that the scope of the offence is too wide and could cover genuine mistakes by solicitors. Section 108 does not mention fraud, even though it is intended to deal with fraudulent behaviour, and it provides no detail on what solicitors need to do to ensure that they are not prosecuted for recklessness. The committee welcomed the minister’s commitment to consider the wording of section 108, with a view to providing much-needed clarity, and I welcome his comments about consultation of the Law Society of Scotland on the provision. The committee raised other issues, which I do not have time to cover in detail. I will briefly mention prescriptive claims. The majority of the committee took the view that the Government needs to consider a more public process for advertising land where there is an application for prescriptive acquisition. I and one other member of the committee dissented from that view, but I acknowledge that the issue generated much public interest. My time is almost up, so I say in closing that the committee said unanimously in its report that completion of the land register of Scotland is a worthwhile objective. However, we believe that the register should not be completed at the expense of quality; that is an important point to bear in mind. We hope that the bill and our report’s recommendations will go a long way towards increasing the number of land registrations. We therefore commend the bill to Parliament.

6. To ask the First Minister what action is being taken to prevent those not actively farming from being able to claim agricultural subsidies. (S4F-00518)

According to the BBC documentary “The Money Farmers”, which was broadcast earlier this week, millions are being spent every year on subsidies to individuals who do not farm in Scotland. On that programme, the European Commissioner for Agriculture and Rural Development said that the Scottish Government had the power to close the loophole two years ago but did not do so. Will the Scottish Government now act with urgency and work, if necessary with the United Kingdom Government and the European Commission, to change the current unacceptable position without further delay?

The minister will have seen the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee’s concerns about the target of 50 per cent growth in tourism by 2015, which we now seem far from being close to achieving. Is it sensible to adhere strictly to that target, given that meeting it would require very substantial growth? Will the Scottish Government reflect on whether the target needs to be revised?

I appreciate that everyone wishes to see better pay and conditions in the hospitality sector. However, that will come about only if the consumers are prepared to pay higher prices for their meals and accommodation. The member needs to reflect on that issue.

5. To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will consider the interim operating base at Perth community fire station as the permanent base for the proposed single fire and rescue service. (S4O-00733)

I thank the minister for her response; indeed, I can think of no one better qualified to express an opinion on the issue. I am sure that she agrees that, with its central location in Scotland, its good transport links and its affordable accommodation, Perth—which I hope this year will be confirmed as our seventh city—is the ideal place to host the national fire and rescue service headquarters. Does the minister also agree that as far as efficiency and service continuity are concerned, it makes a lot of sense to establish the permanent base in the same location as the temporary base?

6. I should declare an interest as a debenture holder at Rangers. To ask the First Minister what impact Rangers Football Club going into administration will have on the economy. (S4F-00478)

I thank the First Minister for his helpful response. I am sure that he would agree that a person would not need to be a supporter of the club to appreciate that there would be a serious impact—on Scottish football and the Scottish economy—if the financial situation at Rangers were to deteriorate further. After all the media revelations of the past few days about the financial history of Mr Craig Whyte’s dealings with Rangers, would the First Minister encourage the Scottish Football Association to review urgently its rules on who are fit and proper persons to hold controlling interests in our football clubs?

Thank you, Presiding Officer—that is extremely generous. I signal that I would be delighted to accept interventions, should any member wish to pad out my rather threadbare remarks. I apologise to Ken Macintosh and Gavin Brown for missing their speeches, but I was called away to a broadcast interview on the different but related topic of fuel poverty. The debate has been consensual and I am afraid that, on this occasion, I have no wish to break the consensus—not yet, at any rate. We have had excellent speeches from throughout the chamber. It is clear from the debate that the Parliament is united and speaks with one voice in sending a clear message that the green investment bank should come to Scotland. As Gavin Brown pointed out, the Scottish Conservatives are delighted to reaffirm our support for that ambition. If I may, I will make a partisan comment. The creation of the green investment bank is testament to the Conservative-led UK Government’s commitment to drive the UK towards a green and growing economy, although I acknowledge Sarah Boyack’s perfectly fair comment that it was a Labour chancellor—Alistair Darling—who shared the ambition for the project to happen. The focus of the green investment bank will be to put an investment of £3 billion into a range of initiatives, primarily offshore wind, industrial energy efficiency and waste products projects. The bank will provide up to 100 jobs by 2015. It is one of a number of key policies that are designed to help to meet environmental objectives and promote economic growth. Other initiatives include the creation of a national infrastructure plan; the reforms to the electricity market that are being considered; changes to the climate change levy; the introduction of a renewable heat incentive; the review of waste policy; and the reviews of Ofgem, the Office of the Gas and Electricity Markets, and Ofwat, the Water Services Regulation Authority. I hope that the Scottish Government takes note of those reforms and reviews and does not hold back from considering its own reviews. Once again, I mention what I and other members consider to be the urgent need for a national strategic review of renewable energy in Scotland specifically in relation to the siting of onshore wind farms. I am convener of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, so it would be remiss of me not to mention our upcoming inquiry into the Scottish Government’s renewable energy targets. The inquiry is attracting a great deal of interest. Indeed, I read in The Press and Journal this morning that no less a person than Mr Donald Trump is keen to give evidence at our humble parliamentary committee. It remains to be seen whether committee members are prepared to accommodate Mr Trump, but I am sure that the occasion would be interesting, were it to come about.

I am happy to give way to the committee’s deputy convener.

Far be it from me to understand Mr Trump’s motives for the positions that he takes. We might explore the issue with him, if he were to come to the committee, or perhaps Mr Wilson might like to ask Mr Trump’s close friend Mr Salmond whether he has intimate knowledge of the matter. I am not in a position to shed light on it, I am afraid. As we heard, the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills has set three main criteria on which applications for the green investment bank will be judged. As Gavin Brown, Marco Biagi and other members said, Edinburgh is extremely well placed to meet all three. BIS is looking for, first: “Ability to recruit and retain the specialist staff needed to run the organisation”. We all know the strength and depth of Scotland’s renewables sector, operationally on the ground and in the context of the intelligence that is available in our higher education institutions. We have expertise in financial services, which is vital. Edinburgh might be unique among the candidate cities in having such a combination of knowledge about finance and renewable energy. Quality-of-life issues are extremely important in attracting and retaining staff, as the minister said. In Edinburgh we have the advantage of a city that has great institutions. We have great schools and universities, so there are great educational opportunities, and we have a very good quality of life, which will attract people. Secondly, BIS talks about “Enabling the GIB to work closely with other parties involved in deals as well as other investment bodies, project developers and green technology providers”. As we know, Edinburgh is one of the top financial centres in Europe—it is the fourth-largest financial centre in Europe. As we heard from Sarah Boyack, John Wilson and other members, there is also superb expertise in our universities. We also have great connectivity. Edinburgh is one of the UK’s best-connected cities, with strong domestic and international transport links and world-class ICT. Thirdly, BIS is looking for “A location that provides good value for money, to ensure that the GIB is cost effective.” Scotland will be extremely competitive compared with London and most other cities. I gently point out that I hope that we have learned from the experience of the Scottish Parliament building and the trams project, which Mr Beattie bravely mentioned, and that if we attract the bank’s headquarters to Edinburgh we will look for economic, appropriate and understated accommodation. I welcome the broad partnership of private and public sector bodies that are promoting the bid. City of Edinburgh Council, Scottish Financial Enterprise, Edinburgh Chamber of Commerce, Scottish Power, PricewaterhouseCoopers, Aberdeen Asset Management and Grant Thornton, to name but a few, have come together. I have no wish to bring in a discordant note. However, I must briefly touch on the constitutional issue, which a number of members mentioned. We are talking about investment of £3 billion in a UK institution, which will be important for whoever benefits from it. In the interests of consensus I do not want to dwell on this, but I think that Rob Gibson said that in the event of independence the rest of the UK would still have to buy Scottish renewable energy. I am not sure that that is correct. According to experts, it is cheaper to build offshore wind projects—which, of course, are the main focus of the green investment bank—around the coasts of England than around the coasts of Scotland because of the shallower waters. Indeed, it would be cheaper for England to import nuclear power from France. Only last week, David Cameron and Nicolas Sarkozy signed an agreement to develop the new generation of clean green nuclear power stations in England. Mr Gibson should reflect on that.

If I have time, I will do so.

I say gently to Mr Gibson that if he studies the economics of energy he will find that renewable energy is the most expensive form of energy for consumers to purchase. Given the choice between purchasing Scottish renewable energy more expensively than it can be purchased elsewhere and the cheaper option, the rest of the UK might well seek the latter.

Once again, I reiterate the Scottish Conservatives’ support for the green investment bank to be located in Scotland. It would be good for the economy, good for our renewables industry and good for co-ordination of energy policy across the UK but, most important, it would also be good news for Scotland.

I am grateful to all members who have contributed to the debate. Its level and intensity reflect the public interest in and concern about the subject, which is demonstrated, as many members said, by the thousands of communications that each of us have received from across Scotland.

I will make some progress first, if I may. We have become used to debating the SNP’s broken promises in the chamber. As Neil Findlay just reminded us, every SNP MSP in the run-up to the election signed up to NUS Scotland’s reclaim your voice campaign, pledging to protect graduate numbers and college places, to improve student support and to rule out tuition fees. It is arguable that the SNP has failed even on that third point, due to the hike in fees for students coming to Scottish universities from the rest of the UK. There can be no dispute, however, that the SNP is breaking its promise on the first two points. We have seen a typically robust defence from the cabinet secretary this morning. The word “bombastic” has been a bit overused in the debate, but it came straight from the Michael Russell textbook: the first line of defence is to accuse your opponents of distortion and scaremongering. There are tens of thousands of e-mails that tell a different story. That is not distortion and scaremongering; it is a reflection of genuine concerns. We have only to listen to those in the sector, such as Hugh Logan from Motherwell College, who talked about the “deeply disturbing” cuts, or John Burt from Angus College, who talked about a “severely impaired ability to deliver for future learners”; or NUS Scotland, which has said that it is “deeply concerned” by the situation. I say to the cabinet secretary that that is not scaremongering. That is representing people’s concerns, which is what we are paid to do in this chamber.

I am long past the point of being astonished by the meekness of the SNP back benchers. I hope that one day they may find their collective backbone. I will move on to the second line of the Michael Russell textbook defence: blame somebody else. In this case, he blames the UK Government for the budget settlement. However, as we heard from Gavin Brown and others, the Scottish Government’s budget has been cut by 1.3 per cent in real terms, but Mr Russell’s cut to colleges is 8.5 per cent. That is a choice that the SNP and no one else has made. John Swinney told members in the chamber last week that the consequentials were £130 million. The only rabbit in sight is the cabinet secretary caught in the headlights of this debate. The third, final and desperate line of defence from the Michael Russell textbook is that if all else fails, you descend to the gutter and accuse your opponents of being anti-Scottish. We have heard that from SNP back benchers before, but to my knowledge this is the first time that we have heard that particular line from an SNP cabinet secretary. The mask has slipped this morning and the true, ugly face of the SNP has been exposed. I say in all seriousness to the cabinet secretary, for whom I had a great deal of respect, that I expected better from him. I hope that in a moment of quiet reflection he will realise that to call into question the patriotism of his political opponents just because they take a different view on a political issue is unworthy of him and his party.

That is a pathetic attempt to wriggle out of the expression of abuse in the chamber. Accusing his opponents of being unpatriotic is beneath him. I had hoped that he might apologise, but it says much about the man that he missed that opportunity. Hugh Henry was absolutely right that it is not just the SNP that speaks for Scotland. Its overwhelming mandate in May last year represents less than 23 per cent of the population. There are other voices in Scotland that should be heard and not dismissed. Far from improving student support—Liam McArthur made a fair point about this—we are seeing cuts to bursary funding. The cabinet secretary uses weasel words when he talks about the baseline. The facts are simple: we are seeing an £11 million real-terms cut in bursary funding. I remember working on a cross-party basis in the previous Parliament with NUS Scotland to deliver an additional £15 million of bursary funding, but that is now being reversed. That breaks a clear promise in the SNP manifesto, which says: “For the future, we will protect the advances already made.” As Liam McArthur reminded us, in February 2011, Angela Constance, the then Minister for Skills and Lifelong Learning, said in a press release: “I can confirm we will guarantee the additional funding for bursaries, not just for next year, but for the full four-year parliament.” Nothing could be clearer than that; it is yet another SNP broken promise. It is no excuse to say that those promises have been broken because of a difficult budget settlement. The SNP was well aware, going into the election in May, exactly what the funding settlement was. The SNP made the choice to cut student support—no one else did that for them. We know why that choice was made. The money that could have gone into colleges has been diverted into higher education because of the SNP’s dogmatic opposition to a graduate contribution. Despite everything that we have heard from the cabinet secretary, the Scottish social attitudes survey in December could not have been clearer. Only 20 per cent of people in Scotland support the proposition that students should have to pay no fees. Every choice has a consequence, and we are seeing the consequences for college funding of that choice by the Scottish Government. As we heard from Hugh Henry and other members, there could not be a worse time to cut college places. Youth unemployment has doubled since the SNP came to power in 2007. Young people do not want to sit at home doing nothing if they cannot find jobs, as is the case, sadly, for all too many of them. They want the opportunity to take up college and training places, which is why it is so short-sighted to cut back on college funding now. Unless the SNP is prepared to change its ways, the consequences of its actions will be with us for many years, with a lost generation of young people. In the budget next week, the SNP has the opportunity to put matters right. I hope that despite all the noise and bombast that we have heard in the debate this morning, in a moment of quiet reflection in the few days that remain before the budget is finalised, the SNP will listen to the voices in the debate and take the right steps to restore funding to our colleges and support our young people.

6. To ask the First Minister what support the Scottish Government has given to Edinburgh’s bid to host the green investment bank. (S4F-00450)

I thank the First Minister for his response and warmly welcome the cross-party support for bringing an important UK institution, with its many jobs, to Edinburgh. Should Edinburgh’s bid be successful, would the First Minister be surprised if, pending the outcome of the referendum, the UK green investment bank signed only a short-term lease?

Thank goodness there were Conservatives in the Parliament to vote the measure through. The minister will have seen the recent report from the Scottish Trades Union Congress on the small business bonus scheme, which argues that it has not had a beneficial impact and that it should be scrapped. Does the minister have any comments to make on the quality of the analysis in that STUC report?

That was a Conservative reform.

It was a radical reform.

The cabinet secretary acknowledged earlier that there are real concerns in the sector about the threat to charitable status from ministerial oversight of appointments to the chairs of colleges’ governing bodies, with the potential loss of £52 million per annum. What discussions have the cabinet secretary and his officials had with Scotland’s Colleges and the Office of the Scottish Charity Regulator about the impact that those changes will have on charitable status?

The minister knows that I recently wrote to him about free transport provision for Gaelic-medium education. Does he agree that, when a local authority in a large rural area provides Gaelic-medium education only at one or two schools and does not provide free transport for pupils of those schools who live a considerable distance from them, it creates a two-tier system in which Gaelic-medium education is available only to pupils whose parents can afford to pay the transport cost? That is regrettable and the Scottish Government should take action on that.

We have learned some useful things during the debate. I learned that I agreed with much of what Margo MacDonald said. Those of us in the Opposition parties learned that we should use the word “separation” as much as possible, because of the pantomime reaction that it draws from SNP members—I have rewritten my speech accordingly.

No—not at the moment. There will be plenty of opportunity for me to mention that word later, Mr Hepburn. We also learned that Christine Grahame has studied constitutional law. I enjoyed Mrs Grahame’s tutorial on sovereignty and the divine right of kings. She was right that Henry VIII of England developed the concept. However, one of the ironies of history is that it was the Scottish Stuart kings, when they came to the English throne, who embraced it with great enthusiasm. James VI wrote extensively on the divine right of kings. His rather foolish son, Charles I, lacked his father’s guile and tact, but nevertheless continued with his political views, which led directly to the Scottish revolution of 1637, the signature of the national covenant, the bishops wars and, in due course, the English civil war. It was not until 1689 that the glorious revolution and the original claim of right led to the eradication of the concept from the British constitution.

I will happily give way to receive a tutorial from Mrs Grahame.

Mrs Grahame is drawing a fine distinction. I will develop my argument on the claim of right and perhaps we will end up agreeing. I am pleased that we are having the debate. The First Minister promised in October that he would bring a debate on the claim of right to the chamber in the next month. Although the debate is three months later than it should have been, I am glad that the SNP has got round to fulfilling that promise. However, our party will not be affirming our commitment to the claim of right. As many members have said, the SNP could not sign up to the 1989 claim of right. It was right to take that stance at that point, and it is to be regretted that it has changed its mind because, as my colleague David McLetchie pointed out, there is a fundamental flaw in the claim of right.

Not at the moment. I want to develop my argument. It is generally understood that the legal reality of the position in the United Kingdom is that sovereignty rests with the Crown in Parliament. However, there is an alternative, popular sovereignty of the Scottish people to exercise national self-determination, and that is recognised in the political reality. Therefore, if the people vote for separation in a referendum, that right will be respected. We come to the fundamental issue: the right of national self-determination relates only to the right to declare independence—or separation—from the rest of the UK and not the right, mentioned in the claim of right, to “determine the form of Government best suited to their needs”. That is because the United Kingdom is founded by the treaty of union, a treaty between Scotland and the other contracting party. As David McLetchie said, you do not need to be a lawyer to realise that one party to a treaty or contract cannot unilaterally rewrite its terms. Therefore, if the Scottish people decide on a form of self-government short of separation—however they express that desire—it can be achieved only by agreement with the other contracting parties: the peoples of England, Wales and Northern Ireland as represented by those whom they have elected to Parliament. It is a complete nonsense to suggest that there is an absolute right for the Scottish people to unilaterally rewrite the treaty of union and to redefine the relationship with the rest of the UK, as Margo MacDonald fairly stated. If members are having difficulty grasping that concept, I will draw a parallel with our membership of the European Union. If we were to have a referendum on EU membership, it would be open to the people of the United Kingdom to vote to pull out altogether. However, we could not vote unilaterally to rewrite our relationship with Europe. We may not like the working time directive, the common agricultural policy or the common fisheries policy, but the UK Government cannot decide unilaterally that it will simply stop adhering to those aspects of EU policy, even if it wants to, because the other contracting parties—the other countries within the EU—would simply not put up with it.

Of course, the treaty of union was precisely that. The Scots Parliament of the time, however imperfectly it represented the view of the people, contracted with the Parliament of England and created a new Parliament. What we did then was to share sovereignty, exactly as we did when Britain joined the European Economic Community. That is what we agreed to do, but we cannot unilaterally renegotiate the terms. The claim of right is based on an entirely false prospectus. Suggestions that there should be a question on so-called devo max represent an equal nonsense, because it could not be delivered. The Conservative party was right to have nothing to do with the claim of right in 1989 and, unlike some others in this Parliament, we remain consistent in our opinion.

6. To ask the First Minister what impact the sale of Robert Wiseman Dairies to Müller Dairy will have on the Scottish economy. (S4F-00400)

I am surprised that the First Minister seems to be so sanguine about the loss of another Scotland-headquartered company when in opposition the SNP took a different view. When Scottish Power was taken over by Iberdrola, the now Deputy First Minister said that “it is now time for some explicit economic patriotism” and that we should defend our national companies “when they are under threat of extinction.” That, she said “is what grown-up national Governments do the world over”.—[Official Report, 7 September 2005; c 18931-18932.] Why does the SNP say one thing in opposition and something quite different when it gets into government?

I join other members in welcoming Hugh Henry to his new role on the Labour front bench. I was Hugh’s wing man on the Public Audit Committee for many years and I pay tribute to the robust scrutiny that he brings to his roles. I look forward to him undertaking such scrutiny in his education brief, as he did in his award-winning role in audit—you can buy me that pint you promised me later, Mr Henry. Given that the debate has been scheduled to take place less than three months after the previous one on the subject, we might have expected the Scottish Government to propose a new initiative or make an announcement. It is a little disappointing that there was nothing particularly new in what the minister had to say. Nevertheless, let us not carp. The debate has given us a useful opportunity to discuss the state of Scottish education and consider where we are going. I agree with the call in the motion to commend the work of teachers throughout Scotland—I would say that, because I am married to a teacher—and hard-working pupils up and down the land. That does not mean that we should be complacent or that we should not accept that there are problems, as members said. International comparisons show that, although Scotland is doing well in many areas, in recent years we have not been doing as well as many of our competitors are doing. Our results are flatlining in many cases, while others are overtaking us. The PISA tables show that whereas in 2000 only two countries were ahead of us in mathematics, today 12 countries are ahead of us. In science, four countries were ahead of us in 2000; today, the number is seven. In reading, one country was ahead of us in 2000; today, six countries are ahead of us. That is despite our having more than doubled spending on education since 1999. Another appalling statistic is that one in six youngsters who leave primary school is functionally illiterate. As Liam McArthur fairly pointed out, to highlight legitimate areas of concern is not to talk Scotland down or to be anti-Scottish, as was suggested during this morning’s debate. The cabinet secretary protests a little too much when he objects to Opposition members raising concerns about education. In the first session of the Parliament, when he was a shadow education spokesman, I recall that he was no shrinking violet when it came to pointing out problems with the Administration at that time.

I am grateful to the cabinet secretary for his clarification. I will highlight more issues of concern and perhaps, when Dr Allan winds up for the Scottish Government, he will respond in the spirit that the cabinet secretary has just demonstrated. Graeme Pearson and Hugh Henry talked about teacher unemployment. It is all very well to praise the work of teachers, but a serious problem with unemployment, especially of newly qualified teachers, must be addressed. The most recent figures, in December, showed that only 16 per cent of teachers who qualified last summer have full-time, permanent jobs. Many have temporary employment and many are on part-time or supply contracts, but they are seeking full-time, permanent work, which is not currently available. Members of all parties will be aware of the situation from their mailbags. As Mr Pearson said, the number of teachers in Scotland has been falling steadily year on year since 2007 and pupil teacher ratios are creeping up. Teachers do not just want to be told how well they are doing; they want action on those vital issues. There is good work going on in early years. Liz Smith mentioned the emphasis on parenting. Liam McArthur made a very fair point about childcare—Ruth Davidson made a similar point a few weeks ago—and the need to match what is being done south of the border. Of course, the Government once promised to reduce class sizes to no more than 18 in primary 1 to 3, which is a flagship policy that has not been delivered. I will be positive in the time remaining. We welcome the fact that the debate has opened up. Our amendment refers to the commission on school reform that has been set up by Reform Scotland and the Centre for Scottish Public Policy. I commend to the cabinet secretary the excellent article in The Scotsman today by Ross Martin and Geoff Mawdsley about the need to learn from other countries. There is a growing view that one size does not fit all—a view acknowledged by no less a person than the cabinet secretary in his famous polemic, “Grasping the Thistle”, which I dip into regularly for entertainment, in which he accepted that choice and diversity were important. Of course, we already have some diversity. We have Gaelic medium education, which we all support. We have faith schools, which I hope we all support. We have schools developing specialisms. There is no ideological opposition to diversity but, increasingly, there is the view that we should go further. It was not so long ago that the Labour Party proposed skills academies—an idea that seems to have gone off the radar. Perhaps Mr Henry will revive the idea, because it is very timely. We cannot discuss education without touching on the important issue of college funding, which was mentioned by a number of members, including Liz Smith, Kezia Dugdale and Margaret McDougall. There has been a £70 million cut in colleges’ revenue spend in the current year, with the result that courses are being cut and staff are being made redundant. At a time of economic difficulty and rising unemployment, it is a false economy to cut spending on colleges.

I am afraid that I am in my final minute—indeed, I may be over time. If we want to drive up attainment in post-16 education, which is what the Government tells us it wants to do and what is in its motion, we have to reverse those cuts. If there is one message that should come out of the debate, it should be a message to the Government to reverse its cuts in college funding because the young people of Scotland depend on colleges.

If this is all such a bad idea, why did James Purnell, Labour’s former work and pensions secretary, say: “Iain Duncan Smith’s universal credit, the plan to merge many current benefits into one, is a good reform ... I proposed a similar plan to Mr Brown ... But he was scared”?

Does Helen Eadie not accept that the logic of her argument is that the Labour Party, in 13 years, should have introduced welfare reform at a time of growing employment and not left it to the coalition Government to sort out now when we are dealing with Labour’s legacy?

When winding up a debate, it is customary to say how helpful it has been and to praise all the well-informed speeches from all sides. Sadly, I cannot do that today because too many speeches have been ill-informed, superficial and even hysterical in tone. It speaks volumes that I have hardly had to refer to the detailed rebuttals of specific points that I came armed with. SNP members’ speeches in particular seem to have focused on damning every single reform, misrepresenting their impact and repeating, like a pantomime audience chorus, that it would all be better if only we had independence. As Jackson Carlaw said, if that is the proposition, why wait? Why not put that to the people and let them decide? There is a serious issue to be debated, but the tone that people would expect for a debate on such an important issue has rarely been reached. The irony is that all the parties that are represented in the chamber appear to agree that welfare reform is a good thing. Despite what we have heard from the Labour members, senior Labour figures such as James Purnell, Frank Field and even Tony Blair—who is sometimes even booed by a Labour audience these days, although I noticed that that did not happen this morning—have admitted that, in government, Labour failed properly to reform the welfare system. As I pointed out to Jackie Baillie earlier, James Purnell, the former Secretary of State for Work and Pensions, is on record as saying: “Iain Duncan Smith’s universal credit, the plan to merge many current benefits into one, is a good reform.”

Jackie Baillie repeats the point that other Labour members made during the debate: “Now is not the time to do it. Reform is right. Lord, make us righteous, but not yet.” The problem is that Labour ducked the issue for 13 years. The time to deal with reform was when we had good years of economic growth and falling unemployment. However, the Labour Party failed that test and now it lectures us about the reform that it failed to address. Everybody thinks that welfare reform is good. The current system is inefficient, creates incentives for people not to seek work and is hugely expensive, as Liam McArthur fairly pointed out. That is why the introduction of the universal credit has been so widely welcomed. A range of means-tested benefits is being removed and replaced with the universal credit, which will streamline and simplify the benefits system. The Government has ensured that no one will experience a reduction in the benefit that they receive as a result of that introduction. We have heard the claim that welfare reforms will cost the Scottish economy £600 million and put 14,000 jobs at risk. That seems to be based on the rather bizarre assumption that the purpose of paying benefits is to provide economic activity. It completely misses the point that benefits can be paid only out of money that comes directly from taxpayers and, therefore, is already being drawn out of the economy. Alternatively, it must be borrowed, and we are all aware of the problems that borrowing has created. By not reforming benefits, we would add to the borrowing that future generations will have to pay back. The interest payments are themselves a burden on the economy. The Government’s reforms are aimed at helping people to get back into work and become more self-reliant, and getting people back into work must be good for the economy. The fundamental reform that the universal credit represents is that, in future, work will always pay. No longer will we see the nonsense of people being penalised by having to give up benefits when they take up jobs. The reform will help people to take on work, particularly part-time work initially, which is surely something that all members would like to encourage. It has also been estimated that a simpler system will mean an increased take-up of entitlements. That, it has been estimated, will lift 900,000 individuals out of poverty, including more than 350,000 children. Members have talked about the reform of housing benefit. To be frank, those reforms are long overdue. It is astonishing that, under the current system, the maximum housing benefit award was £104,000 per year or £2,000 per week. How could anybody possibly defend that figure? Those who are on benefits should never be put in a better position than those who are working.

Do I have time, Presiding Officer?

My apologies to Duncan McNeil. In the run-up to the debate, there were calls for the Parliament to oppose the legislative consent motion, as if that would exercise some right of veto on the Welfare Reform Bill. Those who make such calls demonstrate a complete misunderstanding of our constitutional settlement. Welfare is reserved to Westminster, and we have MPs there—including 59 from Scotland—who are well placed to consider the details of the reforms. The legislative consent motion makes the life of the Scottish Government easier by leaving Westminster to deal with some devolved matters that are, in the main, detailed administrative issues. Opposing the LCM will not block the Welfare Reform Bill or any of its provisions. Nor will it even send a message, as all the matters that have been raised this morning have already been raised ad nauseam at Westminster. It would be a pointless exercise in gesture politics. We have heard a lot of grandstanding on the issue this morning. We have heard people say that although they support the principle of welfare reform, they do not support a single detailed proposal that has been made. I have no doubt that the Scottish people will quickly see through such double standards. I have pleasure in supporting the amendment in Jackson Carlaw’s name.

The Secretary of State for Work and Pensions has been clear on the matter—there is no question of people being less well off as a result of the introduction of the universal benefit. The UK Government will make that clear.

2. To ask the Scottish Executive when it will publish a detailed timetable for the A9 upgrading works between Perth and Inverness. (S4O-00480)

I am sure that we all welcome the announcement that the A9 dual carriageway between Perth and Inverness will be completed in fulfilment of a Scottish National Party manifesto commitment from 2007. However, local people want to know when exactly the works will be done, how they will be funded and where the money will come from. Can the cabinet secretary be precise? When will we have that clarity?

I will start by saying something that I hope will please Jean Urquhart: I welcome the Scottish Government’s infrastructure investment programme. It is indeed an ambitious programme, as Lewis Macdonald fairly said. It might not amount to £60 billion when we do all the sums, but nevertheless there are a large number of projects in it. If they are all delivered, they will make an important difference to people in Scotland. Of course, that welcome has to be qualified, because it is very easy to make promises far into the future. In our amendment, we identify that most of the projects that are being proposed will not even start until after 2016, by which time we will have had another election. I particularly welcome the promise on the dualling of the A9 from Perth to Inverness. As the minister knows, there has been a long-term campaign to have that done, which I have been very happy to support on two grounds: first because of the very serious accident rate on the A9—it has the highest fatality rate of any road in Scotland—and secondly because creating a dual carriageway would increase vastly the economic opportunity for both Perth and Kinross and the Highlands. I am proud of the record of the previous Conservative Government, which, according to a parliamentary answer obtained from Mr Neil’s colleagues, spent £600 million on the A9 in today’s prices in its period of office, compared with £60 million spent by the SNP since 2007, so there is a lot of catching up to be done. However, I welcome the fact that the 2007 manifesto pledge from the SNP is now to be fulfilled. We are told that we will see work start in 2017—we look forward to receiving the details of that early in the new year, according to what the minister said to me earlier this afternoon. We look forward to the work being completed by 2025. We know that another important dualling is to take place: the dualling of the A96 from Aberdeen to Inverness, which, again, is very welcome, and which is to be completed by 2030. According to my calculations, by that time my good friend Mr Neil will be in his 80th year. I have no wish to be negative about the potential longevity of Mr Neil’s career, but I fear that by 2030 he might no longer be with us. Indeed, I see it now: he will be happy in his retirement. He and Isabella will be sitting of an afternoon with slippers on, feet up, watching “Countdown”, having long since cast off the shackles of ministerial office, which some younger person has taken over. My point is that it is easy to make promises that he will not be around to have to fulfil. Of course, all this comes from the people who promised us not so long ago that we would have class sizes of no more than 18 by 2011, and that has not happened either. So, whether it is a wish list or a letter to Santa Claus, time will tell. We welcome what is being proposed, but we will welcome it more whole-heartedly when it is delivered. Before I leave the subject of the A9, I want to agree with a point that Dave Thompson made earlier about two-plus-one lanes. I have always questioned the logic of creating two-plus-one lanes on the A9. If it really is the Government’s intention to move quickly with dualling, money would be better spent on creating not those additional lanes but a full dual carriageway. The other key issue is funding. The cabinet secretary has today set out a menu of options—capital borrowing, non-profit-distribution, regulatory asset base, tax increment financing, national housing trust, JESSICA, loan funds and European structural funds. That is a cornucopia of methods to pay for the infrastructure investment plan. There are two key points in all this. First, virtually all the methods that I mentioned involve borrowing money. Not so long ago, I heard SNP members railing against long-term borrowing and telling us that we were mortgaging our children’s future. Of course, we will be doing that in spades under this infrastructure programme. Secondly, the money that we will be borrowing will be overwhelmingly private funds. We are told that that borrowing will be done through the non-profit-distributing model. As Alex Johnstone pointed out, that is a misnomer. Whether those who are lending the money are the banks or the sovereign funds from Qatar that the First Minister is so fond of, they will not give us money if they get no return. They will expect to make a profit. The model will be not a non-profit model, but a with-profit model. We should stop calling it the NPD model and start calling it the with-profit-distributing model. When I quizzed Audit Scotland a few months ago at the Public Audit Committee, it accepted that the non-profit-distributing model was a type of private finance. Members such as Maureen Watt, who rail against private finance, should have the honesty to admit that, if the programme is to proceed, that will happen only because it is funded with private finance. That is an important point, because private finance has to be borrowed and when we borrow money, the interest rate at which we borrow becomes absolutely crucial. We are fortunate at the moment because interest rates are low. The union dividend has delivered low interest rates in this country compared with what is being paid across the euro zone. Even Germany, at times, is paying higher interest rates than we are. Let us never forget that it is SNP policy to join the euro, see interest rates rise, and see future generations paying even more for the programme than the £60 billion that is being claimed today. Thank goodness that we have David Cameron representing us in Europe and not the First Minister. He is protecting our AAA rating and ensuring that we can borrow money much more cheaply than would be the case if we were independent and part of the euro. I want to mention one other thing in passing. Jim Hume made a fair point. I liked the unlikely sight of the cabinet secretary being savaged by Jim Hume on the issue of housing for social rent. The Government promised 30,000 social rented homes, and that promise is not being delivered. That is another broken promise. If the plan is to be not merely a wish list, it needs more detail. We look forward to that. Our modest amendment calls for that and I am sure that if the minister is serious, he will have no difficulty in accepting it.

I commend Stuart McMillan for his motion and congratulate him on securing the debate. As members might be aware, I am not a regular subscriber to the Greenock Telegraph. However, I was interested to see the campaign that it is running, which sounds extremely worth while in the local context. I will spend my time talking about some of the broader issues that are highlighted in the motion, such as the impact of “dramatically rising fuel prices” on the economy. The assumption in the motion is that rising fuel prices are bad. I agree with that, but that assumption is not shared by everybody. There is no representative of the Green party present, but I suspect that, if there were, they would take quite the opposite view and state that rising fuel prices are a good thing because they dissuade people from using their cars and move them on to public transport. Therefore, we should not accept as a given that everybody thinks that rising fuel prices are bad. That general approach drove previous Westminster Governments to introduce the fuel tax escalator to increase the cost of fuel year on year and help to bring about modal shift away from private transport to public transport. However, times have changed, as the cost of fuel has gone up dramatically not simply because of taxation but because of the underlying cost of a barrel of oil. I remember—as will other members—that, when the price of a litre of unleaded fuel was reaching £1 some years ago, people thought that there would be riots in the streets. It is now, I think, around £1.30 for a litre of unleaded fuel—at least, that is what I paid when I filled up yesterday—so costs continue to rise. The motion rightly points out that there is an impact on individuals and businesses. All individuals pay more when they fill up their cars and all businesses pay more because the goods that we buy in the shops must be brought in. The haulage industry plays a vital role in that, but 1p on the cost of a litre of fuel puts many pennies, if not pounds, on the cost of the goods that we buy in the shops and contributes to inflation. As Stuart McMillan fairly said, there is a great impact on rural communities in particular, including some of the ones that I represent. The option to move to a public transport alternative does not exist there to the same extent as might be the case in an urban community. Stuart McMillan was gracious enough to acknowledge some of the steps that the chancellor has taken to reduce the impact of increased fuel duty. It was announced in the budget earlier this year that the proposed increase would be scrapped. Indeed, fuel duty was decreased by 1p at that time, and the 3p increase that is proposed for January has been deferred until August. The result of that is that by January, fuel will cost 10p a litre less than it would have had the previous Labour Government been re-elected. That is welcome, although I accept that there is more to do. Those steps will also be welcomed by motorists and businesses across the country. There is always a balance to be struck. Those measures reduce the revenue coming in to the Government at a time when the Government is desperately in need of revenue to balance the books. The Government used the budget to introduce an increase in the tax on oil and gas to fund the reduction in fuel, and that led to loud calls from the oil and gas industry about the deterrent effect that that increase would have on future exploration. I have to say that there is little sign of the increase having deterred future investment, but it goes to show that there are never any easy options. If we reduce the price of fuel, we have to find the money from somewhere to fund that. Whoever has to pay the extra money will not like it. My congratulations to Stuart McMillan, and I thank him for giving us the opportunity to discuss these important issues.

Scotland got Sunshine and Sweetie, while China got the First Minister. Who does the Deputy First Minister think got the better deal?

I thank the minister for the advance copy of his statement and welcome Derek Mackay to his new place on the front bench. The minister’s announcement of the approval of the Scottish Power visual impact mitigation scheme is a slap in the face for the people of Stirling. The additional mitigation schemes that have been proposed amount to very little, given the huge visual impact of the new pylons close to the Ochils and the Wallace monument. The Scottish Power proposals faced widespread and united public opposition in the Stirling area. I attended a number of public events at which that view was made very clear. Every political group in Stirling Council, including the Scottish National Party group, unanimously took the view that the line should be undergrounded in the Stirling area and that nothing less would do. It is a tragedy that the SNP Government has ridden roughshod over not only public opinion but the views of its own group on the council. The minister made great play of the costs of undergrounding, but the figures involved are minimal relative to the billions of pounds that we are spending on supporting renewable energy projects. What is the point of public consultation on this development and future ones if, at every turn, the Government will favour the multinational company over local people and put Scottish Power before Scottish people?

Does Mr Chisholm understand that, in Italy today, interest rates are at 7.2 per cent. Is that a sign of high growth in the Italian economy?

I apologise to Mr Swinney for missing the first four minutes of his speech—I was detained elsewhere. I am extremely sorry about that, because it means that I cannot judge the accuracy of the unprecedented nature of the warm words that my colleague Mary Scanlon offered in praising Mr Swinney’s speech. Not since before the Moray by-election has Mary Scanlon been so nice to Mr Swinney. I am hopeful that we will see such a rapprochement in future debates on the economy. I listened with great interest to what SNP back benchers had to say. They were long on criticism of what the coalition Government is doing in Westminster but short on alternative strategies. That is entirely in tune with the approach of the members of the SNP’s front bench, who claim that all the good news about the Scottish economy, whether it is new job announcements, unemployment statistics or inward investment, is down to the actions of the SNP Government, and that all the bad news is down to the actions of George Osborne and the coalition Government. I do not think that it is quite so simple.

Indeed—it is utterly brazen. As he told the chamber again today, Mr Swinney thinks that the coalition Government is cutting too quickly and deeply. However, we have heard nothing from him about the level of cuts that would be acceptable or appropriate.

I would be delighted to.

Mr Swinney has given us one specific example but he has not set out any overall package that the UK Government should follow. If he is maintaining the position that the UK Government is cutting too quickly and deeply, is he now saying that that one proposal would, if followed, be enough for him to praise everything else that the coalition Government did? I think not. For us on the Conservative benches, a highlight of the debate has been watching the SNP and Labour back benchers spend all their time attacking one another. In fact, they are so busy attacking one another that they seem to have hardly any time for attacking us. It is all very refreshing. The outlook is a matter of concern. Members who, like me, attended at an ungodly hour this morning the presentation on business confidence by the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales and Grant Thornton will have heard about the sharp fall in such confidence across the UK and Scotland. However, in the past quarter, that fall has been driven not by domestic concerns but by the euro zone crisis. There is also good news—gross profits and exports for Scottish businesses are expected to rise—and, despite the loss of confidence, growth, albeit modest, is still expected. Richard Baker did not touch at all on the cause of the current concern and completely ignored the fact that the euro zone crisis is driving down confidence right across the globe but particularly in Europe. The UK is the only major western country where credit ratings are improving.

Some countries in the euro zone have superior growth; others have poorer growth than us. Some start from a lower base than us; others do not. However, if we look across the euro zone, experience will tell us that countries with credible spending plans are in a stronger not weaker position. All of us—householders, mortgage payers and businesses—benefit from record low interest rates. As I pointed out earlier to Malcolm Chisholm, interest rates in Italy are now at 7.2 per cent. We are paying less than even Germany; indeed, as Gavin Brown reminded us, there is a threat to Germany’s triple A rating. A 1 per cent rise in interest rates would mean an extra £10 billion on mortgage bills annually, an extra £7 billion on business borrowing and an extra £21 billion on debt interest payments. Any interest rate rise is far more damaging than any advantage that we might get from higher spending or tax cuts funded by borrowing. Incidentally, while we are on the subject of the euro, where are all the euro advocates now? Where are all those people who, 10 or 15 years ago, were telling us that we should join the euro? The SNP benches are absolutely full of them. Of course, if Scotland became an independent country, we might well have no alternative but to join the euro—at horrendous cost to our economy. Like Mary Scanlon, I will briefly remind the chamber of the ways in which the autumn statement has been good for Scotland. New spending on infrastructure means £433 million in Barnett consequentials for the Scottish Government; there will be a national loan guarantee scheme of £20 billion to provide cheaper loans for business; there will be cuts in income tax for lower earners; the scrapping in January of the 3p rise in fuel duty will save 10p on fuel duty compared with where we would have been under Labour; there will be £50 million to support cross-border sleeper services; there will be a record increase in the basic state pension of £5.30, which is above the CPI rate; there will be a youth contract to help 40,000 youngsters find work and to provide employers with wage incentives; and there will be an urban broadband fund. All that great news to get the economy going should be welcomed, and I am delighted to support Gavin Brown’s amendment.

How does Mr Eadie explain the fact that, in 1997, Scottish manufacturing exports were higher than they were in 1979?

I thank the Labour Party for giving us the opportunity to debate the vital issue of youth unemployment. I pay tribute to Iain Gray, as I suspect that this is the final debate in which he will lead on behalf of his party. He and I have something in common, which is not that we are not very good at winning elections, but that we were at the same school—Inverness royal academy—although he is, of course, much older than I am, so our paths did not cross. I am sure that he benefited from the IRA’s excellent education. I know about Iain Gray’s interest in youth unemployment and his personal commitment to dealing with it, and the Labour Party was half right in its analysis, but what was missing from the speeches by Labour members was any admission of Labour’s part in creating the current situation. The economic mismanagement of the Labour Party in government led to the crisis that we are now in. The economic boom that it oversaw was fuelled by cheap credit and excessive borrowing over many years, and it has resulted in the worst debt legacy of any major industrialised nation. It was Gordon Brown who said that there would be no return to boom and bust, yet he delivered us both. I gently remind Labour members that, under Labour in government, youth unemployment rose every year from 2004, even before the recession. Under Labour in government, youth unemployment rose by 40 per cent.

What the Labour Party was not doing was providing long-term jobs. The fact is that youth unemployment was going up year on year; Labour’s legacy was a situation that was getting worse. I want to move on to some positive points. A number of fair points have been made, and the most important and serious issue that needs to be tackled is that of college funding. If we are serious about employability, we must ensure that there are college places available to provide proper training opportunities. As local members, we all know of the great work that is done in our further education colleges. We see lives being transformed—people come out of college with the skills that they need to enter the workforce. In light of that and of the difficult economic times that we are in, it is extraordinary of the Scottish Government to cut further education funding by £74 million.

No, I need to make some progress. Colleges across the country are closing courses, laying off staff and turning away students because the Scottish Government has taken the conscious decision to divert money from FE into the higher education sector as a result of its dogmatic opposition to a graduate contribution. At this stage, the single most important measure that could be taken to help would be to find more money for the FE colleges. I noted with interest the First Minister’s announcement that we are to have a new minister dedicated to youth employment, with a new budget of £30 million. He needs to look closely at how that budget is allocated and, in particular, at whether priority should be given to putting it into further education. Before I leave the issue, I express the hope that the regionalisation agenda that we hear about from the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning is not a euphemism for enforced mergers of colleges.

The member seems to be in a state of utter denial about his Government cutting the funding at a time when it is required to promote youth employment. He should accept that point. I hope that we get a more positive response from the front bench when Mr Swinney winds up. A number of important points were made on skills. Liz Smith made an excellent point about employability. The irony is that, even when we had a boom economy in our country, we had youth unemployment, because many employers preferred to employ people from overseas. They preferred to employ eastern European workers not because of a lack of training on the part of our youngsters, but because our youngsters sometimes lacked a proper, work-focused attitude, as we have heard. Stuart McMillan mentioned the evidence given at the Economy, Enterprise and Tourism Committee last week by Gavin Ellis, a hotelier from Morayshire, who said, rather depressingly, that he had interviewed local workers to come and work in the hospitality industry and their response was that they did not want to work weekends. That sort of attitude has to change.

No. I am sorry, but I have taken two interventions already and I will run out of time very shortly. I want to say something about school education, which the Smith group recommendations touched on and which is absolutely vital. The group was quite clear that the current one-size-fits-all education policy is damaging and that we need to see the learning experience become more individually focused. We in the Conservative Pfarty have argued for years for a more diverse education system. When we look elsewhere in Europe, for example at Germany, we see a whole spectrum of technical schools—which are being developed south of the border—and the development of vocational skills, and we see that people are having better success than we are with our one-size-fits-all comprehensive system. That is the road that we should be going down. The Labour Party used to talk about skills academies, but it has gone very quiet on that recently. I hope that it will resurrect the idea, because it was a sensible way of driving the economy forward. I welcome—as Derek Mackay was fair to do—the announcement this week of the UK Government’s youth contract, which will create 40,000 work places for young people. I look forward to hearing the details of the new minister for youth employment. If Iain Gray has any legacy, maybe it will be a new ministry to take forward the issue that is of so much interest to him. I take pleasure in supporting the amendment in the name of Liz Smith.

I commend Neil Findlay for securing the debate. The attendance in the chamber and in the gallery is testament to how seriously the issue is treated by members and by the public. In Perth and Kinross, Stirling and Fife, this is a live issue for many of the communities that I represent. I will make three points in the short space of time that is available to me. The first is on the cost of wind power. As Alex Fergusson pointed out, wind power is not free but, like all renewable energy, is subsidised. Indeed, renewable energy is the most subsidised form of energy production. We are all paying for it. Even Scottish Renewables concedes in its briefing paper that the subsidy per bill payer will be £50 per annum by 2016. Others have put the figure higher. That is a flat rate that is payable by all. It is a regressive tax that hits the poorest the hardest. In any other sphere of activity, such a regime would be regarded as pernicious. We are taxing the poor, who are already struggling with fuel poverty, to give money to rich power companies that then pass it on to rich landowners. We are robbing the poor to give to the rich. It is Robin Hood in reverse. Worse still, we are paying power companies even when power is not being produced and the turbines are standing idle. My second point is that wind power is an unpredictable and intermittent source of power. Without large capacity for electricity storage, for which the technology does not currently exist, it is therefore unreliable, and it requires to be backed up at all times with what is known as a spinning reserve, which has to come from conventional sources of generation. Those of us who attended the presentation in the Parliament a few weeks ago by the Institution of Mechanical Engineers heard its concern that, because of the potential loss of conventional generating capacity in Scotland in the coming years, the spinning reserve will in future have to be imported from England or France. It would be a rich irony indeed if the greening of the Scottish energy industry was made possible only because of France’s investment in nuclear power, but that is where we are heading. My final point is on planning, which was raised by Neil Findlay, John Lamont and other members throughout the chamber. The planning regime for large-scale onshore renewables is utterly inadequate and communities throughout the country feel under siege from speculative proposals from developers. That is the situation in Perth and Kinross and many other parts of the country. The worst aspect is that local authorities spend a great deal of time devising local plans and identifying suitable sites for development, and democratically elected local planning committees base decisions on those local plans, but when appeals are made to the Scottish Government, it completely disregards the local decision making that has taken place. That is not democratic and it does not promote local accountability or localism. It shows disregard, if not contempt, for local decision making. The Scottish Government claims to speak for the people of Scotland. The people of Scotland are here in the gallery tonight and it is time that the Scottish Government started speaking up for them.

This has been a wide-ranging and worthy debate. I am sure that we are all grateful to Stuart McMillan and Duncan McNeil for giving us some entertainment when our spirits were flagging an hour and a half into the debate. I will touch on two issues that are of interest to my constituents in Mid Scotland and Fife and will then touch on some of the broader issues raised in the debate. The first issue that I will address is town centre regeneration. I was interested to read Fife Council’s response to the Scottish Government’s regeneration discussion paper. Fife Council refers to the threat to town centres from “the growing importance of the internet; the increasing dominance of supermarkets; the expansion of retail and business space permitted outwith town centres; a move to ‘leisure shopping’ by increasingly demanding consumers; increasing geographic mobility ... fewer purchasing trips being taken to larger centres with larger outlets; an increasing stock of vacant but unsuitable property for modern retail trading; rising costs.”

BIDs have brought some benefits. One downside is that the businesses themselves are expected to contribute, so in a way it is a form of additional taxation. The cabinet secretary said that the town centre regeneration fund was a £60 million fund that had provided assistance to 89 town centres. I am sure that it was due only to forgetfulness on his part—perhaps brought on by advancing years—that he did not mention that it was a Conservative initiative, which was inserted into a previous Scottish Government budget due to Conservative pressure. I am delighted that we have seen so many benefits for town centres across Scotland as a result of that excellent idea. Some of the challenges that Fife Council identifies in its paper are being addressed by the injection of those funds. The minister will be familiar with the situation in Blairgowrie and Rattray, where funds to the sum of £1.5 million were obtained for town centre regeneration. He will know that the situation has not been without its local difficulties. The community and the regeneration company are working hard to find a way forward. I hope that he will be sympathetic to initiatives being brought forward by the community to utilise that money, as it would be a tragedy if, after so much work has gone into the bid, the funding was lost to the community due to misfortune rather than any lack of attention by those driving the bid. The second point specific to my constituency that I want to raise is the future of Perth city centre. Of course, Perth is not yet a city, but we hope that it will be come the Queen’s diamond jubilee next year. The development control committee of the local authority decided today to demolish the city hall in Perth. It is a landmark building of some historic importance, which has been the venue for a great many civic events over the years and, indeed, a venue for many political conferences. In fact, I am sure that many members have attended conferences there. My colleague reminds me that Margaret Thatcher spoke there many times. Some will remember that it was the venue for Ted Heath’s famous declaration of Perth back in, I think—[Interruption.] I was going to say 1967, but I am being heckled and told that it was 1968. Nobody has made a film about him yet. The city hall is a building of questionable architectural merit, which is perhaps overlarge for its site. Crucially, following the creation of the new concert hall in Perth, it had no viable future economic use, so the decision has been taken to knock it down. That has created the opportunity to establish a civic square in the centre of Perth—an objective that I support—and to improve the setting of St John’s kirk, the most important historic building in the centre of the city. On balance, that was the right decision, although a halfway house was proposed of retaining the front part of the city hall for another use and knocking down the back half. An interesting point about the proposal, which relates to the broader discussion on regeneration, was how controversial it was. It divided opinion throughout the city and further afield. That shows the challenges that we face when ambitious ideas for regeneration are proposed and we try to win public support for them. I will touch on other issues to do with regeneration priorities that have been raised during the debate. The cabinet secretary talked about the need for community leadership and for the process to be bottom up and not top down. That is essential. Successful regeneration projects are those in which people at the grass roots come up with ideas and then seek funding from a variety of sources. That leads me to my next point, which is about the need to involve the private and voluntary sectors as well as the public sector. As we all know, and as the Government has acknowledged, we live in difficult times as far as funding is concerned. We therefore need to bring in private sector funding where that can be achieved. A good example of that, about which members from the north-east will know more than I do, are the proposals to redevelop Union Terrace gardens in Aberdeen. I will not get into the controversy about whether that is a good idea, but it has been made possible by generous philanthropic support from Sir Ian Wood. Were it not for that support, we would not have that potential redevelopment. The point about a participatory approach from the public sector is well made in the briefing for the debate from the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors, which points out that, too often, there is an adversarial relationship between the public and private sectors. We must examine the planning system. The Public Audit Committee recently considered the Audit Scotland report “Modernising the planning system”, which presented a range of challenges for planning. One important fact that was pointed out was that, although income for planning departments is reducing because the number of planning applications has fallen as a result of the economic downturn, the cost of planning departments is still going up. That seems extraordinary, and there is clearly a mismatch. Of course people want a planning system that gives a fair balance, but it must be responsive and it must reach decisions more quickly than happens at present in many cases. I am coming towards the end of my time but, if I may, Presiding Officer, I will make a couple of final points.

The first is about deprivation. Regeneration is not only about so-called deprived areas. As I said, many small towns have changed shopping patterns and so need support, but they are not what are traditionally seen as deprived areas. On funding models, the cabinet secretary talked about JESSICA and TIF and other acronyms, but we already have a model whereby we can spend money now when there is a shortage of capital funds: the public-private partnership. However, the Scottish Government has an ideological opposition to PPP as a means of creating economic opportunity now and paying for it down the road. We look forward to scrutinising the Government’s regeneration strategy in due course. In the meantime, I support the Government’s motion and the amendment in the name of Alex Johnstone.

I commend Dave Thompson for his motion and congratulate him on securing this evening’s debate. As he said, even in this secular world the Bible is still the most influential book in world history and it is still a bestseller across the globe. This is the 400th anniversary of the King James Bible and although Dave Thompson is technically correct to say that he was king of Scots, by the time the King James Bible appeared he had become king of the United Kingdom—or Great Britain, technically speaking, in those times. After going down to London, he famously made only one return visit to Scotland. No doubt he was too busy overseeing the creation of the new Bible. The people’s Bible was a joint venture between the Scottish Bible Society and the Bible Society in England and Wales and it was an opportunity for the entire Bible to be written by hand, with individuals each contributing a pair of verses and making their mark in history. It was heartening to see the tour made by the people’s Bible across Scotland over the year. In my region, it went through Perth and Kinross, to Clackmannanshire and to various stops in Fife. Its last stop in Scotland was on 13 November in Stirling castle, appropriately enough, because Stirling castle has many connections with James VI. He was raised and educated there so it was right that it was the last stop for the people’s Bible and the last chance for members of the public to get involved before the completed version was presented in Westminster abbey. I pay tribute to all the organisers and the individuals throughout Scotland and the rest of the UK who took part and contributed verses to this worthwhile initiative. The Scottish Bible Society and its counterpart south of the border are to be commended for their outward-looking and innovative venture. They are aware that many people in Scotland are not connected actively to the Church or to religion and the Scottish Bible Society is trying to address that by thinking of new and exciting ways to bring scripture to the public and to a wider audience across the country. The people’s Bible was an energetic and exciting idea to raise public awareness of that very important book. Other initiatives have taken place during the year. Later this month, the Perth branch of the Scottish Bible Society is holding a Bible-reading marathon over three days—three complete 24-hour periods. I have been asked to participate for an hour, which I am happy to do. Over the course of the three days, the Bible will be read from start to finish in a public place—on the steps of the North church in the centre of Perth. It will be important for people in Perth to witness that; it will reflect the importance of the Bible and the importance of the anniversary that we are celebrating as this year comes to a close. Dave Thompson said that perhaps the Bible was better known to previous generations than it is to many people today. Various academics have told me that, whereas with previous generations of students they could include biblical references in their lectures that would automatically be understood, many students today just look on blankly. John Mason mentioned his favourite passages in the Bible. I have always based my approach to politics on the prophet Samuel’s dealings with King Agog of the Amalekites. If any members are not familiar with the passage to which I refer, I suggest that they look it up—1 Samuel, chapter 15. It is better read in the original King James version, where the language is so much better. I close by commending the Scottish Bible Society for all its work, and I again thank Dave Thompson for giving us the opportunity to discuss these issues.

It is with great pleasure that I rise to speak in the debate on what will be my last outing—at least, for the time being—as the Conservative health spokesman. I say to the cabinet secretary, to Jackie Baillie and to others how much I have enjoyed debating with them over the past couple of years. They will shortly have a new face, or perhaps a returning face, to contend with when someone else fills my current role as I move on to pastures new. It is fair to say that those are not the pastures that I had originally intended to move on to, but I am sure that the grass will be just as green. Jackie Baillie’s motion makes some fair points about the decline in NHS staff numbers over recent years. Indeed, the statistics that have been cited this morning have been raised frequently in the chamber over recent months. However, the motion, which I read in great detail when it was published yesterday, refers to a real-terms reduction in the overall health budget, and, on scrutinising the figures, it becomes apparent that the situation is not quite so clear cut. Revenue spend on the NHS remains more or less constant in real terms, in line with the commitment by the UK coalition Government to ring-fence NHS spending and the subsequent commitment by the Scottish Government to pass the Barnett consequentials of that on to the NHS in Scotland. The reduction in funding referred to in Jackie Baillie’s motion is, as the cabinet secretary said, in the capital budget. It is not entirely correct to say, as the motion states, that the reduction threatens further front-line job losses. Indeed, I would have to say to Jackie Baillie that there is more than a little whiff of Labour opportunism about the motion as I cannot see anywhere what the Labour Party is proposing as an alternative. We all know that the public finances are in a horrendous situation, and that that is a legacy of Jackie Baillie’s colleagues in the previous UK Labour Government. We also know that, with a fixed Scottish budget, if the Labour Party proposes to increase spending on the NHS, it has to tell us what other area of the budget it would cut. We have heard nothing from the Labour Party this morning about how much it would increase health spending or how it would afford to do that in the current budget round. Perhaps later contributions from Labour will set out in detail whether it thinks that the NHS in Scotland is underfunded and by how much, how much extra it would spend, and where that money would come from. That said, there are serious issues affecting the NHS because of the standstill budget and continually rising costs, more expensive treatments and—[Interruption.]

I am not used to such disruptive womenfolk, Presiding Officer. I am glad that you are keeping them in order. We know that costs are rising in the NHS and that the population is ageing. I am sure that we have all met people working in the NHS who have extreme concerns about workforce cuts. The RCN briefing for the debate highlights the fact that the number of nursing staff who are in post is at its lowest since 2006. The Royal College of Speech and Language Therapists, which held an event in Parliament just a couple of weeks ago, also raised concerns about vacancies not being filled and about that having a knock-on effect on patient care. That is particularly concerning, given that we are all supposed to be investing more in preventative spending. If the problems that such therapists deal with are not dealt with early, they will cause greater problems and incur more costs further down the line. Service redesign and change are always going to be a part of the NHS, with treatments that used to take weeks in hospital now being reduced to a day or two, and workforce reductions in themselves are not always a bad thing, nor do they always mean poorer services. However, we need to be careful that we are not impacting adversely on patient care. We remain of the view that it was an error to take more than £50 million out of the health budget to give free prescriptions to all, including members of the Scottish Parliament who can well afford to pay for their prescriptions. If given the choice, I am sure that the public would rather make a small contribution towards the cost of their medicine than see cuts in NHS services. I am delighted that our new leader, Ruth Davidson, is maintaining our opposition to the policy of free prescriptions for all, and I hope that, in time, other parties will realise that the policy is a good example of a wrong choice with serious and negative consequences for our public services. We have some sympathy with the terms of the Labour motion, which raises some serious issues. However, it would have been better if Labour had offered an alternative rather than simply being on the attack. These are serious issues and they deserve more than a superficial treatment.

The minister referred to clinical need. Does he accept that there are many children and young people who might not have a clinical need for orthodontic treatment but who do not want to grow up with disfiguring crooked teeth? Does he accept that the legacy of what he is proposing might well be that we have children with crooked teeth from less well-off backgrounds while the parents of those from better-off backgrounds can afford to pay for the much-needed treatment?

As the minister reminded us in her opening speech, it is national adoption week. The key message that has come out of the debate—it was addressed by the minister in her speech—is the need to address the time that is taken to secure long-term placements for looked-after children. The problem is not unique to Scotland. On Monday, the Prime Minister promised tough action to deal with local authorities that are failing in their basic responsibilities to deal with adoption cases swiftly and efficiently or are weak at finding suitable and stable foster placements for children. He said that it is unacceptable that some local authorities have been allowed to let down the children in their care for so long. Of course, he was talking about the situation south of the border, but as we heard in the debate, the situation in Scotland is not so different. The Prime Minister went on to say: “We need a real culture change in this country to be more pro-adoption. For many children it is the right answer. But there are far too many stories today about pointless questions, very intrusive questions, and also a sort of tick-box mentality that means that people are looking at things like how long ago you gave up smoking or the age of your youngest natural child. There’s too much ticking of boxes and not enough discretion, judgment and responsibility.” It was good to hear from Gil Paterson and Richard Lyle, who were able to share their experiences as adoptive parents. I have friends who were adopted and they recognise what a wonderful chance in life they were given as a result. I also know—I am sure that other members will have had this experience—couples who have been interested in adopting but have been put off by the bureaucracy, the delays that we have heard about, and the prospect of intrusive questioning about their lifestyle, which they have not welcomed. There is always a need for balance. On the one hand, we must protect individual children, particularly vulnerable children. We must ensure that adoptive parents are properly scrutinised and that they have the skills and the resources, in the broadest sense of that word, to look after vulnerable children. On the other hand, we should not put barriers in the way so as to deter able and appropriate parents from coming forward. The irony is that virtually anyone can have children themselves, with no state interference—rightly so—but that rigorous checks are made on those who seek to foster or adopt other people’s children. Claire Baker talked about children requiring placement, many of whom can be from disturbed backgrounds and homes in which there is substance abuse or neglect. They are victims of abuse and have challenging problems. As Mark McDonald said fairly a moment ago, adoption often conjures up images of a healthy bouncing baby, but in reality most adoptions or long-term fostering arrangements today are for older children who are desperately in need of stability. Every month that goes by without their being placed has potentially serious consequences. Claudia Beamish reminded us that we are dealing in many cases with teenagers. For the children whom we are talking about, there needs to be careful selection of adoptive parents. We need to ensure that parents have the right skills, but it takes too long. Liz Smith and Stewart Maxwell acknowledged that the educational attainment of looked-after children is dramatically poorer than the average, so early placement is vital. However, too many children are being failed in that regard at the moment. The key question for the minister, which I hope that she will address in her winding-up speech, is how improvement will be measured. When will the minister report to Parliament on the progress that is being made? As Liam McArthur acknowledged in his speech, we have been here before over the past 12 years. That takes me on to the Labour amendment from Claire Baker, which makes a very important point about timescales for implementation and raises the important question of resources. It also touches on kinship carer payments, which one or two members addressed. Those payments were, quite rightly, heralded when they were introduced, but there is concern that in too many local authorities they are not being paid. As I have acknowledged in many previous debates, there is always a conflict between national policy on the one hand and local decision making on the other. However, politicians should stand by what they promise and if they make people believe that they will get kinship carer payments, they should ensure that the payments are being delivered. Stewart Maxwell mentioned, in an excellent speech, early intervention and the centrality of the first two years of a child’s life. There is a nervousness on the part of the authorities about removing children from a family setting at that young age, but such is the importance of early intervention that we have to be prepared to take that leap, perhaps more often than is currently the case. If we do not get to children early enough, we are blighting their later life chances. In closing, I pay tribute to all those who adopt, who put up with the bureaucracy and delays for the joy of looking after a child, for all the sacrifices that they make. Theirs is a vital, caring role and we owe it to them to do better. However, we owe as much if not more to the children we have heard about during the debate, many of whom are from troubled backgrounds and who are desperate for a permanent, loving home. They have suffered enough already; the state should not make them suffer more. They deserve better from us, so if anything comes out from this debate I hope that it will be renewed enthusiasm on the part of the Government to reduce the time needed to find a permanent home for those looked-after children. I am pleased to support the motion and the Labour amendment.

6. To ask the First Minister when the Scottish Government will set a date for the referendum on independence. (S4F-00198)

The First Minister will not give us a date for his referendum and now he wants to muddle things further with talk of a third option. Surely it cannot be the case that the First Minister lacks the courage to put his big idea of independence to a straight yes or no vote of the Scottish people, or is he feart?

I am not interested in the opinions of constitutional lawyers, however eminent they are; I am interested in the opinions of the First Minister. If the First Minister is so confident that he can win support for independence, why not put the matter to a vote now and let the people decide?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. At First Minister’s questions today, the First Minister, in response to a question from me on the referendum on independence, stated the following, and I quote from the Official Report: “I have been handed a statement by Matt Qvortrup, a professor and the world’s foremost expert on constitutional referenda, from a letter that he is sending to The Times newspaper. He closes the letter by saying: ‘While it is a matter for the Scottish people and Parliament to determine the form of their own referendum and while asking about a single question would be much more common, such a two-question proposition would be fair, reasonable and clear.’” End of quote. I have now been informed that the words quoted by the First Minister purporting to be from Professor Qvortrup are not those of the professor but were written by the First Minister’s official spokesman, who advised the press of that at lunch time’s media briefing. I am sure that you will agree, Presiding Officer, that if that is correct it appears that the First Minister has misled Parliament, which should be a matter of great concern to all members. Will you ask the First Minister to come to the chamber and make a statement so that the record can be put straight?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. My point of order is further to the one that I raised earlier this afternoon on the same issue. I welcome the First Minister’s apology to the chamber for misleading the Parliament in response to a question from me at First Minister’s question time. It speaks volumes about this Government that, when it comes to its flagship policy of an independence referendum, it misleads, manipulates and manufactures evidence in support of its stance and browbeats and bullies those who dare to take a contrary view. Presiding Officer, can you ascertain from the First Minister whether, in addition to apologising to Parliament, he has apologised to the esteemed academic, Professor Qvortrup, for misrepresenting his view?

The cabinet secretary will know that, in addition to the job reductions that have been referred to, newly qualified nurses and doctors are struggling to find employment. Before the election, the SNP promised that it would cut management costs in the NHS by 25 per cent to free up resources to spend on the front line, which is a welcome commitment. What progress is being made on that and what is the target date to complete the reduction?

I also welcome the statement and thank the cabinet secretary for advance sight of it, although I did get advance sight of the announcement on the BBC website yesterday afternoon. The subject of the statement is a serious issue that has needed resolution for some time. We have raised it on a number of occasions, including at First Minister’s question time on 9 June, when Annabel Goldie raised the matter. There is concern that it has taken time to resolve it. That said, I welcome the interim solution that has been set out today. The cabinet secretary said that the majority of the unions involved have accepted the interim offer. I understand that the GMB has not done so. Can the cabinet secretary tell us how many workers are not signed up to the interim offer and what impact that will have? What assurances can she give us that at the end of the three-month period there will be a permanent solution, given that there have been two failed attempts to reach a resolution?

We have all seen newspaper headlines such as “Scots ‘worst’ for cancer survival”, “Lung cancer survival among the lowest in Europe” and Scotland “has the lowest breast cancer survival rate”. The sad truth is that report after report tells us that Scotland lags behind a plethora of developed countries in survival rates for cancer. Norway, Sweden, the US, Canada and France are but a few examples of countries that boast better five-year survival rates than Scotland across a range of cancers. I accept that, in recent years, there has been an improvement in the figures for survival rates in Scotland, but I wish to highlight that Scots also lag behind a significant proportion of Europe for access to new cancer medicines, even though successive price cuts and exchange rate movements have meant that United Kingdom prices are currently among the lowest in Europe. It is our job as parliamentarians and as compassionate members of our society to ensure that, when a person is diagnosed with a terrible illness such as cancer, they have the best possible fighting chance of beating it, or—in the most extreme cases—of being able at least to extend for as long as possible the time that they can spend with loved ones. Sadly, in June this year, one of my constituents, Gillian Bauld from Dunblane, died after being diagnosed with advanced metastatic breast cancer. Her husband had contacted me prior to her death to raise concerns about the difficulty his wife was having accessing lapatinib—a drug that is not approved by the Scottish Medicines Consortium, but which would have presented the best way of controlling the disease’s progression after her chemotherapy came to an end. The Baulds made two separate exceptional prescribing requests, by two different consultants, and were rejected both times. As the drug was not approved by the SMC and because the exceptional prescribing route had been closed down to them, Gillian’s consultant advised that the only option would be to pay for the treatment themselves, at a cost of £10,000 for a 12-week course. That was unaffordable for that family, as it would be for many families across Scotland. It was a crushing blow at what was already a difficult and distressing time for the family. The really devastating fact for Gillian was that, had she been living in England, she would have met the specific criteria that are laid down for access to lapatinib through the interim cancer drugs fund. As her husband wrote in The Scotsman: “The ICDF is intended to help people like my wife. If we lived in England, then she would fully meet the criteria for funding, whereas in Scotland she isn’t considered worthy of further help.” There are many cases all across Scotland like my constituent Gillian Bauld and I am sure members have dealt with, or are dealing with, similar cases. According to a report that has been published by the Rarer Cancers Foundation, there are now 23 cancer treatments that are not routinely available in Scotland but which can be funded through the interim cancer drugs fund that has been set up by the Conservative-led coalition in England. The cabinet secretary will dispute the figure of 23 cancer treatment drugs. I have read the correspondence that she sent to my colleague David McLetchie yesterday, and I have seen the vigorous rebuttal from the Rarer Cancers Foundation that was sent to the health services research unit on 8 September. I am not here to get into a dispute about whether the figure is 23 or some lower figure. I acknowledge that the cabinet secretary believes it is not 23 and may be as low as 12. It seems that that is not really the point; even the cabinet secretary will accept that cancer medicines that are available in England are not available in Scotland. If we cannot agree on the number, the principle is established. The interim cancer drugs fund totals £600 million over three years, which is in addition to an initial £50 million. It has helped 5,000 patients in England to access the cancer medicines that they need. Such facts convince me that the Rarer Cancers Foundation is right to argue that about 14 treatment requests per million population are being approved in Scotland, in comparison with almost 48 such requests in England. Lapatinib—the drug that my constituent required for her breast cancer—has an approval rating in England that is nine times greater than that in Scotland. If Scotland set up its own fund and achieved the same approval rate as England has for a host of drugs, the number of cancer patients in Scotland who could gain access to life-enhancing and life-extending treatment would increase by 235 per cent. We need to remember that we are dealing with many people who are reaching the end of their lives. Often, such drugs will not save their lives, but will prolong them and give them better quality of life when they need extra help. I acknowledge that the fund south of the border is an interim measure, as such a fund in Scotland would be. The fund in England will run until 2014, when the Department of Health intends to replace the current pharmaceutical price regulatory system with a value-based pricing system for drugs which, I hope, the cabinet secretary will support for Scotland. That change will link the price of a drug to cost-effectiveness on the basis of clinical evidence. It is hoped that the new system will lead to more innovation and investment being focused on patient needs. However, until that time, morally we cannot accept a system in which Scottish patients—simply because of where they are domiciled—are being denied access to cancer drugs that are available to other United Kingdom citizens. When the cabinet secretary gets to her feet, I am sure that she will extol the virtues of the individual patient treatment request arrangements, which form the Scottish Government’s default position when it is challenged on the availability of cancer medicines. However, as my constituent Gillian Bauld found out, even with that system, access to cancer drugs is still being denied, while such vital drugs are available in England. The report “Nations divided? An assessment of variations in access to cancer treatments for patients in England, Scotland and Wales”, from the Rarer Cancers Foundation, highlights the fact that patients do not access the group of medicines that the SMC has declined through the IPTR route, which is why patients in Scotland are three times less likely to gain access to a cancer drug that is not routinely available than are patients in England. One clinician told me that bevacizumab—I hope that I pronounced it correctly—is a very good example of such a medicine. The drug has no SMC approval and no successful IPTR appeals, despite being the gold standard of treatment of advanced colorectal cancer in the western world and now in England, with the introduction of the cancer drugs fund. Again, a drug is being made available to patients in England and Wales but not to patients in Scotland. Cancer Research UK welcomed the English drugs fund and said: “This cancer drugs fund could make a real difference for some cancer patients, allowing them to get the treatments they need.” I know that other cancer charities take a different view, and it is clear that opinion is divided, but patients in England are undoubtedly benefiting from the fund. That is why cancer sufferers, many clinicians and many experts can see the evidence of the £600 million cancer drugs fund working for cancer patients. The Rarer Cancers Foundation has estimated that achieving a comparable level of access in Scotland would cost the Scottish Government £5 million. That amount is insignificant in the context of the health budget. In our manifesto for the Scottish election earlier this year, we identified where that money could be found from. It would be money well spent. I, and we, do not believe that cancer sufferers in Scotland should be treated less well than those elsewhere in the United Kingdom. It is time for the Scottish Government to think again on the issue. I have pleasure in moving the motion in my name. I move, That the Parliament notes with concern the findings of the Rarer Cancers Foundation (RCF) report, Nations divided? An assessment of variations in access to cancer treatments for patients in England, Scotland and Wales, which states that there are now 23 cancer medicines not routinely available in Scotland that may be available in England through the Cancer Drugs Fund; recognises that patients in Scotland are now three times less likely than patients in England to gain access to a cancer medicine that is not routinely available; further notes the comments of the RCF that the Scottish Government has displayed a concerning degree of complacency over access to cancer treatments, and calls on the Scottish Government to set up a Scottish cancer drugs fund to be reviewed once the current pharmaceutical price regulation scheme expires.

I entirely understand the cabinet secretary’s point about equity. However, at the heart of that very question is the fact that we are where we are in relation to decisions that have been made by the Department of Health in England and Wales. As a result of those decisions, patients in England and Wales are getting access to cancer drugs that are not available in Scotland. Surely in the interests of equity that question must be addressed.

If the member had read our fully costed manifesto he would have seen that, among other things, we do not think that it is right to be giving free prescriptions to people such as him and me, who can well afford to pay for them. That money would be better spent on other things.

It has been a useful and wide-ranging debate. There has been a general welcome from all parties for the Government’s consultation on the mental health strategy for Scotland. Although the exact detail of the strategy needs to be worked out once the consultation has closed, it makes sense to bring the Government’s actions and strategy on improvement, prevention and NHS delivery of mental health services into one cohesive document. As my colleague Mary Scanlon stated, for too long, mental health services have been underresourced and have lacked clear strategies for early diagnosis and early intervention. There has been an unfortunate propensity to reach for the prescription pad when dealing with some mental health disorders, such as depression. Despite mental health being championed as one of three clinical priorities of the Scottish Government and previous Scottish Executives, there is no doubt that, notwithstanding Rod Campbell’s comments, it is still seen as a Cinderella service. That is particularly concerning when we examine some of the raw statistics that underlie the debate. Poor mental health has resulted in Scotland having one of the highest suicide rates in western Europe, with a higher rate than England and Wales. From an economic perspective, Audit Scotland estimated the wider costs of mental health problems to be more than £8 billion per year in 2009. Those are staggering figures, but perhaps they are not surprising when we consider the ramifications that severe mental health problems have for the health, welfare and criminal justice budgets, not to mention the wider impact on families and communities. A number of members mentioned stigma, which the see me campaign has properly identified. I join Fiona McLeod and Malcolm Chisholm in praising that campaign’s work in raising awareness of the need to destigmatise mental illness. I also congratulate, with Dennis Robertson, NUS Scotland on its work, particularly with LGBT students. Earlier in the summer, I lodged parliamentary questions to the Scottish Government in connection with awareness raising and training for medical professionals who deal with LGBT students. Professionals often seem to lack the training that is required to identify some of the problems that such students encounter. I turn to the early years and preventative spending, which Richard Simpson majored on. In the previous parliamentary session, the Health and Sport Committee’s inquiry into child and adolescent mental health services and the Public Audit Committee’s report “Overview of mental health services” highlighted that there was too much emphasis on treating severe and enduring mental illnesses and not enough on preventative work and early intervention. All members recognise the importance of early childhood development and the impact of early intervention in determining future mental health, social wellbeing and educational attainment. There is a large and growing body of empirical evidence that highlights the importance of child and parental interaction in the early years of life with regard to a child’s physical and mental wellbeing. That is why the Conservatives believe that we should take more of a preventative approach to mental illness to ensure as far as possible that problems do not arise in the first place. That thinking lies behind our manifesto commitment to ensure the universal provision of health visitors and to provide better support in the early years. Outcome 2 in the consultation document states that the Scottish Government’s action will be “focused on early years and childhood to respond quickly and to improve both short and long term outcomes.” Early diagnosis and intervention are fundamental to better mental health. Therefore, once individuals present to health professionals, treatment should be prompt and consistent, so waiting times of the length that we have are unacceptable. There has not been a great deal of disagreement in the debate, but such as we have had has been on the prescribing of antidepressants. As Mary Scanlon outlined, our view is that, where possible, the treatment of depression and other mental illnesses should, in the first instance, involve methods other than prescribing drugs. Siobhan McMahon made that point and referred to the figures that came out last week, which show a rise in the number of prescriptions. I understand the minister’s point that that does not necessarily mean that more people are being prescribed antidepressants, but we should not forget that, after the election in 2007, a Scottish Government target was introduced to reduce by 10 per cent the use of antidepressants. That target has not been met and, in fact, it has been dropped because it could not be met. The best that we can say is that the Scottish Government has not met the target. Although the number of people who receive prescriptions might not have increased, the figures are certainly not improving. Our underlying belief is that we should move away from the predilection to prescribe if there are other and better solutions. Cognitive behavioural therapy, psychology and psychiatry are essential, as are a range of talking therapies. Early access to those can be crucial to prevent mild depression from becoming severe and enduring. The default position of many GPs is that, if somebody comes in with depression, they are put on antidepressants and the alternatives are not considered. We need to move away from that, which would be a useful step that would have a hugely beneficial effect on outcomes for many people with mental health issues. In the very short time remaining to me, I will touch on the number of psychiatric in-patient places.

Thank you. I can therefore expand on the point that I was about to make. In 2005, a working group recommended that there should be 60 psychiatric in-patient places in Scotland. Today, six years on and after an entire term of the SNP Government, there are only 42 places, with a business case being developed for an additional six beds in Dundee. There is still work to be done. If mental health is to be a priority, as the Scottish Government fairly says that it should be, a lot of work still needs to be done. I welcome the progress that is being made, but we should renew our efforts to reduce the figures on the prescription of antidepressants. I am pleased to support the motion and both amendments.

I thank the Labour Party and Jackie Baillie for giving us the opportunity to debate this important subject. I am disappointed that she has not yet put her hat in the ring to be Labour leader. However, there is still time and I look forward to seeing it happen in due course. A number of important points have been raised and I have only four minutes. First, a very important point was made about the amount of care that third sector charities and voluntary groups provide. As Jackie Baillie pointed out, there is a sorry tale throughout the third sector of, for example, pay cuts, poor packages, reductions in hours and poor pension provision. We understand that local authorities face serious budget pressures, notwithstanding what the Government has said. However, we are concerned that local authorities are too ready to protect their own in-house services at the expense of the third sector, which often bears the brunt of the cuts. There is often a disconnect between councils and the voluntary sector. As the Coalition of Care and Support Providers in Scotland said in its briefing for the debate, we need better “Recognition and respect for the third sector as an engaged partner, not just a contracted supplier”, and the funding to those arm’s-length bodies should not be the first port of call when there are cuts to be made. On Friday, I was at a question time in Perth for the local voluntary sector. It came out strongly in the contributions from the voluntary sector representatives who were there that they feel that councils are too ready to make cuts to their voluntary sector services rather than cutting in-house. COSLA and the Scottish Government need to take that point on board.

That may be the case, but that is not the message that I got on Friday at the conference for the Perth and Kinross voluntary sector, which is extremely concerned at cuts coming down the line. Charging has been at the core of the debate. Learning Disability Alliance Scotland has referred to dramatic increases across council areas in charges for some of the most vulnerable people in society, leaving them worse off. We have heard a lot about postcode lotteries. That brings us to a serious issue on which Derek Mackay touched in his speech: localism against national standards. If we believe in a localist agenda and in local democracy, of course we must recognise that local authorities have the right to set different charging rates. At the same time, there is no contradiction in saying that there should be nationally set standards and parameters, as well as local flexibility. Indeed, in its amendment, the Government talks about “COSLA’s intention to tackle variation on charging via its fundamental review of the cost of care.” That is a sensible way forward and there is no contradiction between that and promoting localism. Mary Scanlon talked a lot about funding arrangements. We all trumpet free personal care, which is treated with a certain degree of irony by people who pay large sums of money to be in full-time residential care. There has always been a discrepancy between the high cost of council-run homes and those in the third sector or private sector, but Mary Scanlon raised another serious issue: the disparity between self-funders and those who are funded by local authorities. Under COSLA arrangements, those who are funded by local authorities pay £474 a week, but some self-funders can be paying up to double that amount. There is a moral hazard there: how can we expect people to save for their old age when they are being penalised as a result? The amendment in the name of Mary Scanlon simply calls for a review. That is a sensible suggestion, and I am disappointed that the minister is not prepared to accept it.

6. To ask the First Minister how the Scottish Government is helping the expansion of the whisky industry. (S4F-00132)

The First Minister should of course have included the United Kingdom Government in the list of those responsible for that deal with China. I associate myself with his comments about the export figures, which have gone up, but is it not ironic that while that is happening, the industry remains concerned that foreign countries to which we export, which might look for excuses to impose trade barriers, will use minimum pricing as an excuse to diminish whisky sales? That is what the industry says. How will the Scottish Government clear the issue of the legality of minimum pricing policy with Brussels before the bill is introduced, given the European Court of Justice’s long-standing rulings against minimum pricing in the past?

I, too, welcome the cabinet secretary’s statement and thank her for advance sight of it. I welcome the U-turn on inspection timetables. I am encouraged that the Scottish Government has rethought that in the light of experience. On SCSWIS, it seems that changes of name are fashionable at the moment. It will make life easier for us all for that body to be referred to as the care inspectorate. I welcome the progress on seeking new operators for the Southern Cross homes and ensuring continuity of care for residents. I declare my connection with Robert Kilgour, who is involved in that and is a supporter of my campaign. In the light of the cabinet secretary’s comments on that, will she state for the record that the Scottish Government supports the current mix of provision of care places from public, voluntary and private sector providers?

Hear, hear.

I enjoyed listening to Ken Macintosh. As one leadership candidate to, perhaps, another, I would say, “Ken, go for it. You’ll find it very liberating.” [Laughter.] Having debated more or less non-stop for the past 72 hours the future or otherwise of my own party, it is a change to return to more mundane matters, namely the Scottish Government’s legislative programme. I will start with something that is not in the legislative programme but should be, namely the bill for an independence referendum. I would have thought that a party with an overall majority in Parliament that has for years campaigned for Scottish independence would be desperate to put to the Scottish people a vote on whether they become independent but, no, we are disappointed again. We are not yet to have the bill. That is important because we heard only last week from the boss of CBI Scotland, Linda Urquhart, that the delay in settling the issue is causing concern to the business community. The Scottish Government and the First Minister should put their money where their mouth is and bring forward a referendum bill for a straight yes or no, so we can have the matter resolved once and for all. I turn now to something that is in the legislative programme: minimum pricing, which makes a return and which I suspect—due to the parliamentary arithmetic—will be here to stay. We opposed the measure in the previous session of Parliament, and we will continue to oppose it in this one, too. I do not say that from any dogmatic approach to the issue, because I recognise that there is a substantial problem with alcohol consumption in Scotland. That is why we supported the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill in the previous session of Parliament—a bill that contained a number of very important measures to tackle excess alcohol consumption that have yet to be implemented—but we remain unconvinced that there is evidence to support minimum unit pricing. It was rejected by all the main Opposition parties at the time, and there are a number of problems with the policy.

I have consistently asked those in the health lobby to produce evidence to support their arguments. I am sad to say that I am still waiting, but there is still time. I say to Mr Eadie that I am an open-minded man and I remain to be persuaded. If the evidence can be produced, I will look at it; however, I remain to be convinced. We have still to see a direct linear relationship—a causal link—between alcohol price, consumption and harm. There is no such established relationship, and even the most cursory overview of the key literature proves that. Let us take, for instance, the Government’s monitoring and evaluating Scotland’s alcohol strategy—MESAS—report, which was published last week. The Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy was quick to put out a press release saying that it was further evidence that we needed minimum pricing in Scotland. In fact, it proved nothing of the sort. I think that this point was made by Iain Gray earlier. The report showed that the number of sales of alcohol per adult were nearly a quarter higher in Scotland than in England in 2010, despite the fact that there is no difference in price between Scotland and England. Indeed, because average salaries in England are higher than average salaries in Scotland, the relative cost of alcohol is lower in England and we might expect the rate of consumption to be higher there, but it is not. England does not have a policy of minimum pricing because the coalition Government has wisely ruled that out.

No. I have given way once already. The fact remains that, regardless of how many actresses, comediennes and health-lobby attack dogs the cabinet secretary wheels out, Scotland’s relationship with alcohol is a complex issue. Any policy that seeks to modify behaviour through price changes must be targeted and proportionate while also avoiding being regressive. Minimum unit pricing fails to satisfy any of those criteria. That brings me to my second objection to minimum unit pricing. What is the point of introducing a policy that can be so readily evaded and undermined by cross-border and internet sales? The UK e-retail market is currently growing at 18 per cent a year despite the economic downturn. The industry is worth £5.5 billion and, during April, there was a 55 per cent increase in online alcohol sales. What convinces the cabinet secretary that her imaginary Maginot line will be able to thwart the will of the Scottish consumer? Thirdly, unlike tackling the issue through targeted taxation, which we would support, any increases in price coming from minimum unit pricing would simply go to fill the pockets of retailers. Finally, the Scottish Government has yet to convince us that minimum unit pricing is legally competent. As far as I can see, European Union law is pretty clear on the matter. Not only did the European Court of Justice reject minimum prices for spirit drinks in a 1978 ruling, but the European Commission has taken several member states to the ECJ in relation to minimum pricing, albeit of tobacco. The cabinet secretary may be interested to note the words of the Advocate General—the court’s top legal adviser—who issued a strong opinion that minimum pricing is “not necessary to protect public health”. More recently, the Swiss Government has rejected minimum pricing on the basis that it would fall foul of its trade obligations with the EU, arguing that reasons of public health fail as a justification due to the proportionality of the measure. We remain to be convinced. If the cabinet secretary can produce the evidence, we will look at it. The fact that the SNP has a majority to railroad the measure through Parliament does not make it the right move.

6. To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government is taking to reduce the number of attacks on ambulance and fire service crews. (S4F-00096)

I agree that everyone must condemn these attacks. However, figures published earlier this week show that ambulance crews in Tayside and Fife have been assaulted more than 50 times in the past three years and such incidents are increasing. How will the Scottish Government ensure that the laws protecting those to whom we owe so much are rigorously enforced and that those who carry out such attacks are severely punished?

What action is the Scottish Government taking following the resignation of the well-regarded chief executive of the Commonwealth games organisation?

I was about to get to the point, Presiding Officer, if you will bear with me just for a second. How are we going to find a replacement chief executive for the Commonwealth games organisation of a suitable calibre in order that the planning for the games, including planning for multiculturalism, can continue on track?

The cabinet secretary has said previously that the comparative spending gap can be partly filled by efficiencies and philanthropic giving, despite the fact that those, of course, are also being pursued by English institutions. What other funding sources does he envisage using to fill the funding gap other than simply trying to charge English, Welsh and Northern Irish students more?

6. To ask the Scottish Executive what recent discussions it has had with NHS Tayside regarding Ninewells hospital. (S4O-00057)

The cabinet secretary referred to the extremely disappointing follow-up report that the HEI carried out in April. It identified failings on cleanliness in Ninewells hospital, which had been raised in an inspection six months previously and had not been dealt with adequately. The microbiologist Professor Hugh Pennington has proposed that hit teams be set up to ensure that inspections are properly followed up. Will the cabinet secretary consider that proposal?

When the minister meets First ScotRail, will he raise the question of capacity on the Fife commuter line? Even before the service to which Roderick Campbell referred was cancelled, peak-time services could be extremely overcrowded, as I am sure you know, Presiding Officer.

I am very grateful to Nicola Sturgeon for giving way. One of the major concerns for residents is the future of the homes. Has the cabinet secretary had any discussions with other independent providers that might be interested in taking over the running of Southern Cross homes, should that company go into administration?

I congratulate the members who made their maiden speeches in the debate—John Finnie, Bill Walker and Mary Fee. I also thank Fiona McLeod for her speech. I am not sure whether one can be a maiden the second time round so, to avoid discussion of that issue, I will just say that I congratulate her on her return to Parliament. I also thank the Labour Party for bringing to the chamber a timely debate that has allowed us to discuss various issues with regard to reports that have arisen lately in the media: the future of Southern Cross; the case of Mrs V at Ninewells hospital; the horrendous cases at the Elsie Inglis home in Edinburgh; the change in the inspection regime; the future of community health partnerships as examined in Audit Scotland’s recent report; and the proposed integration of health and social care. The debate has been largely consensual; of course, that is only right, given that we are dealing with serious issues on which more joins, than divides us. Much of the debate has been taken up with discussing current issues that have arisen in care homes. However, in recognising that some of these issues have made the headlines, we should also acknowledge that most care provision, either in care homes or in people’s own homes, is excellent and that the cases that have been cited are striking precisely because they are individual occurrences and do not represent the norm. Not recognising that point creates the potential for scaremongering and causing distress both to elderly and perhaps vulnerable people and to their relatives. We have heard in one or two speeches a slight undercurrent that all the problems are in the private sector and all the blame lies with the profit motive. Mary Scanlon was quite right to make it clear that there is no evidence to support the “public good, private bad” mantra; indeed, if we need proof of that, we have only to look at the Mrs V case in Ninewells. One can only imagine the voices that would have been raised in protest had that happened in a private care home. The point is that we need to get this matter into perspective. I say as gently as I can to John Finnie that his comments in that respect were perhaps ill advised and stood in marked contrast to the measured remarks made by his new SNP colleague Bill Walker. Claire Baker rightly referred to the importance of mixed social care provision and made a fair point about the situation in Fife, where the SNP-run council is looking to move the four local authority-run homes into the private or independent sector. I fully understand why it is making that move—after all, many other councils have done the same—but Claire Baker was right to contrast the approach in Fife with the rather unfortunate comments about private sector provision that the First Minister made just a week ago in the chamber. As Alex Johnstone pointed out, the key is an effective regulatory regime with regular inspections across the public, private and voluntary sectors; indeed, Malcolm Chisholm made the same fair point in his excellent speech. As Mary Scanlon made clear, we are not comfortable with the part of the Labour motion that calls for an immediate reversal of the cut in SCSWIS’s funding. In combining organisations, one is right to look for efficiency savings, as is the case across the whole of government. However, although we cannot agree with that element of the motion, it is nevertheless right to keep the matter under review and to revisit it if with time it appears that the budget reduction is impacting adversely on inspections.

I do not disagree with Jackie Baillie that we need to keep the matter under close review. As time is getting on, I want to focus on the Southern Cross situation. There is serious concern about the company’s financial situation and, given yesterday’s announcement of 3,000 job losses across the UK and the fact that it runs 98 homes in Scotland, all this uncertainty about the future will undoubtedly be causing distress to residents and their families. I very much welcome the cabinet secretary’s offer to meet us later today and to keep us updated. It is also important that there is co-operation with the Department of Health. After all, given that Southern Cross is UK-based, the matter affects not only Scotland but the rest of the UK. As the key to helping in this situation is to avoid any disruption to the residents of these homes, any solution should focus not on finding alternative settings for people but on trying to keep them in their current situation, where they are familiar with things and feel settled. We should therefore look closely at the offers that I know other independent providers have made to come in and, if necessary, take over the running of the homes.

I am grateful to the cabinet secretary for that reassurance and look forward to meeting her later to discuss these matters in more detail. Everybody agrees that delayed discharges are wasteful and inefficient and that they often cause concern and distress to those involved. Good progress has been made in the past but, as Audit Scotland has just pointed out, the trend in delayed discharge numbers is now upwards. The figure for January 2011 that it quoted in a recent report was 30 per cent higher than that for January 2010, and older people’s emergency admissions to hospitals are now rising. We need to keep constant pressure on those figures. There has been a healthy debate, but there is much more work to be done. I support the amendments in the names of Mary Scanlon and Nicola Sturgeon.

I thank the cabinet secretary for his kind acknowledgement of my efforts in his statement, and I commend his own interest in the subject. He has referred to the financial case that is made by councils, which has been highlighted by Sandy Longmuir of the Scottish rural schools network. Will the new commission look specifically at how it can force councils to improve the accuracy of the financial case that they make when they produce a school closure consultation?

I welcome the opportunity, at this early stage in this session, to debate the Government’s priorities on health, wellbeing and cities. I congratulate the cabinet secretary on her reappointment to the Cabinet and on the expansion of her portfolio to include the new cities brief. I welcome back Shona Robison in her new job, and I particularly welcome the much-deserved elevation of Michael Matheson to his new role in the Government. I am sure that the robust discussions that we have had in previous years will continue. It is fair to say that there has been a reasonable degree of consensus on health in the past four years, with the possible exception of the debate on appropriate policies to tackle alcohol abuse. Unlike the Liberal Democrats, we remain unconvinced that there is an evidence base in support of minimum unit pricing, but we look forward to the new Health and Sport Committee’s scrutiny of the Government’s proposed legislation on that. We will consider objectively any new evidence that the Government can produce in the field. On health more generally, the issue that will dominate debate in the next five years is the financial situation. I welcome the SNP Government’s commitment to ring fence the health budget, which is in line with the UK coalition Government’s stance and with what we proposed. However, as we all know, that does not mean that there will not be pressures on the NHS budget because, as we have heard, NHS inflation runs well ahead of general cost increases. There have already been cost pressures on health boards across Scotland and resulting workforce reductions. In the past, the cabinet secretary has made the fair point that the total number of people who are employed in the NHS today is higher than it was four years ago. Nevertheless, the trajectory is likely to be downwards. The British Medical Association and the Royal College of Nursing, in their briefings for the debate, call for better workforce planning. We should all agree on that. As other members have done, I have met young doctors and recently qualified nurses who are finding it extremely difficult, if not impossible, to find employment in the NHS in Scotland. That seems to be an utter waste of talent, not to mention the waste of precious resources that is involved in providing training to individuals who are then lost to the Scottish health service. Ensuring that NHS boards develop a coherent strategic approach to workforce planning must be a top priority for the next five years. I believe that efficiencies can still be found in the NHS. Better workforce planning would in itself provide efficiencies, through reduced reliance on locums. On the drugs budget, a greater move to prescribing generic drugs would free up precious resources. We believe that there is an opportunity in permitting pharmacists greater discretion in prescribing drugs, if issues around security of medical records can be resolved. In the previous session of Parliament, the Scottish Conservatives raised the issue of early intervention, and specifically the need for a dramatic expansion in the provision of health visitors. A huge body of evidence demonstrates that we can save money down the line and deliver much better health and life outcomes for the individuals who are involved if we invest early—in the first two or three years of life—in identifying and assisting with potential problems. To do that, we need a universal health visiting service, which should be a high priority for the Government. At a time when resources are tight, it is more important than ever that we encourage individuals to take greater responsibility for their own health. The cabinet secretary referred fairly to health-related behaviours. We need to promote a culture in which everyone is interested in having a lifestyle that is conducive to better health outcomes in terms of diet, alcohol intake, smoking and taking exercise.

That is the sort of imaginative approach that needs to be looked at. Whether we need to provide prescriptions for exercise is a different issue, but we need to encourage individuals to take greater responsibility for their own health. We have proposed free universal health checks for the over-40s as an important element in helping those who wish to help themselves. During the recent election campaign, I had my blood pressure checked and was rather dismayed to find out that I was suffering from mild hypertension. Whether that was brought on by the number of hustings that I did with Nicola Sturgeon and Jackie Baillie I cannot say, but as a result, thanks to the promptings of Mrs Fraser, I recently signed up for a heart health check that is being provided in the Parliament later this month, in which my blood pressure will again be checked at a time that is convenient for me. Those simple checks should be available not only to MSPs or those who work in this building, but to the whole population. There would be substantial savings and cost benefits if we went down that road. I have in the past raised with the cabinet secretary the issue of cancer drugs. We now have a situation in which a cancer drugs fund is being established south of the border and, increasingly, rare and expensive cancer treatments that are denied to people in Scotland are being made available in England and Wales. I hope that the Scottish Government will not lose sight of that issue. It may affect a relatively small number of individuals in the population, but they feel that they are being badly let down by the current arrangements. I understand that we will debate the issue of social care in more detail tomorrow. We all owe a debt of responsibility to the older generation to ensure that when they need help in the later years of their lives, they get what they need and are treated with dignity. There have been too many cases recently in which that has not happened. As a society, we should be ashamed whenever we hear about the ill treatment of elderly, vulnerable citizens who have contributed so much over their lives. I hope that, in the spirit of consensus, all parties can work together over the next five years to deliver an excellent health service and a better standard of care for all those who require it.

6. To ask the First Minister what support is being provided to berry farmers whose crops and infrastructure were badly damaged by the recent severe weather. (S4F-00005)

The First Minister is right to acknowledge the sector’s importance and the damage that has been caused. In Perthshire alone, the cost of the damage runs into many millions and the losses are not insurable. The First Minister referred to calls from the sector for changes. Some of the issues are reserved, but there is one devolved issue on which the First Minister could take action, and that is to abolish the Scottish Agricultural Wages Board, which, given that the equivalent English body is being scrapped, potentially puts Scottish fruit farmers, who employ large numbers of migrant workers, at a competitive disadvantage. Will the First Minister take that action to help our fruit farmers?

What I asked about is what the farmers have asked for—

I pay tribute to Margaret Burgess for an excellent maiden speech. It is clear that she is passionate about her constituents’ interests in her new constituency. I look forward to hearing more contributions from her. I think that we all agree that we want a sustained economic recovery and that we all acknowledge that Governments do not create jobs but can create an environment in which business can flourish. Businesses need a stable—and preferably low—tax regime, a light touch on regulation and good-quality infrastructure. I will concentrate on infrastructure this afternoon. I will make two points. The first is on connectivity to Edinburgh airport for my constituents in Mid Scotland and Fife, and particularly for those in Fife and in Perth and Kinross. That issue arose when I and several colleagues met Fife Chamber of Commerce on Friday. Everybody in the area—particularly those who are involved in the tourism industry—acknowledges the importance of a direct rail link with Edinburgh airport for Fife and Perth and Kinross. We all know that the Scottish Government—with our support—cancelled the overambitious and expensive Edinburgh airport rail link project in the previous parliamentary session. That decision was correct, but the quid pro quo was that we were promised an alternative—the creation of a new station at Gogar, which the trams would link to the airport terminal. I will not rehearse the whole unhappy saga of the trams. More than a little schadenfreude has gone on as people have observed what has happened to the trams project under the stewardship of TIE and the City of Edinburgh Council. We must accept the risk that the entire trams project might now be cancelled, which would have implications not just for City of Edinburgh Council residents but for those who live elsewhere on the east coast and who hoped that a tram link would provide a vital connection between Edinburgh airport and the main rail line. I hope that, when the Government considers the issue, it does not lose sight of the very important point that we were promised a rail link by means of the tram when EARL was cancelled.

People should apologise for mishandling the project. If Transport Scotland—the Government agency—had been a bit more hands on instead of sitting back in the past four years, perhaps more progress would have been made on the trams project than has been the case. I move on to broadband connectivity, which I have raised many times in the chamber and which I make no apology for raising. I am happy to follow Aileen McLeod’s reference to the issue in her excellent speech. Many people in rural areas have no access to fast and reliable broadband, or have no access to broadband at all. In the previous parliamentary session, the Government’s broadband commitment extended to providing basic broadband, which is defined as 512 kilobits per second. Even that is not available to many residents. Meanwhile, people who live in urban areas can expect broadband speeds of faster than 40 megabits per second. I have always believed that it is unacceptable that we have a two-tier method of communication whereby those who live in cities receive a much better service. Every year, the gulf in technology seems to be larger. That is why it must be a Government priority to see that all of rural Scotland is broadband enabled and that there is proper investment in superfast broadband for the whole country.

Mr Swinney makes a reasonable point, but there is an issue of market failure, and Government has a role in addressing specific market failure. In some rural areas, it will not be economic for the private sector to deliver; there is a role for Government to step in there. Interestingly, the UK Government recently announced that the Highlands, along with three other areas of the UK, will see investment to roll out superfast broadband. Highland Council has stated that that investment will deliver more than £70 million of additional economic output per annum for the region. Already the UK Government is demonstrating that there is a role for some Government intervention. Eighty-three exchanges in Scotland have the capacity for only 0.5 megabits per second. I know of many cases of households and businesses that have no access to broadband as a result. There will be investment in those exchanges only through public-private partnerships. I urge the Government to go down that road. Cornwall Council has set a good example. Like Scotland, Cornwall is an area with a widely dispersed rural population. Cornwall Council opened a tender process to allow for a public-private partnership to bring broadband to rural communities. The contract was awarded to BT. The partnership enabled business to provide the extra investment and expertise that are needed to deliver broadband in a rural area. The project will deliver superfast broadband for the region, connecting between 80 and 90 per cent of homes and businesses, with speeds up to 100 megabits per second. All homes and businesses will receive faster speeds than they receive at the moment. The project is expected to create up to 4,000 new jobs, with a further 2,000 jobs being safeguarded. I agree with Mr Swinney that there is a role for the private sector, but there is also a role for partnership between Government and the private sector. I hope that the Scottish Government will learn from Cornwall’s experience and from the action that the UK Government is taking to roll out superfast broadband. We need to see leadership from the Scottish Government on that vital issue.

Thank you, Presiding Officer, for your generosity. I thank Chic Brodie for his erudite and entertaining speech. I saw the Presiding Officer smiling at his reference to the renaming of Prestwick airport, which has always been a cause dear to the Presiding Officer’s heart. I also thank all those other members who made their maiden speeches: Kezia Dugdale, John Mason, Graeme Pearson, Joan McAlpine, Kevin Stewart, Annabelle Ewing, James Dornan and Neil Bibby—I do not think that I have missed out anybody. I congratulate them all on their excellent speeches and on their fortitude in sitting through four and a half hours of debating time in the chamber today. I do not know whether the cream of the crop spoke in the debate, but if the standard that has been demonstrated by those new members is indicative of the new intake, we will be in for five years of very high-quality parliamentary debate. I turn to the First Minister’s statement and the debate that has followed. It was perhaps unsurprising, but nonetheless depressing, for us on this side of the chamber to hear so much focus on constitutional change. I do not believe that that is what even the people who voted SNP in the recent election, out of the 45 per cent of the Scottish electorate who cast their votes, want to see. The First Minister’s statement was light on policy detail and light on proposals for legislation, excepting sectarianism and minimum pricing for alcohol, of which more in a moment. To me, the big issues that concern the voters are the economy, jobs, help for business—particularly small businesses, to which Jamie McGrigor referred—and the future of our public services: how do we provide excellent public services when there is less money to go around? Another big issue is the need for early intervention, particularly in health. Annabel Goldie talked about the necessity of providing a universal health visiting service. There is also a need to improve standards in education, to which Elizabeth Smith referred, and a need for a properly funded higher education system instead of a second-class one that is falling behind universities elsewhere in the UK and Europe and instead of the cuts to services, cuts to courses and compulsory redundancies that we are seeing in higher education. Those serious issues require to be addressed.

The Scottish Parliament has a huge range of powers and a budget of more than £30 billion. Even with its existing powers it is quite capable of addressing a range of problems, and the Scotland Bill will bring many more powers to the Parliament to expand that range still further. We should not use the perception of the Parliament’s lack of powers as an excuse for not tackling those serious issues, otherwise we will never make any progress. The SNP made many promises to get elected. It promised full employment for teachers, free higher education, free bus travel for the over-60s and so on. The point has been fairly made by others that, with a majority Government, the SNP has no one else to blame if it does not deliver those things. I dare say that it will try to blame Westminster and a lack of powers, but for the rest of us the buck stops here. The First Minister referred to the social contract. I want to make it clear that we on this side of the chamber believe that there is such a thing as society, but we believe that it is not the same as the state. Society is more than Government. It is the complex tapestry of individuals, families, communities, voluntary groups and charities—Edmund Burke’s “little platoons”—that make up our country. The crucial element in that is the voluntary sector. Many organisations in the third sector will have looked on ruefully as the First Minister praised society at a time when they are experiencing funding cuts and uncertainty about their future and are having to make redundancies. The protection of society should be about protecting all the groups that I have referred to, not just arms of the state and those who are directly employed by it. Two legislative proposals were mentioned. The first concerned sectarianism. I agree that action is required in that regard, but I share some of James Kelly’s concerns about the detail of what might be proposed. We should bear two issues in mind. First, we should not outlaw the legitimate celebration of anyone’s cultural heritage, whether that be an Irish heritage or a Scots Protestant one. The issue will come down to a matter of detail: where do we draw the line? We cannot have people being offensive or stirring up hatred, but it is not helpful to have uncertainty about where the line is drawn. I hope that the Cabinet Secretary for Justice will carefully consider the matter when he draws up his legislative proposals. The second issue is enforcement. It is comparatively easy for Parliament to pass laws; it is much harder to enforce them. Last night, I heard Les Gray from the Scottish Police Federation make the fair point that Graeme Pearson repeated today, which is that the police need the resources to ensure that enforcement is effective. There is no point in passing a law without giving the police the tools to back it up. The second piece of legislation that is proposed is on minimum pricing of alcohol. Like Dr Nanette Milne, I have still to see evidence that minimum pricing will work. No simple equation links price and consumption. I spent last weekend in Gibraltar, and as part of it I did a little bit of hands-on research into the availability of alcohol. The interesting thing about Gibraltar is that, as in other European Mediterranean countries, the cost of a pint in a pub is substantially lower than it is in this country. Indeed, the price of alcohol, particularly spirits, in off-licences is much lower than it is here, yet those places do not experience the public drunkenness, loutish behaviour and alcohol-related problems that we do in Scotland. Therefore, the problem is more complex than is suggested by those who simply propose a minimum price.

I do not regard it as a myth, because I have seen it with my own eyes. The issue is one of culture. As a northern European country, we have a hard-drinking culture. It is not as simple as proposing the silver bullet of increasing the price. The First Minister raised the constitutional issue—which he has repeated over the past three weeks—that there is a mandate for constitutional change, despite the fact that the constitutional issue was not at the top of voters’ concerns during the recent election campaign and was hardly raised on the doorsteps at all. Many people who voted SNP were not interested in independence or constitutional change; they believed that the SNP’s team offered a better opportunity for Scotland than the likeliest alternative. Pushing constitutional change might be the Government’s priority but it is not the people’s priority. I am sure that, deep down, SNP MSPs must know that. I was concerned to hear the First Minister say, in relation to Westminster, that it was time to end the “benign diktat”. That is a misrepresentation of our constitutional settlement. Westminster is not the Parliament of a foreign country. Westminster is our Parliament, too. Just over a year ago, 59 Scottish MPs were elected with a mandate to look after Scottish interests. Our two Parliaments should work in partnership; they should not be in conflict or continually at war, which is what the SNP seems to offer. The SNP leadership now raises the prospect of independence-lite: all the taste but none of the calories of real independence—or, for Pat Kane, perhaps it is all the calories but none of the taste. I look forward to seeing the standard bearers of SNP fundamentalism—Alex Neil, who is now in the Cabinet, and Christine Grahame, who sadly is not yet in the Cabinet—rally to the independence-lite banner and the cry of, “Freedom—but only in the context of a confederal United Kingdom with a shared defence and welfare system within a social union.” I suspect that the red meat of real independence is what really stirs the breasts on the SNP benches. Let us have a referendum: a straightforward yes or no on real independence. On that I hope that we can all agree, so let us have it as soon as possible.

I look forward to that. When we eventually come to the referendum, will it be on real independence or the independence-lite that is being spun to us by sources at the top of the SNP?

6. To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government considers that planning guidelines for renewable energy projects strike a balance between the interests of developers and those of local communities. (S3F-2989)

Notwithstanding the First Minister’s response, he should be aware that, in the absence of clear locational planning guidance, communities up and down Scotland feel under siege from speculative wind farm planning applications. The Scottish National Party manifesto in 2007 pledged a nationwide assessment of renewables sites, but that has not been delivered. Should the First Minister be re-elected, will he keep his promise this time, or will this be a matter for post-election negotiations?

I echo the cabinet secretary’s remarks about Dr Ian McKee, as he approaches retirement. The cabinet secretary will know that distinction awards for consultants contribute not just to their salaries but to the pensions that they draw, which are paid on a final salary basis. Following publication of the Hutton review, does the cabinet secretary have a view on how pensions for top earners in the public sector, such as consultants, might be reformed?

The evidence shows it. Read the evidence.

It happened in England.

If fees are introduced for EU students studying at Scottish universities, as the cabinet secretary has proposed, what does that mean for Scottish students studying at EU institutions?

Can Mr Brown tell us where the Lib Dem approach to decentralisation was when the Lib Dems, in government, scrapped the area tourist boards and brought all tourism services together in one national agency, VisitScotland?

Notwithstanding how much I enjoyed Lord Foulkes’s speech, I will try to address the terms of the motion that is before us. I am grateful to the Liberal Democrats for bringing the debate to the chamber, as it allows us to explore issues of local accountability and perhaps to contrast what the Lib Dems say today with their past record. Before I get into that, I must first agree with James Kelly—I see that he has momentarily left the chamber—on how disappointing it is that there have been so few Liberal Democrats in the chamber for the debate this morning. We started the debate with only 11 Liberal Democrats present when Robert Brown got on his feet. That number fell to five, and throughout most of the debate there have been only six present in the chamber. Perhaps the Liberal Democrats are getting the rest of us used to how things will be after May. Perhaps, as they sit and look round at the rows of empty seats in the chamber, they will be reminded of their conference in Perth last weekend. In opening the debate, Robert Brown talked about the importance of local accountability and how the centralising approach that others are developing is anathema to the Lib Dems. Indeed, the motion states in glowing terms: “the people of Scotland will be better served by a new approach from government that trusts local people to make good decisions for their areas”. I checked the Liberal Democrats’ record in government, as I am sure Robert Brown would have expected me to do. I wonder where that concern for local accountability was when, as I mentioned earlier, the Liberal Democrats were part of a Government that scrapped the area tourist boards and took away the local democratic accountability from tourism? Where was that concern when the Liberal Democrats oversaw the scrapping of the three regional water boards and their absorption into Scottish Water as one national service? Where was the new approach to which the motion refers that “equips local government with the powers, levers and authority to drive innovation and improvement in local services” when for eight years the Lib Dems were part of a Government that ring fenced virtually every penny that went to local government? Where was the new approach to local accountability when Nicol Stephen, as a Lib Dem Minister for Transport, removed Strathclyde Passenger Transport’s rail powers and centralised it under Transport Scotland as part of the Scottish Government? I understand the Liberal Democrats’ need to develop a narrative for the coming election, given the dire straits that they are in. However, we should judge them by their actions in government, not by their rhetoric today. I turn to the issue of social care. I was a little confused when I saw the motion, as it refers to the centralisation of “social work”—in fact, it took Robert Brown to clarify that for us in his opening remarks, when he referred to social care, so I give two out of 10 to the drafter of the motion. There is a serious problem with social care that is recognised on all sides of the chamber. We have separate budgets for these matters: social care is funded from local government, and yet hospital stays are funded from the NHS. That has created a concern that was highlighted by Lord Sutherland more than 10 years ago, as it has led to the problem of delayed discharge, which is familiar to all of us in the chamber. As somebody who represents Fife, I am painfully conscious of the problems with delayed discharge that there have been in that area recently. The Minister for Public Health and Sport has made great efforts to try to resolve a problem that has been caused in part by a council in which the Liberal Democrats have a leading role, but there are severe difficulties there. The problems of delayed discharge are well known, and they cause human misery to those involved and to their families. What is more, delayed discharge costs the public sector: it is more expensive to keep people in hospital than to have them in a care setting, so it makes no sense. The other parties in the chamber have at least thought about that, and have solutions that all go in the same direction of travel. Our party supports the transfer of social care out of local government into the health service, the Labour Party supports a national care agency and the SNP supports lead commissioning. Those are different approaches, but they take us in the same direction. It is a pity, therefore, that the Liberal Democrats are out of step with the rest of us.

I would welcome a solution from the Liberal Democrats. We have heard nothing from them on how they intend to tackle these serious problems. At least the other parties in the chamber, although we may differ in our approach, recognise that there is a problem and have the same direction of travel. It is a pity that we have heard nothing from the Liberal Democrats in that regard, but perhaps Mr Rumbles, if he makes a winding-up speech, will enlighten us about exactly what the Liberal Democrats propose on social care. Richard Baker and other members have said that preserving the status quo in police structures will mean cuts to the number of front-line officers. The overriding priority for us in policing is to maximise the resources on the streets and the number of officers in uniform. We should not be wedded to historic structures. The world has moved on from where we were 30 years ago, so it is right that we now review where we are with the structure of policing. The point was well made by a number of members that if we reform the current structure, there will be cost savings and, of course, transitional costs, but in the longer run we will make savings, which can be reinvested in front-line services. Liberal Democrat members have referred to the issue of local tensions and how they would be expanded if we had a national police force. However, local tensions already exist within Tayside, for example. People in Perth and Kinross ask why all the police resources are put into Dundee, and people in Angus ask why all the police resources are put into Perth. Such tensions already exist, but if we listened to the Liberal Democrats we would think that they would be a novel development. Jeremy Purvis referred to G division in the Borders. I have no personal knowledge of policing in the Borders, but I know about the divisional structure in my area. There would be no reason at all for divisional structures to change simply because we moved from the current set-up of police forces to a single force or, indeed, four forces. Rob Gibson referred to the dishonesty of Lib Dems in the Highlands protesting outside Dingwall police office. Again, I have no personal knowledge of policing in the Highlands, but I cannot imagine that it will be more likely that Dingwall police office will close as a result of a merger of police boards. In fact, I think that the opposite is the case, because if we do not take steps to reduce policing costs nationally, we will not have the money to sustain our local forces and local numbers. Of course, we also need to have accountability. I agree with my colleague John Lamont on the crucial point that we have 1,000 extra police officers on Scotland’s streets thanks to the Conservatives. That is what matters to people, who want to see police in uniform on the streets deterring crime and providing visible reassurance. The Liberal Democrat priorities are clear: they would rather preserve their head offices, the chief constable salaries and the men in suits. That is not our choice.

I am pleased to speak in support of the legislative consent motion in the name of Iain Gray, which is supported by Annabel Goldie and Tavish Scott. In so doing, I commend the coalition Government at Westminster for taking forward the work of the Calman commission to enhance the powers of the Scottish Parliament. I was a supporter of greater fiscal powers for this Parliament long before it was fashionable in my party to be so. I am particularly pleased that we will have a more financially accountable Parliament in the future—one in which politicians will be held to account not only for the money that they spend but for how it is raised. At the outset, I record my thanks to the members of the Scotland Bill Committee who did a huge amount of work in scrutinising the legislation and producing their report—or should I say reports. We have not only the excellent committee report, but the remarkably churlish and petulant minority report, the latter of which goes on about “political motivation”, “bias and distortion” and damage to the reputation of this Parliament. I pay particular tribute to the committee convener, Wendy Alexander. Wendy will shortly leave the Parliament after serving with distinction for 12 years. Wendy and I have often crossed swords in the past, but I have also worked closely with her. Some years ago, with Alex Neil and George Lyon, we set up the cross-party group on the Scottish economy. Although I have often disagreed with Wendy, I have nonetheless always respected her intellect. The detailed and comprehensive report that is before us is a fitting legacy of her period in the Parliament. I never imagined that Wendy Alexander’s last weeks in the Parliament would see her cast in the role of a vicious and remorseless mugger—someone who abuses committee witnesses. According to some, Wicked Wendy, ably assisted by her henchman, Dastardly David McLetchie, ganged up to terrorise poor, innocent and unsuspecting professors of economics who came before the committee to have their say on the Scotland Bill provisions, apparently not for one moment suspecting that they might be asked to justify their opinions. Indeed, in the eyes of some members on the SNP benches, it was extraordinarily impertinent of Wendy Alexander, David McLetchie and other committee members to dare to ask the so-called experts about their published views on the pros and cons of fiscal devolution or full fiscal autonomy. Far from diminishing the role of the committees in the Parliament, the Scotland Bill Committee did exactly what a committee is supposed to do: it rigorously challenged and tested the evidence that it received. To do anything less would be a disservice to the work of the Parliament. For that reason, I commend Wendy Alexander and her colleagues for the work that they did.

Not at the moment. The proposals in the Scotland Bill will give the Scottish Parliament control of around one third of its revenues. In so doing, we will create for the first time a Scottish Parliament in which politicians are held to account for how a sizeable proportion of the money that they spend is raised. For the first time, politicians in this place will require to set an income tax rate to fund their spending plans—a rate that may or may not be in line with that which is payable south of the border. That is an important step change. To my mind, it will ensure that Scotland will be better governed in the future. I agree with the committee's conclusion that the Scotland Bill proposals will give the Scottish Parliament very wide fiscal powers.

Of course, it is not a single tax that is being devolved, but a range of taxes. We already have a basket of taxes: non-domestic rates, council tax, stamp duty and landfill tax are all devolved. I do not accept the minister’s characterisation of the situation. The Scotland Bill Committee robustly scrutinised the evidence that it received for and against the proposals. Of course, the SNP proposes that all taxes in Scotland should be levied by the Scottish Parliament. As the committee made clear in its report, the SNP produced no detailed plan for the proposal. Paragraph 42 of the report makes it clear that the Scottish Government's plans consisted of a single side of paper—not quite the back of an envelope, but not far away from it. There has been no attempt by Scottish Ministers to engage constructively in debate on the detail of how the financial provisions in the Scotland Bill might be improved. No amendments or written suggestions for improvement were received during evidence taking. Ministers’ ideas were finally submitted to the committee as late as 20 February—more than 10 weeks after the bill’s publication. That is hardly a serious attempt to engage with a serious process.

No. The minister will forgive me, but I have already given way once. In paragraph 43 of its report, the committee states that it did not examine in detail the option of full fiscal responsibility “as there was no detail to examine.” There were “no costings for these plans” and “no material explaining the practical implications for taxpayers, employers, Scotland’s financial sector or collection plans.” If SNP members feel that the committee did not give sufficient attention to the option of full financial responsibility, that is the fault of no one but the Scottish Government and the SNP. If they had wanted to engage with the process, they had the opportunity to bring forward serious proposals, but they failed to do so. We are now in the extraordinary position that the three unionist parties in the Parliament are supporting legislation to devolve greater powers—and, importantly, financial powers—to the Parliament. However, the SNP—the party that is supposed to believe in independence for Scotland—is dragging its feet. It has completely failed to engage with the debate and has failed to give meaningful evidence to the committee. SNP members of the committee have resorted simply to playing party politics and to crying foul when the argument has gone against them. The proposals in the Scotland Bill will strengthen the Parliament and our Government in Scotland and will make for better politics in the future. I commend the Scotland Bill Committee and, in particular, its convener on their sterling work. I have pleasure in supporting the motion.

I am grateful for the opportunity to close the debate—the first ever plenary debate for the Public Audit Committee—on behalf of the committee. There will have been audible groans at the prospect of participating in the debate from members who looked at the Business Bulletin and saw a committee debate scheduled for a Thursday morning. When they read further and saw that it was a debate on audit, those groans would have become wails of anguish. I am therefore delighted to thank all members who have contributed this morning, especially those who have stayed until the end of the debate. I join other members in putting on record my thanks to the Auditor General and his staff for their sterling work in informing the work of the committee. I also join other members in thanking for their work the committee clerks, who serve us so well. Other members have referred to the awards that have been won by the committee. It has twice won committee of the year, and the convener’s personal award as politician of the year is richly deserved. It is interesting to reflect, as we consider the various members of the committee, some of whom have come and gone over the past four years, that we have in our ranks—I think that we are unique in the Scottish Parliament in this respect—no less than two members of the House of Lords, in Lord Foulkes and Lord Stephen. I am not sure what that tells us about the work of the committee, but I reflect on the fact that the committee, and the Parliament, are shortly to be losing the services of those two noble lords. That will be our loss and the Westminster upper chamber’s gain because this place will be poorer and less colourful without them. I will respond to some of the points that have been made during the debate. Members including Mr Whitton and Mr Carlaw referred to the important work that has been done by the committee, particularly at a time of pressure on the public finances. That is an appropriate point. We all know that money is tight, and when money is tight it is all the more important that we ensure that every penny is spent as effectively as possible. That is what the committee tries to ensure—backing up the able work that is done by the Auditor General. A number of members referred to specific reports that have been published by the committee over the past session, particularly “The Gathering 2009”. I want to address points that were made by Jamie McGrigor, George Foulkes and others about the gathering. The irony of the report, as Nicol Stephen said fairly, is that sometimes the greatest concerns we have as a committee arise from what are actually quite small sums of money. The public cost involved in the gathering—a few hundred thousand pounds—was not substantial, yet the committee felt that the way in which that money was spent merited further investigation. One of the interesting things about the gathering report is that although we started with a focus very much on the Scottish Government’s involvement, as we went further into the issue our focus turned to a greater extent towards the actions of the City of Edinburgh Council. Jamie McGrigor made a fair point that if the Scottish Government’s loan to The Gathering 2009 Ltd—a loan that was not publicly disclosed—had been made known to the private sector creditors, they may well have rethought their involvement in the project. The sum that The Gathering 2009 Ltd ended up owing to private sector creditors may not have totalled £344,000. We can only conjecture on that. The private sector creditors should at least have been given that information so that they could have made an informed decision on whether to proceed with their involvement with the company. The committee’s biggest concern related to the actions of the City of Edinburgh Council—in particular the issue of the misleading press release that was issued, which was referred to by George Foulkes. This is not some dry academic subject, because we know that the issue of the press release by the City of Edinburgh Council saying that DEMA would take on the obligations to the private sector creditors was instrumental in those creditors holding off from taking legal action to recover the sums. As George Foulkes said, the one creditor—Portakabin—that ignored the press release got a settlement out of the City of Edinburgh Council. The others, which believed what they were told by the council, got nothing and to this day have received not a penny. The committee considered evidence that we heard from leading figures in the council to be literally incredible. It did not live up to the quality of evidence that we, as a parliamentary committee, have a right to expect. The whole system of parliamentary inquiry depends on witnesses who come to committees being prepared to give accurate and truthful evidence. It is a source of regret that that was not done in that particular case. The matter is being pursued elsewhere, but it is worth reflecting that, had it not been for the work of the Public Audit Committee, we would not have known about the issues in the first place. I turn to the issues of accountability and performance management of staff in the Scottish Government and its agencies. Throughout the session, the committee received evidence that staff performance issues have not always been directly addressed, with staff being moved sideways or sometimes even to more senior posts when concerns have been expressed about their performance. Members have referred to the audit in 2006-07 of Western Isles NHS Board. Willie Coffey remembered travelling in what I think he called a flying oven to Stornoway to take evidence. I regret to this day that I was not part of that delegation, because I was on paternity leave. My colleague Derek Brownlee had the wonderful opportunity of sitting as my substitute on the committee that day. For weeks afterwards, he expressed his gratitude to me for his participation in the event. The committee’s report on that health board demonstrated that several weaknesses in staff performance had contributed to deficits that culminated in a total of £3.36 million. As members have said, at one point, there were no fewer than three chief executives—one was on leave, another was seconded elsewhere and a third interim chief executive had been brought in to tackle budget issues. The Scottish Government health department did not address performance issues, including at board level, quickly enough. The problem was exacerbated by staffing issues in the board’s finance department that had not been tackled during previous years, notwithstanding the fact that the auditor had expressed concerns about governance in the board. Good staffing and performance management are increasingly important in times of financial austerity, particularly when levels of staffing in the civil service might be reduced. The Western Isles case is an example in which a lack of clarity on responsibilities contributed to financial losses year upon year, despite those having been identified in external audit reports. Clear lines of accountability ensure that health boards can challenge poor performance earlier and prevent losses. Although we are aware that boards need to remain independent, the committee felt that improved monitoring and scrutiny by the Government’s health department of individual boards would ensure that failures at board level can be challenged and addressed at an earlier stage. Another staffing issue that the committee encountered related to knowledge transfer when civil servants or policy responsibilities move between Government departments. That issue was particularly in evidence in our report “National concessionary travel”. In that case, insufficient knowledge transfer between staff when the policy moved to Transport Scotland meant that officials who came to the committee were unable to explain how the original costs of the scheme technology, which were assessed in 2004 at £9 million, had originally been conceived. The costs increased to £42 million by 2010 when the technology was implemented, but nobody could explain to us why and how the figure of £9 million had been arrived at. We have therefore urged the Scottish Government to ensure that record keeping from the initial stages of policy implementation is sound and that robust procedures are put in place to provide continuity and proper knowledge transfer between staff. We also addressed the issue of major capital projects, to which members, including John Swinney in his closing remarks, referred. For any project, there must be from the outset clearly identified outputs and outcomes in the business case. That helps to ensure value for money, provides a base to manage any changes during implementation and helps to realise intended benefits. However, the committee learned that business cases were not available for some projects and that others had not been kept up to date, resulting in cost overruns and delays as staff could not clearly identify decisions that were taken from the outset of the policy. The committee’s key themes report distils into three broad areas the key recommendations that the committee has made in the past four years. The committee undertook that work to assist any future Government to learn the lessons from the past, which, as I said, is crucial during a time of financial constraint. We hope that, in the next session of Parliament, those lessons will be learned, resulting in better value for money for taxpayers. I send my good wishes to the members of the committee in the next session of Parliament, whoever they may be. It will be interesting to see whether they win quite as many awards as we have.

Will the cabinet secretary put her colleague Mr Paterson right on the policy of the UK Government? The UK Government’s policy has not changed to any extent. It is implementing what was in the coalition agreement: a ban on below-cost sales. That is something that the Conservatives in this Parliament have been calling for in Scotland for the past year. Why will the cabinet secretary not do that?

The context of this debate is of course patients’ right to complain in the national health service. I think we all agree that the national health service is a very good institution that provides a very good standard of care, but it is not perfect—nothing on this earth is—and, on occasion, people have reason to complain. In my experience—others have touched on this point—people are reluctant to complain. Earlier in the week I met young mothers of babies who had been born with neonatal issues and who had spent some time in hospital. Even though the mothers identified that there had been problems with their children’s treatment, when I asked them whether they had complained they said that they felt very reticent about doing so, because the care that they had received from the staff whom they had encountered was of a high quality and they felt that making a formal complaint would denigrate that, even though they had legitimate concerns about some of the administrative approaches to how they were dealt with—there were particular issues around staffing levels and the funding of the resource. We have to be conscious of that issue. Ian McKee made a good point in his contribution about the NHS not being free. We assume that it is a free service, but of course we pay for it through our taxes. As the people who pay for it, we are quite entitled to expect a good-quality service in exchange for the money that we put in. Sometimes we are reluctant to complain—we see that often. We all deal with constituency cases of people who are complaining. Very often they want to make a complaint because they are at the end of their tether with the health service. They feel that all they wanted from someone in charge was a simple apology for the way that they, or perhaps an elderly relative, had been treated. Sometimes they end up going down the legal route simply because they feel that no other road is open to them. I know that we are continuing to develop complaints handling in the NHS. We have to look at how we make it easier for people to make complaints and get an apology without necessarily having recourse to a formalistic and legal route. The Scottish Conservatives did not believe that the bill as originally proposed would achieve anything worth while. We agreed with many of the medical groups who said that it was unwise to seek to enshrine patient rights in primary legislation. I have a lot of sympathy with the remarks that Ross Finnie made in that context. In addition, concerns were expressed at stage 1 about the treatment time guarantee and the employment of patient rights officers. We thought that there was no point in having legal rights in the bill if they could not be enforced, and we thought that making the rights legally enforceable would create more problems than it would solve and would create the doleful prospect of a lawyer at every bedside—doleful, that is, for everyone apart from the lawyers, who I am sure would welcome the extra work. However, after something of a comprehensive retreat on the part of the cabinet secretary, the bill was transformed beyond recognition at stage 2. It now provides for a patient rights charter, which we can support. As Mary Scanlon said, it was the Conservatives—indeed, I think it was Michael Forsyth, in the Scottish Office—who proposed a patient charter 20 years ago. I am sure that in the spirit of political consensus Lord Forsyth would be delighted that the Scottish Parliament is following his leadership today. In briefings on the bill, the British Medical Association and the RCN continued to express concern about enshrining rights in legislation, but both organisations conceded that the creation of a patient charter is a sensible alternative. The amendment of the bill in that regard was a sensible compromise, which I hope the BMA and the RCN regard as an improvement. The bill has also been amended to remove the provisions on patient rights officers. We were far from convinced that the NHS needed between 65 and 80 full-time-equivalent new posts, which would take money from the health budget that could be better spent on front-line services. The bill was improved by the deletion of the provisions. We remain concerned about the treatment time guarantee. At stage 2, an amendment in the name of the cabinet secretary included provision to require NHS boards to take account of the clinical needs of all patients and prioritise appropriately as they try to meet the treatment time guarantee. The amendment helped to dilute our concern that health boards would skew clinical priorities as they strove to meet the guarantee. As I said, the bill has changed beyond recognition. For that reason, we welcome it. Although we still have some reservations, we think that it is worthy of support. However, it is not the bill that the cabinet secretary intended. Our passing of the bill will be a victory for the Parliament over the Government.

We are starting rather earlier than had been expected, but I am sure that the chamber will fill up and that other front-bench members will appear in due course. In any case, it is my pleasure to open this Conservative party debate on early intervention in health and education. It might seem obvious to say that the early years of children’s development provide the basis for all areas of the rest of their lives, but the point is often overlooked in the provision of health and education. Too often, instead of making a concerted effort to provide the best service and care in the initial stages of life, services begin to address problems and issues only when they have developed fully. The importance of early childhood development and the impact of early intervention in determining future health, social wellbeing and educational achievement have been widely recognised, and a large and growing body of empirical evidence has highlighted the importance of child and parental interaction in the early years of life with regard to the child’s physical and mental wellbeing and future development path. The early years have a huge impact on outcomes for the rest of a child’s life. Dr Philip Wilson of the University of Glasgow, who provided evidence to the Health and Sport Committee in 2009 and to the Finance Committee’s inquiry on preventative spending in October 2010, has highlighted the key role that early intervention plays in the trajectories of young lives. He said: “there has been an enormous blossoming in the evidence base on ways of identifying early in life the children who are going to follow a problematic and painful trajectory.”—[Official Report, Health and Sport Committee, 25 March 2009; c 1728.] Investing early in young people’s health and education has been shown to produce a better return on the time and resources spent both in terms of financial capital in skills-based outcomes and having emotionally able young people. Dr Wilson has also said: “There is robust evidence that expenditure in the preschool years gives the highest rate of return on investment in human capital ... Public expenditure on the under-3s is minimal when compared with expenditure on any other age group ... There is no doubt that early intervention with vulnerable families by nurses is highly effective, and cost-effective.” The later it is left, the less the investment provides. Given the ability to act early to identify issues and potential problems before they impact on the child’s development, it remains a great mystery why more emphasis has not been put on resourcing all those who work in intervention to safeguard the future of Scotland’s upcoming generations by affording them a solid start in life. The quality of the child’s first years of life is strongly associated with his or her educational achievements later in life, and investing time and resources in the initial months and years of a child’s learning reaps many subsequent benefits. Moreover, it is clear that conditions in early life have long-term effects on health and wellbeing. Childhood is the key stage for developing resources to underpin adults’ physical and emotional health, social identities and behaviour. For instance, David Olds’s seminal work in the United States on home intervention by health professionals shows that around 30 hours of input between mid-pregnancy and the age of 2 can halve the incidence of criminal behaviour, substance abuse, smoking, absconding and high-risk sexual behaviour by the age of 15, all of which are issues that the Parliament subsequently has to try to address through legislation and intervention. The Scottish Conservatives are committed to providing early intervention to a universally high standard. For too long, the provision of the best supportive care for young children has been a postcode lottery, and indeed has been available only to those whose health boards have chosen to provide regular contact with health professionals as a matter of course or those who are in the additional or intensive support brackets. As such, the Scottish Conservatives have pledged an additional £20 million a year to recruit, train and maintain Scotland’s health visitors, who we believe are one of our most valuable assets for effective support and intervention. Members of other parties will rightly ask how we might be able to afford such a measure in the current climate. We in our party have been clear that we oppose the abolition of prescription charges for people such as MSPs who can well afford to pay, as the move will simply take precious resources out of the national health service budget. Restoring a £5 prescription charge would save £37 million, £20 million of which would be allocated to the vital task of expanding employment of health visitors. We are also committed to investing in improving parenting skills and support for parents and creating more flexible and accessible nursery education provision. My colleague Liz Smith will expand on those points in a few minutes. I will take a few moments to explain why sustained investment in health visitors is so important. Far from being able to provide a universal and comprehensive service to all parents and young children at present, health visitors are having to focus on a narrowing number of cases. The restructuring of services under “Health for all Children 4”—Hall 4—brought a change in emphasis to health visiting, meaning that the only formal assessment that is available to all children is at six weeks and that only children who are in the additional and intensive care bracket are offered an assessment at two years. Follow-up after two, three or fourth months of age is no longer expected, and families are left without regular contact, advice and support—a potentially dangerous development in the provision of early years care. Changing the focus to place it primarily on children in the additional and intensive care bracket has left thousands of parents every year without the expertise and care from which they could benefit under a truly universal system, forcing them to identify early signs themselves and to approach proactively their general practitioners or other health professionals. The Royal College of Speech and Language Therapists has highlighted the effects of the demise of universal care. Professor Law told the Health and Sport Committee that, for many years, a large proportion of pre-school referrals to speech and language therapists—between 40 and 50 per cent—was from health visitors. A review after the implementation of Hall 4 saw the number drop to only 15 per cent. Fewer problems are being picked up in the crucial early stages, as health visitors’ time and resources are being channelled solely into supporting those who are in a particular bracket of care.

I welcome Dr Richard Simpson to the debate and thank him for his constructive intervention, with which I agree. Parents’ response to the situation is clear. When asked in a recent survey by Ipsos MORI whether they thought that health visitors should visit only those parents who were having problems with their child, 91 per cent of parents disagreed. Nine out of 10 parents agreed that they found the advice of health visitors reassuring. A significant 76 per cent felt that they would have missed the help that was provided by the health visitor if they had not had it. Far from supporting those parents, all too often we make the advice and assistance that they need available to them for only a brief number of weeks, which rarely allows the all-too-crucial relational links between parents and health professionals to be made.

I am aware of the announcement that has been made. My concern is that we need to ensure that it is backed up by resources and the availability of health visitors. If the minister bears with me for a moment, I will expand on that point. The links between parents and health visitors and between health visitors and GPs are invaluable. Continuous contact must be fostered between GPs and health visitors in working relationships, to provide a universal and non-stigmatising service for communities that links with social work and education to provide a powerful service. Removing health visitors from that equation cannot but limit the reach and scope of the care that is provided. My concern is highlighted in the statistics, if we look at the number of vital health visitor posts across Scotland. Despite a small increase during 2009-10 in some health boards—notably in NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, where there has been an expansion—the overall number of health visitors has fallen across Scotland since 1998.

I am grateful that the minister is attempting to be accurate, because I am referring to a parliamentary written answer that I obtained from her, which gives the figures. The figure that I quoted is very important: I said that there had been a fall since 1998. Between 1998 and 2005, the number of health visitors in Scotland was more or less steady at around 1,500. There was then a substantial drop in 2007 to just over 1,100. The figure has since come back up, but only to 1,200. Therefore, we are better off today than we were three years ago, but much worse off than we were in the period between 1998 and 2005. The minister should not rest on her laurels, but should accept that there is a serious problem. Even within the period to which she refers, within the past year there has been a fall in the number of health visitors in seven health boards in Scotland. Each of our 14 NHS boards has a separate strategy on the use of health visitors, which leads to inevitable variation in service delivery across the country. Indeed, some boards—for instance, NHS Highland—are abandoning the training of health visitors altogether, under the belief that the profession may soon become obsolete. I have been told that the average age of health visitors in Scotland today is 55, and the concern is that, as they retire, they are not being replaced, as health boards try to make savings by not filling vacant posts. I referred to Dr Wilson earlier. In his evidence to the Health and Sport Committee, he told of the devastating effect that recent policy developments have had on the morale of the remaining health visitors. In its helpful briefing for this debate, the Royal College of Nursing Scotland reports that 61 per cent of health visitors feel underpaid and that 70 per cent say that they are under too much pressure at work. My colleagues in the chamber will not have failed to notice the emphasis that the United Kingdom Government has placed on the provision of health visitors in health boards across England and Wales. The UK Government has committed to creating 4,200 new positions for health visitors, to revitalising training and recruitment, and to creating a new identity for the profession. That investment south of the border in early years services will result in a doubling of the number of health visitors who are supporting families in England and Wales and will help to secure many healthy and active generations of families and children. This is an area in which Scotland cannot afford to lose out or start to lag behind. Making the effort to invest in these key services now will reduce the need to try to resolve problems that will go undetected if we continue to reduce health visitors’ capacity to help families across the country. The £20 million investment that the Scottish Conservatives propose would go a long way towards redressing the imbalance in the provision of early years care in Scotland. Through the creation of a truly universal service of health visiting, working with all families throughout the early years of a child’s life, we would be able to offer the support and advice that parents need, and to work towards combating problems before they take root. That widened provision would not mean a move away from increased care for the most vulnerable. The greater number and provision of fully trained health visitors, working in partnership with GPs and health professionals across the community, would serve to provide a greater level of care for all and would allow the most vulnerable to receive the care that they deserve, as well as opening up that care for everyone, regardless of postcode or region. The benefits of resourcing now for the future are clear. Scotland cannot afford to sit back and watch while children in other parts of the United Kingdom are offered a better start in life while we have the ability, the opportunity and the duty to provide them and their parents with the most comprehensive universal service of early years care that we can offer. I move, That the Parliament recognises the importance of early childhood development and the impact of early intervention in determining future health, social wellbeing and educational achievement of individuals; notes the large and growing body of evidence that highlights the importance of child and parental interaction in the early years of life; recognises the vital role performed by health visitors in supporting families in the early years; notes with concern that, in seven NHS board areas, there was a fall in health visitor numbers between 2009 and 2010; supports a national health visiting strategy that ensures that all families, regardless of income, area or need have access to a health visitor service that will provide a guaranteed level of support to families until their child reaches the age of five; further believes that there needs to be greater flexibility in how parents use their child care entitlement; supports a more flexible mix of state, partnership and private provision of nursery school places, and believes that more information relating to good parenting should be made available to all parents through maternity units, early years settings, GP practices and on NHS websites.

Before we leave the statistics, does the minister share my concern that, since 2007, we have seen a fall of 25 per cent in the number of health visitors who are employed by NHS Lothian? Perhaps more important, we know about the budget pressures that health boards are under. What has the Scottish Government to say to health boards about the future employment of health visitors?

I thank everyone who has spoken in what has been a largely consensual debate. I will try not to single out Helen Eadie—although I might say something later if I have the time. What was important was to achieve a proper consensus on the importance of early intervention. As various members have pointed out, an election is coming up in less than three months and, no matter what party or combination of parties might be in government, everyone needs to understand that this issue is vital. Opening for the Government, Adam Ingram referred to the early years framework and the review of Hall 4. After listening with great interest to Christina McKelvie’s request that I agree with the Government, I will agree that I agree with a lot of the early years framework, but I still believe that we need to do more in specific areas. For example, as Mary Scanlon pointed out in her powerful speech, a 24-month health check is simply not enough. We need pre-school development checks. Indeed, we should not rely on a reactive approach but should take an interventionist approach. It might be unusual for a Conservative to say such things, but I think that intervening more in this area will pay dividends. As Mary Scanlon also made clear, there are too many different approaches in Scotland. We need a universal service—indeed that is, for us, the key issue. Although I see merit in the Labour, Liberal Democrat and Government amendments, I cannot accept any of them because they delete from our motion the reference to a national health visiting strategy, which, for us, is the single most important point in this debate. In a very good speech, Des McNulty raised a number of fair points and I certainly agree with his statement that there are large areas of agreement in this policy area. The key message that I took from his speech is that we know what we should do, but we must now make it happen. Perhaps we have had enough strategies; now we need delivery. He very fairly accepted that the changes to Hall 4 introduced by the previous Administration had not been beneficial and that it was time to think again. As for the debate about a universal versus a targeted service, I want to reassure Mr McNulty that we are not saying that we should not target resources. Instead, we want both; we want to ensure that a service is available to all, with an additional resource for the most vulnerable. I also agree with Des McNulty and, indeed, Hugh O’Donnell on the importance of the voluntary sector, which will play a huge role in delivering this agenda. Des McNulty, Ross Finnie and a number of other members mentioned the importance of preventative spending and referred to the Finance Committee’s report on the subject. In this respect, Shona Robison was right to point out that the issue did not feature in the budget discussions, which I believe illustrates one of the challenges that we have to face. We are all under pressure from constituents to deliver on certain policy areas and funding for bursaries, housing or whatever, but the fact is that this important agenda gets overlooked because we will not see any of the benefits of spending this money until many years down the road. If we are to introduce preventative spending, we have to ask ourselves what we will stop spending money on today to fund something that will produce benefits tomorrow. That challenge, which faces all parties in the chamber, will not be solved as a result of this debate or, I suspect, any time soon. In its briefing, the RCN draws attention to the various changes in approach that have been made. It points out, for example, that the RONIC pilots were not progressed; that the modernising community nursing board, which was introduced by the Scottish Government, is due to finish its work at the end of the current year, after which a clear way forward for community nursing should be set out; and that this is creating uncertainty in the nursing profession and among health visitors. All that those people are looking for is certainty and a clear way forward. Liz Smith and Nanette Milne pointed to the importance of education in early years. As we know, nursery education is vital; however, the current set-up does not suit all parents, which is why we are calling for greater flexibility. Moreover, as a number of members made clear, by the time a child reaches the age of three, it is already too late to intervene effectively and deal with many of the problems that we need to address. As a result, although nursery is important, waiting until children get to nursery before intervention takes place is not the answer. Parenting skills are vital. There is nothing automatic about having good parenting skills. In most cases, such skills are passed down from generation to generation, but we know that many families do not have that benefit—it simply does not happen. That is why support for parenting initiatives is essential. There are tremendous examples of good work that is being done by voluntary sector groups—Barnardo’s and Care for the Family are two that come to mind—and which provides support for families that need extra help with parenting. We should encourage that. We do not need massive new quangos to be set up, or even massive new state funding—we need support for the voluntary sector projects that are providing those vital skills. I have a moment to deal with the points that Helen Eadie and Rhoda Grant made about the coalition Government. I gently remind Helen Eadie that we are making cuts today because the previous Labour Government left us with the worst set of public finances in the industrialised world. When we talk about cuts, let us not forget that the Labour Party, if it had remained in Government, would have cut two thirds of every pound that the coalition Government is cutting. Rhoda Grant rose—

When we talk about early intervention, let us never forget Labour’s legacy to every child in this country. Every baby who is born in Britain today is saddled with a debt of £22,300, thanks to the debt legacy that the Labour Party left. To quote Des McNulty again, we have policies and strategies, but what we now need is action. Today we have proposed solutions on health visitors, nursery education and parenting. Others have different ideas, which is fair enough. One of our major concerns is that we do not fall behind what is happening south of the border. The UK Government is creating 4,200 new positions for health visitors—a doubling of the number of health visitors who are supporting families in England and Wales. In health and education, people in England and Wales benefit from having the Conservatives in government, at least in coalition. How much we look forward to May, when people here in Scotland will have the same opportunity.

What lines of accountability will apply for care workers under the proposed new arrangements? Will accountability be through the NHS or through local government?

I thank the cabinet secretary for her statement and for providing me with advance sight of it, although I intrude with some trepidation on what appears to be a private conversation between the cabinet secretary and Jackie Baillie. First, as a local member, I welcome the focus on Fife. I am grateful to ministers for their updates on the situation there. To put it politely, there seems to have been a breakdown in communication between Fife Council and NHS Fife. That situation has now been resolved. What assurances can ministers give us that it will not be repeated in the future? Secondly, I agree with the cabinet secretary that integration of health and social care budgets would help to reduce the problem of delayed discharge. What is her proposed timetable for that much-needed change, for which the Conservatives have called for some years?

I thank all the members who signed my motion on a timetable for dualling the A9 and those who have attended the debate. I am just about old enough to remember, from growing up as a child in Inverness, what we now know as the old A9, which meandered its way from Perth northwards through countless small communities. It was unsuitable to serve the Highland population and was often subject to congestion and long delays. In 1974, the then Conservative Secretary of State for Scotland, Gordon Campbell, signed the orders for the creation of what was then known as the new A9. The road was constructed over the following 12 years. It bypassed towns such as Dunkeld and Newtonmore, relieving them of traffic congestion, and was a mix of single carriageway and dualled sections. At the time, it was built to the highest design standards and with the latest engineering technology. It was a massive commitment and investment in Perthshire and the Highlands. Now, more than 30 years after the completion of the road, traffic levels are, in places, five times what they were back then in the late 1970s. A road that was adequate in the 1970s and 1980s is no longer sufficient to cope with the level of traffic and the number of heavy goods vehicles that use it today.

I am happy to support the general thrust of Mr Stewart’s comments, although I would have to look at the details of his proposal about the driving licence. Generally speaking, more driver education would be extremely helpful. Through Transport Scotland publications and parliamentary answers, we know that the A9 is officially Scotland’s deadliest road, with the highest fatality rate of any road in Scotland. It witnesses on average more than 200 accidents per year and had the highest or joint-highest death rate of any road in 2004, 2006, 2007 and 2008. We are still to receive the official figures for 2010, but I understand that there were 14 fatalities in that year, with 13 lives lost on the Perth to Inverness stretch. Sadly, I am sure that that will again mean that the A9 has one of the highest numbers of fatal accidents on roads in Scotland for that year—if not the highest. No one here can ignore those facts. We must remember that, behind the statistics, there are many families and friends who have lost loved ones and many communities that have been devastated. Every accident is a human tragedy, and tonight we are joined in the gallery by some of those who have lost loved ones on the A9. As my motion sets out, between Perth and Inverness there are long and dangerous stretches of single carriageway and the road continually switches between single and dual carriageway sections. The long stretches of single carriageway cause driver frustration and the road’s switching between single and dual carriageway causes driver confusion. If the A9 were dualled in its entirety, those problems would be substantially removed. I fully accept that dualling the A9 would not end accidents on the road, but I strongly believe—my belief is shared by road-safety campaigners and the police—that upgrading it would substantially reduce the number of accidents. I welcome the commitment that the Scottish Government made in its strategic transport projects review to dual the A9 between Perth and Inverness, but my concern about that commitment is that the A9 project is in competition with 28 others, and people who wish to see improvements on the road have no idea where they sit in the Government’s list of priorities and no idea what the likely timescale for completion might be. That is why I hope that the Minister for Transport and Infrastructure will give an indication of when road works to improve the A9 will commence and how they will progress. I would like him to tell us that tonight, or to confirm that a statement to Parliament will be made, in which a full timetable for the dualling of the A9 will be set out, similar to the timetable for the new Forth road bridge crossing, with details of when it will start, the likely costs and the likely completion time. I understand that dualling the A9 is a massive financial commitment, and I recognise that finances are under severe pressure and that most of the Scottish Government’s capital budget for the next few years will be swallowed up by the new Forth crossing. However, it is for the Government to set out its priorities and to tell us where the A9 stands in relation to other projects. We should not forget that there is a substantial cost to not acting. I am talking not just about the appalling human cost that I have mentioned, but about the economic cost of disruption. The most recent fatal accident on the A9 between Perth and Inverness was on 23 December, when three lorries crashed north of Dunkeld. Understandably, the road was closed all day. The closure of Scotland’s main arterial route between the central belt and the north of Scotland for a whole day, two days before Christmas, inevitably caused major disruption for individuals and businesses, and had a massive economic impact. We are now seeing money being spent on the creation of two-plus-one overtaking lanes on the A9. Although any improvements are welcome, I wonder whether the money would not be better spent on the creation of dual carriageways, because if the Government is serious about its commitment to dualling the road in the long term, those lanes will have to be replaced. It is ironic that the new overtaking lane at Moy had to be closed just two weeks after it was opened, because it turned out that it was more dangerous than the single carriageway that it replaced. On the issue of cost, I was disappointed to hear the minister, Keith Brown, when he was interviewed this morning, repeat the old canard that the Edinburgh trams money could have been spent on the A9. Unfortunately for him, I have a long memory and I remember—I have all the evidence to back this up—that at the time of the vote in Parliament on the trams in 2007, the Scottish Government made it quite clear that if the trams project did not proceed, that money could be spent only on other public transport projects and not on the A9. I understand the game of politics and the minister’s need to shift blame away from his Government’s broken promises, but he is engaged in a pretty shameless attempt to rewrite history. To be frank, I expected better of him. In closing, I would like to thank the newspapers The Courier and The Press and Journal and local papers such as the Perthshire Advertiser and the Inverness Courier, which have all done so much to highlight the need to dual the A9. I would also like to put on record my thanks to all the people who have supported the campaign to dual the road, especially those who have gone through the ordeal of losing loved ones on it, for whom I have the greatest respect and admiration. If any good is to come out of the succession of tragedies on the A9, I hope that it is a full and detailed timetable for its dualling, set in stone.

Will the member take an intervention?

I regret the tone of Mr Thompson’s contribution to this serious debate. It was quite clear in 2007 that the SNP meant that the trams money could be spent only on public transport projects. I also found a campaign leaflet from the Glasgow North East by-election in 2009 in which the SNP said that the Edinburgh trams money should have been spent in Glasgow. So, it was Edinburgh or Glasgow—not the Highlands.

Will the member give way on that point?

Will the member give way?

I am grateful to the minister for giving way, because I will make an important point. I have here a quotation from May 2007, from Mr Kevin Pringle—whom Mr Brown will know—who is an official spokesman for the First Minister, Alex Salmond. When questioned about what would happen if the Edinburgh trams project did not proceed, he said: “The government intends all expenditure planned for these projects or any alterations will continue to be used for public transport projects”. Does Mr Brown dissociate himself from Mr Pringle’s remarks?

Yes or no, Mr Brown?

Shameless behaviour. He is not fit to be a minister.

It was reported in the Sunday Herald at the weekend that, in addition to distinction awards, some consultants are rewarded with additional salary points. What action is the cabinet secretary taking to address that system of additional reward?

The First Minister will be aware of the calls from some parents for vaccination of all young children against flu—a call that does not, however, have scientific or medical support. Where does the Scottish Government stand on the issue?

Will the member give way?

Like his Labour colleagues, Mr Macintosh has been long on the critique of the SNP Government. Will he tell us what Labour will do if it wins the election?

This has been a rather bad-tempered debate, with more heat than light. With the whiff of an election in the air, perhaps that is to be expected. Things will probably get no better over the coming weeks. In his opening speech, in what was quite an effective critique of the SNP Government's failures on education, Des McNulty referred to falling teacher numbers, class size targets not being met and the lack of investment in school buildings. In the amendment in her name, and in her speech, Elizabeth Smith identified that the key problem facing the SNP is not so much what it has failed to do, but that it promised so much in advance of the previous election that it has not delivered. The SNP made unrealistic and uncosted pledges that have come back to haunt it. I know people—many of whom are connected with education, such as teachers and parents—who at the previous Scottish election in 2007 voted SNP for the first time because they wanted smaller class sizes and more teachers to be employed. All those people have been let down and they all tell me that they will not be voting SNP again. The cabinet secretary's defence, which was articulated as he spoke to an amendment that is almost as long as the list of SNP broken promises, is to say that it is all the fault of the Government at  Westminster because of its cuts. However, he neglects to mention that, for the first three years of his Government in this parliamentary session, the budget was not affected by any cuts from Westminster. There was plenty of money and we had record levels of spending compared to those under any previous Scottish Administration, yet still the SNP failed to deliver on its promises on class size reduction and teacher employment. As Mr O'Donnell fairly said, the defence of, "It wisnae me—it's all somebody else's fault," does not hold water. Sooner or later, the Government and the cabinet secretary must start taking responsibility for their actions and failures and stop blaming others. Many members have raised concerns about teacher employment, which is one of the Government's biggest failings. As somebody who is married to a recently qualified teacher who, like many of her contemporaries, has not been able to find a permanent job since qualifying, I am painfully aware of the issues. The situation is a desperate waste of talent. Many people came from other careers to retrain as teachers because of the promises that were made to them, but they are not being utilised and will potentially be lost to the teaching profession. Many Labour members raised that subject but, although they were strong on critique, they were light on solutions. I will briefly give three suggestions that might help. First, why do we continue to train so many teachers to add to a pool of unemployment? There has been a reduction in the number of people going through teacher training, but I question whether that has gone far enough. We have to consider that. Secondly, we need much better information in the marketplace on supply of and demand for teachers, and on vacancies. Thirdly, because we support better local decision making, we believe that if headteachers had greater flexibility in their budgets, that might create opportunities for more employment. Those are serious suggestions to the cabinet secretary, which I hope he will take on board. Overall, the speeches from Labour members were long on criticism and light on alternatives. What will Labour do if it is successful in the election in May and faces the problems that we are discussing? Where will Labour find the money to deal with the problem of teacher unemployment? I hope that Mr Macintosh, in winding up the debate, will shed light on what Labour will actually do after 5 May if it forms the Administration. Overall, the debate has missed the point. There is a real debate to be had about the future of Scottish education but we have hardly touched on it today. Among the opening speakers, only  Elizabeth Smith addressed the issue. In Scotland, we are not as good as some claim we are, and we are failing too many pupils. Even Labour-connected commentators such as John McTernan and John McLaren now accept that Scottish education has a long way to go. We have had a huge injection of additional money in the past decade, but with no commensurate improvement in outcomes. On international comparisons, Scottish education has stagnated. So we have to change things. Instead of throwing mud at one another, we should be having a debate about how to make changes and what they should be. As Elizabeth Smith said, the Conservative view is that we need to go down the road of greater school autonomy, greater diversity, more parental choice and greater emphasis on basic skills. In relation to that debate, I was disappointed with the cabinet secretary's speech. Consumed with insomnia the other night, I turned to my well-thumbed copy of "Grasping the Thistle", which was co-authored by the cabinet secretary in his younger and more interesting days. In the section on education, I read praise for the private sector delivering public service and for the idea that Swedish-style education vouchers should be made available to all. Indeed, the book suggests that those could be topped up by parents to purchase private schooling. Then there is the classic remark: "Choice and diversity are the hallmarks of a mature and confident society and this system will encourage the emergence of new types of private provision". How disappointing it is that, 14 months after taking office, the cabinet secretary has pursued none of those interesting ideas. As we enter the twilight of Mr Russell's career as cabinet secretary, we should reflect on how far he has retreated from his once-bold vision for Scottish education. For that alone, he stands guilty of failing Scotland's parents, pupils and teachers, so I support the amendment in Elizabeth Smith's name.

To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government is taking to raise awareness of the importance of the flu vaccine among eligible groups. (S3F-2805)

The First Minister will share my concern that there has been a low take-up of seasonal flu vaccinations among some eligible groups. For example, fewer than one in five pregnant women have had the jag. I do not know whether the First Minister himself falls into an eligible group, but I was interested to see him described in a newspaper at the weekend as being "a wee softy" who "hides behind a rather macho facade". Is the First Minister too much of a softy to have had his own flu jab?

Universities Scotland has told us that it supports a graduate contribution, as has the Scottish National Party's hand-picked Council of Economic Advisers. Why can the cabinet secretary not tell us whether he supports a graduate contribution, in principle? Why can he not give us a simple yes or no answer to that question?

To ask the Scottish Executive what its position is on the response by public agencies to the recent severe weather. (S3O-12345)

I appreciate that this ground was gone over in some detail in the debate this morning. Does the minister understand the frustration of my constituents in Fife, Perth and Stirling about the cancellation of rail services last week, even some days after the thaw had set in? Many people rely on those rail services to get to their places of employment. Will the minister be holding urgent talks with First ScotRail and Network Rail to see what can be done to minimise disruption in the event of more severe weather coming this winter?

I congratulate my good friend Ted Brocklebank on securing tonight's debate on a subject that is very important for his constituents and mine. We have heard from MSPs of all parties about the importance of RAF Leuchars to Fife, to Scotland and to the United Kingdom. As has been said, the base plays an integral role in the defence of the UK, and it is why many families call Fife home. As Ted Brocklebank pointed out, it is vital to the Fife economy. Businesses in Fife and further afield, including businesses in Angus and Perth and Kinross, would be affected if the base were to close. As a number of members have said, RAF Leuchars is more than a base for fighter planes. Iain Smith pointed out that it is home to the Territorial Army's 71 Engineer Regiment, 58 squadron of the Royal Air Force Regiment, the Royal Auxiliary Air Force and the regimental headquarters of the RAF cadets in Scotland.  As Ted Brocklebank pointed out, yesterday, following a speculative story in one newspaper, the MOD said: "There are no plans to close RAF Leuchars, any suggestion that it will close is pure speculation. The RAF is doing a full study of all its bases across the UK, and this is expected to be finalised in March or April. It is far too early to say what the outcome of that study may be, and any speculation is deeply unsettling for staff at the RAF bases and their local communities." I think that that statement on RAF Leuchars is welcome, and I completely agree that any rumour or speculation on the base's future is deeply unsettling for those who work there, as well as for the local communities and businesses, the livelihoods of which depend on the base. Nevertheless, it is important for the debate to set a marker and send a message to the MOD that there is strong feeling and affection for RAF Leuchars, and that we have high regard for its importance to Scotland and the UK. As with RAF Lossiemouth, I believe that we must present a united front in Scotland and say with one voice that RAF Leuchars must not be closed. There must be a genuine cross-party coming together on the issue. Despite Maureen Watt's best efforts, I believe that that is what we have seen in the debate. A cross-party initiative was launched in defence of Lossiemouth, and the same energy must go into a campaign for Leuchars. It should not be a case of keeping either RAF Leuchars or RAF Lossiemouth, thereby setting one base against the other. We should not squabble for an either/or scenario but campaign and make the case for the retention of both bases. That is why I look forward to the minister making a robust case and issuing a rallying call for the retention of both bases. 2011 will mark 100 years of aviation at Leuchars. In 1911, a balloon squadron of the Royal Engineers set up a training camp in Tentsmuir forest. Squadrons 224 and 233 were stationed at the base in world war two. On the second day of the war, a Hudson of 224 squadron attacked a Dornier 18 over the North Sea, giving Leuchars the proud accolade of being the base to the first British aircraft to engage the enemy in world war two. I want RAF Leuchars to continue for another 100 years. It has the full support of the Scottish Conservatives.

We are here today because of the resignation of Stewart Stevenson as transport minister. Mr Stevenson was fond of regaling us with tales of all his previous employment, from airline pilot to inventor of the internet, but the man who has had every job now has no job. On a personal level, we should recognise Mr Stevenson's contribution as a Government minister and accept that he acted honourably in resigning when he did. In reality, however, he had little choice. What cost him his job was not the severe weather, but his inadequate response to it. The lesson of his resignation is that on occasion, a little less arrogance and bombast and a little more humility are required from Government ministers. That is a lesson hard learned by the former  transport minister, and one to which his boss should pay attention. I remind the First Minister that Mr Stevenson had to resign not because he had lost the confidence of Opposition parties, but because he had lost the confidence of the public, and even—if our friends in the press are to be believed—the confidence of members on the SNP side of the chamber, including his ministerial colleagues. I congratulate Keith Brown on his new position. The former royal marine is noted for his pugilistic style, and I am sure that next time we have a transport crisis, Labour Party press officers will be keeping out of his way. I also congratulate Angela Constance on her appointment to Government in an important role, to which she will bring her experience as a social worker. According to one jobs website that I looked up, social workers assist people in managing their daily lives, coping with issues, navigating relationships and solving personal and family problems. It sounds like she would have been better suited to working for Ed Miliband. I wish both ministers success in their new roles. If I had one word of advice for them it would simply be this: it is always worth paying attention to the weather forecast.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will consider using Friarton hall to increase prison capacity in Scotland. (S3O-12241)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that when there is such pressure on prison places it makes little sense to have an asset such as Friarton hall lying underutilised and empty? I am aware that the Scottish Prison Service is putting together proposals for the redevelopment of the building. Will he seriously consider those proposals to ensure that we are making best use of the prison estate?

The Scotland Bill marks the latest step in the development of the coalition Government’s respect agenda for Scotland. Within three days of becoming Prime Minister, David Cameron came to this Parliament and met the First Minister; UK Government ministers now regularly come to appear before Scottish parliamentary committees; the coalition Government agreed to make funds available to the Scottish Government from the fossil fuel levy; Richard Lochhead, the Scottish fisheries minister, has been allowed by the coalition Government to lead UK-level fisheries talks in Brussels; and the Scotland Bill has now been introduced to implement the proposals of the Calman commission. None of us should underestimate how far the process has come. When the Conservatives, Labour and the Liberal Democrats came together to set up the Calman commission, few believed that the process would even have an outcome, never mind find its way into legislation. It is indicative of the strength of the work that was done by the commission that the three parties are united, representing between them the great majority of people in Scotland as we propose a major set of constitutional changes—changes that have, of course, already been endorsed by a vote of this Parliament.  As we have heard already, the biggest changes affect taxation, spending and borrowing. Writing in The Scotsman last week, Prime Minister David Cameron said: “For eleven years now, Holyrood has had the power to spend money on schools, hospitals, transport and justice as it decides. But it has raised little of this money itself, depending instead largely on the block grant from Westminster. This doesn’t make sense. If you believe in people power and accountable government, the two should be joined up.  Scottish politicians, who better know the needs of the economy and the will of the people, should be able to both spend money and raise taxes—and then be prepared to be judged at the ballot box for those decisions.” I find it hard to disagree with any of those words.

I have consistently supported greater financial powers for the Parliament. I am delighted that we have a Conservative Prime Minister who agrees with me and is taking the agenda forward. In future, we will have a properly financially accountable Scottish Parliament and politicians who will have to concern themselves with not just spending but raising money. There are critics of the Calman process who think that it is another step on the slippery slope to independence, but I do not think that improving devolution undermines the United Kingdom or that giving Scotland better government makes independence more likely. During the devolution debates in the 1990s, members of my party—including me—often argued that setting up a Scottish Parliament would boost support for independence. In the event, that did not happen and I am happy to admit that we got it wrong. Last week, the most recent opinion poll figures showed support for independence to be at an all-time low of 23 per cent. So much for the argument that a Conservative Government in Westminster would stoke the fires of nationalism. Just as the argument that more devolution will increase support for independence is wrong, the argument that devolution will kill off nationalism, as George Robertson famously said, is wrong. There is no such thing as inevitability in politics or history. In Scotland we will get the constitutional future that we choose. That will ultimately be for the Scottish people to decide, and I have every confidence in their good sense. Their majority view is clear; we should back the proposals in the Scotland Bill, which will bring better government for Scotland.  The SNP has simply stood on the sidelines and criticised the process. Once again, the party has brought little constructive comment to the debate. I exempt from that general attack Alasdair Allan, who made a constructive speech. Indeed, his speech was much more constructive than the speech that we heard from the First Minister—I am deeply sorry if that in any way damages Alasdair Allan’s career prospects. The SNP’s attack on the proposals in the Scotland Bill for financial devolution is based on the assumption that they will mean lower income for the Scottish Government. Let us leave aside the basis of the SNP’s fiddled figures on which the assumption is founded, which was thoroughly demolished by Derek Brownlee—I am sorry that the First Minister was not here to listen to Derek Brownlee’s demolition of his financial case. It staggers me that SNP members cannot see the irony of the argument that they are putting forward. If it is the case that we are seeing a fall in income tax revenues as a result of the economic recession, that would apply to Scotland whatever level of financial powers it obtained. If Scotland were independent, the position, far from being alleviated, would be made much worse. We have only to consider what has happened over the Irish Sea during the past few weeks for an example of the problem.

I am sorry. The Presiding Officer is indicating that I do not have time to do so. The Calman commission’s proposals as set out in the Scotland Bill will improve devolution, increase the accountability of Scottish politicians and strengthen the United Kingdom. For all three reasons they deserve our whole-hearted support.

I am genuinely interested in the cabinet secretary's argument, but the problem with her proposal is that the bill contains no legal remedies to enforce the rights that she is supposed to be giving. How is what she suggests better than the patients charter?

This afternoon's debate has been helpful in setting out the different positions that people take on the Patient Rights (Scotland) Bill. The position that is taken by the cabinet secretary and her colleagues on the SNP benches is clearly that the bill is appropriate and necessary. The position that has been set out by my Conservative colleagues and the Liberal Democrats is that the bill is inappropriate and unnecessary. The Labour Party's position is drowning in a sea of fudge. There is a philosophical question at the heart of the debate: when is legislation necessary? The view that my party and I take is that we should legislate only when necessary and as a last resort. We should not legislate as a gesture or, as Iain Smith said, to send a message. That is what the cabinet secretary said earlier that the bill would do. Ross Finnie made the point very fairly in his opening speech. I find myself increasingly in agreement with Mr Finnie in health debates. Some have observed that, indeed, I am increasingly coming to resemble Mr Finnie. However, I reassure him that that is only a temporary arrangement on my part. I will be as delighted as he will be when St Andrew's day comes along and I can get the razor out. It seems to me that legislation should be put through only when it is necessary, when it is required as a last resort, and when we have exhausted all the other possibilities. I do not believe that the bill meets those tests, because what is required by the bill should be happening already in the NHS. The bill will make no difference. What is singular about the reaction to the bill and the evidence on it from the health bodies is that, as Michael Matheson said, it has been extremely negative. The Royal College of Nursing said: "There is a need to enshrine patient rights, but we do not believe that legislation is the way forward." BMA Scotland said: "We could do it by publishing a charter, so that patients feel more empowered to address patient rights issues within the context of an on-going episode of care." Dr Bill Mathewson from the Royal College of General Practitioners Scotland said:  "I agree with my colleagues."—[ Official Report , Health and Sport Committee , 29 September 2010; c 3439, 3440.] Others to whom Mary Scanlon referred took the same view. Does the cabinet secretary see the irony that, just a week after we were lectured to on minimum unit pricing of alcohol and told that we should listen to the medical establishment when it comes to health issues, she is now disregarding its opinions on the important issue of patient rights? The Government is taking a pick-and-choose approach. There has been a lot of discussion about the treatment time guarantee. We have always been nervous about enshrining time limits and targets in legislation. On this occasion, we agree with the BMA, which has expressed concern that the measure would have unintended consequences, distort clinical care and harm patients. Nanette Milne, speaking from medical experience, agreed with the BMA and confirmed what it had to say. We need to be cautious. We are not convinced that there is a need to enshrine the guarantee in legislation. In any event, there is no sanction. What is the point of having a legal right in the bill if the recipient cannot enforce it? The provision will, of course, come at a cost, as we will need an army of patient rights officers—potentially between 65 and 80 full-time equivalents throughout Scotland—who will take money out of the health budget. We believe that that money could be better spent on front-line services. There are other flaws in the bill. Mary Scanlon quite properly referred to the lack of mention of those with mental health issues who face extremely long waiting times to be seen. They will not be helped at all by the bill. Other patients, such as those who are waiting for physiotherapy, are in the same boat. Therefore, we have deep concerns about the approach that the cabinet secretary has proposed. What should be done instead?

I hear that point but, to be honest, I have difficulty seeing how the bill could be amended in a way that would make it acceptable to us. It seems to us that there is a better way to approach the matter, through enhancing the patients charter. Mary Scanlon set out that approach. Notwithstanding the cabinet secretary's rather dismissive words, the patients charter was an improvement in the NHS. It improved the way in which patients were dealt with and their rights to complain. There was a culture change in the NHS at that time, and it was  improved by the previous Administration. We think that that is the right way forward. There is an issue with NHS complaints more generally. Jamie Stone drew attention to that in a fine speech. Last week, I met the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman, Jim Martin, to discuss some issues. The problem in the NHS is that, if people feel that they or a member of their family has had bad treatment, they will want some redress. Those people will not be looking for money or compensation; they will probably be looking for an apology. They will want somebody to say, "We're sorry. We got this wrong and lessons have been learned." However, the current system does not allow that to happen and, in frustration, many people end up going to lawyers and seeking redress through the courts. That is extremely expensive, stressful and time consuming, and they are not looking for that. They want a proper complaints system. That is what we should get, but the bill will not give us that, which is why we will not support it. I am sorry that poor Richard Simpson, who is a robust opponent in committee, has now been exposed as Jackie Baillie's poodle, and that he will meekly vote for the bill. We and Rhoda Grant say that it does not do what it says on the tin. There is a better way, so members should reject the bill.

I thank members of the Health and Sport Committee for their extensive report and the clerks to the committee for all of their hard work and assistance. Although I am not a member of the committee, I joined it on its visit to Kinloch Rannoch to take evidence, on a day that I am sure will live long in the convener's memory. I take this opportunity to thank all of the individuals, health boards and organisations that gave evidence and contributed to the report. In particular, I thank members of the Kinloch Rannoch community, some of whom have made the long trip from highland Perthshire to be here to watch today's debate.  As we have heard, the inquiry was generated by a petition that a resident of Kinloch Rannoch submitted to the Public Petitions Committee in summer 2009. The petition outlined concerns about the provision of out-of-hours GP cover to rural communities. In its final conclusion, the report refers to the fact "that trust and confidence in the out-of-hours service have ... been lost." It states: "a substantial degree of work" is required "to re-build confidence. This can only be achieved when the system can be depended on to work properly, which will require out-of-hours services to be fully joined up—which they are not currently. NHS boards should be given the responsibility for devising ... specific, sustainable, and often innovative arrangements whereby out-of-hours services meet the needs of individual communities. This should be delivered in consultation with those communities." I entirely agree with that. It is clear from the report's conclusion that there are significant problems with the out-of-hours health service in rural and remote communities. I hope that health boards throughout Scotland will take note of the report's findings and will work with those communities to ensure that they have a health service that they are satisfied with and in which they can put their trust. The Scottish Conservatives believe that rural and remote communities require an out-of-hours GP service that is fit for the 21st century. The local GP service should be the focus for out-of-hours services in rural areas. There are still great concerns in rural communities regarding NHS 24's lack of knowledge of local services and geography. We have already heard various examples of that in the debate, and I am sure that we will hear more of them later. Such problems would not occur if a local GP provided the out-of-hours service—a GP in the community who knew their patients and who knew the area. The British Medical Association Scotland has made it clear that there will be no return to a universal Dr Finlay style of service, and I understand why that cannot happen. I do not think that anyone is calling for a whole new system across the country. We believe that a one-size-fits-all approach is not appropriate. The complexities of rural communities must be considered when designing out-of-hours health services. The Conservative and Liberal Democrat Government at Westminster has pledged to amend out-of-hours provision south of the border and to put GPs back in charge of commissioning the service, even if they do not provide it directly themselves. I urge the Scottish Government to  work closely with Andrew Lansley and his team to see what lessons Scotland can learn from what is happening south of the border. The committee convener has mentioned, and the report covers, important issues concerning ambulances in rural areas. The report notes the 41 per cent increase in the number of emergency calls that were made out of hours following the introduction of the new GMS contract in 2004. That suggests that a proportion of the out-of-hours service, which is properly the responsibility of NHS boards, is now being picked up by the Scottish Ambulance Service, which, in some cases, diverts its fleet from emergency situations. As Christine Grahame said, it seems that the Scottish Ambulance Service is being used to fill gaps in provision. In places such as Perthshire, where there is already a threadbare ambulance service, that is a worrying trend. Only one ambulance is stationed in highland Perthshire, and it covers an area of 600 square miles. Many rural communities feel that ambulance cover is simply not sufficient. I return to Kinloch Rannoch as an example of a remote and rural community whose out-of-hours health service has been removed. In May 2006, the local general practice opted out of providing an out-of-hours service, against the wishes of the local community and, to be fair, against the wishes of NHS Tayside. At that point, NHS Tayside made a commitment to the community that it would insist that the new general practice that was due to begin following the retirement of the then doctor would provide an out-of-hours service. That promise was broken, and out-of-hours cover is now provided via NHS 24, with the result, local residents claim, that there are lengthy waits for ambulances and residents call one another out during the night for help rather than rely on the service. As the minister will know, there is a great deal of concern in the community that NHS Tayside is not addressing its responsibility to provide an appropriate out-of-hours service in that remote and rural area. Given those concerns, I ask the minister whether the Scottish Government is prepared to intervene on the issue with NHS Tayside. The Scottish Government has intervened on a range of important health issues, such as reversing the closure of accident and emergency departments at Monklands and Ayr, so is it prepared, on this occasion, to get involved in this important health issue and to take up cudgels on behalf of the community? I would be grateful if the minister responded on that point when winding up the debate. What is happening in Kinloch Rannoch is an illustration of what might well happen—and what probably is already happening—elsewhere. We  cannot allow health services to be diluted in this case, as it could set a precedent for other communities in Scotland. Kinloch Rannoch residents are standing up for their community, but also for all other rural and remote communities in Scotland. I thank them for the work that they are doing, which highlights a hugely important issue.

Does Nicola Sturgeon accept that, if she goes to France and many other southern European countries, she will find that alcohol costs much less there than it does here?

I join others in thanking all those involved in the legislation, the bill team and members of the Health and Sport Committee, who spent many hours looking at the evidence, preparing the committee report and considering the bill at stage 2. For my own part, although I have been my party's health spokesman for only a few months, I feel that the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill has taken up a huge amount of my time. I am sure that other members, not least the cabinet secretary, will feel the same. On a personal level, I think that it is only fair to pay tribute to the cabinet secretary for her personal commitment to the issue. We may have disagreed on minimum pricing, but nobody could doubt her personal conviction and the interest that she has taken in pursuing the issue. The discussion on the bill has allowed us to have a national debate about Scotland's problem with excess alcohol consumption. The reasons for  that are complex, and there is no point in trying to pretend otherwise. I believe that the consumption rate of alcohol per head in Scotland is equivalent to that in France, but in France the health outcomes are much superior because the French consume alcohol differently, which suggests that there is a strong cultural issue. In that respect, Scotland is akin to other small northern European countries with dark, cold winters and long winter nights, as a result of which we seem to consume a lot of alcohol. There are more issues at play than simply the question of price. It is a real pity that minimum unit pricing dominated the debate and prevented a broader discussion about the causes of excess alcohol consumption. I am also concerned about the somewhat sanctimonious tone of some members, not so much in the debate today but in the wider debate. We must remember that, consumed in moderation, alcohol is not just harmless but beneficial. It is also a vital part of Scottish industry and Scottish exports. We must therefore be wary of introducing unproven measures that might well jeopardise the future of vital industries that employ many thousands of people throughout Scotland. I was pleased to hear the cabinet secretary say that she does not regard minimum unit pricing as a magic bullet. To his credit, Michael Matheson took up that point. Unfortunately, the point seems to have been lost on Anne McLaughlin, who seemed to suggest that that is exactly what it would have been. There is a relationship between price and consumption but, as Ross Finnie fairly said, it is not a simple one. As Mary Scanlon said, the prices in England and Scotland are the same but consumption per head of alcohol is 25 per cent higher in Scotland than in England. It is a complex issue. Moreover, in recent years, consumption per head in Scotland has fallen. If price were the major driver, that would not have been the case. We have said all along that we would prefer a UK-wide approach and that we want to see increases in tax and duty on a targeted basis. That would have an important impact in that it would apply across the UK and would get around the problem of cross-border trade—an issue that has been dismissed too easily by the Government in the debate. We buy our wine over the internet, and I am sure that many thousands of other Scottish households do the same. It would be far too easy to avoid minimum unit pricing if it were introduced only in Scotland. Even without minimum unit pricing, this is still a worthwhile bill. It will clamp down on irresponsible promotions and the challenge 25 measures will be extremely valuable. However, we continue to have concerns about the social responsibility levy. We do not believe—and never did—that blanket measures should be applied to everybody; we  always believed that the measures should apply only to irresponsible traders, in whatever way that could be formulated. We await the regulations coming to the Parliament under super-affirmative procedure so that we can consider them. Although we have reservations about that aspect of the bill, it is, on balance, a good bill and one that we will support today. It is an important step but not the end of the story.

The sun has well and truly set and here we are with yet another sunset clause—this time on the provisions around the social responsibility levy. My amendments 44 and 45 call for the legislation to be reviewed after five years, with a Government report to the Parliament on its effect. As I said earlier, I believe that it is important that all new legislation is evaluated effectively, especially when many of the proposals are being tested in Scotland and do not apply across the United Kingdom. Representations from the industry bodies show that a majority of businesses in Scotland believe that a levy will push up costs to consumers and do little to impact on the problem drinkers whom the Government seeks to target. I believe that the Scottish Government should be prepared to be accountable to the Parliament and review the legislation after five years, taking into account the likely impact of the legislation on consumers, particularly those in lower income brackets, the economy and cross-border and online trade. Reporting to the Parliament on the impact of the legislation would enable MSPs to scrutinise fully the impact of the proposals and reach a consensus on whether the social responsibility levy has had the effect that the Government intended. Given that the Government has failed to bring forward any detail about the social responsibility levy and has just published a very vague consultation on the regulations, it is important that clear procedures are set out in primary legislation to ensure that the impact of the legislation is  scrutinised and can be halted if after five years it is having a negative effect. It is clear from the debates that we have had this afternoon that there is uncertainty about the social responsibility levy. That is why it is more important than ever that we have a sunset clause on the measure. I commend amendments 44 and 45 to the Parliament.

Amendment 41 seeks to ensure that any regulations to introduce a social responsibility levy would be consulted on for a minimum of 12 weeks, which is the period that the better regulation principles recommend. Given that little detail has been provided about the levy thus far, it is important that licence holders are given the opportunity to assess and respond to the impact of the levy on their business. We hope that, as part of any consultation process, the Scottish Government would publish all responses. Amendment 41 covers more or less the same ground as amendment 40, which was ably spoken to a moment ago by Jamie Stone. It pains me to say this, but Jamie Stone's amendment is more comprehensive than mine so, if his is agreed to, I will not move amendment 41.

We are happy to support amendment 13, but we have concerns about amendments 14, 21 and 22. Amendment 14 would provide licensing boards as well as local authorities with the power to impose functions such as determining, administering and collecting the social responsibility levy. We are concerned that if the levy were calculated at a local level, that could lead to inconsistent interpretation and different rates across the country. Many of those in the retail trade believe that it would be better to take a uniform approach across the country and are concerned about confusion and disruption for retailers. Similarly, amendments 21 and 22 will add chief constables and health boards to the list of people to be consulted before regulations can be laid for the social responsibility levy. Again, there is a concern that the involvement of health boards could lead to greater inconsistency between areas. Therefore, we are concerned and will oppose the amendments.

Yes.

Consistent to our opposition to the social responsibility levy, as it currently exists, we will oppose this amendment.

Amendment 29 and the consequential amendments in the group apply the social responsibility levy only to those licence holders who have been convicted of a relevant offence or a foreign offence. The amendments go to the heart of the division in the chamber between those members who believe that there should be a blanket approach to the social responsibility levy, and those who—like me and, I believe, Ross Finnie, given his earlier comments—believe that it should be targeted based on the polluter-pays principle. Given that the social responsibility levy is mentioned in the long title of the bill, my Conservative colleagues and I sought legal advice, which was that the levy could not be removed from the bill in its entirety. My amendments therefore seek to restrict the implementation of the provision on charging licence holders a levy. My Conservative colleague Mary Scanlon dissented from certain paragraphs of the committee's stage 1 report on the social responsibility levy, so it is no surprise that we are trying to amend section 10. My amendments would restrict the scope of the social responsibility levy to licence holders who had been convicted of a relevant offence or a foreign offence, as described in section 129 of the 2005 act. If the levy were to be introduced, many trade organisations and others would favour a fault-based approach that did not seek to punish the majority of responsible businesses that comply effectively with the law of this country. If a levy is to be applied, it should, in all equity, be directly  attributable only to those premises licence holders who have been convicted of a relevant offence under the 2005 act. As things stand, as we have heard, there is undoubtedly a lack of clarity around the levy, which many in the industry claim will be very difficult to implement and which could lead to responsible licensees being punished. It is worth noting that 51 per cent of the responses that the committee received in response to its call for evidence were in favour of the levy and 49 per cent of them were against it. That hardly represents a ringing endorsement of the principle. I hope that my amendments will help to put greater emphasis on enforcement of offences under the existing law, such as the offence of selling alcohol to a person who is intoxicated. The Scottish Grocers Federation has raised concerns about the disproportionate effect that the levy would have on smaller shops and thinks that there should be a fault-based measure rather than an indiscriminate, blanket levy, which could send the dangerous message that no individual needs to be responsible for their own actions. I move amendment 29.

To the charge of illogicality that Richard Simpson levied against me, I simply say that I appreciate that the amendments that I lodged on the social responsibility levy overlap and, in some cases, compete. As Richard Simpson knows, when amendments are lodged in advance of stage 3 proceedings, we cannot predict which of them will be successful, so I took a belt-and-braces approach. I apologise to Ross Finnie if I misunderstood his earlier stance. However, if we are going to define what is socially responsible, operating within the  law is a pretty clear and straightforward definition. There is nothing complicated about that. I appreciated Patrick Harvie's comments on the amendments. There is a division of opinion over whether we regard the social responsibility levy as a punishment for bad behaviour, or whether it is a blanket form of additional taxation, which it will be seen as. When I checked the briefing note from the Scottish Grocers Federation, which represents many small shopkeepers up and down the land, I was interested to note that it sees the levy as an additional burden and it is keen to support the amendments in my name. For that reason, I will press amendment 29.

Amendment 33 would make it clear that future regulations on the social responsibility levy would provide discounts for licence holders who demonstrated that they met or exceeded best practice, as set out in the regulations. The Health and Sport Committee and the Scottish Government have said that licensees who demonstrate best practice in their approach to social responsibility should be recognised under the levy regulations. Amendment 33 would ensure that that principle was enshrined in legislation. The Scottish Government has acknowledged that the majority of licence holders act in a responsible way. A social responsibility levy should not penalise licence holders who comply with best practice and contribute to projects in communities that support responsible drinking. The offer of maximum discounts for best practice would ensure that projects that are already substantially funded by the industry could continue to flourish and that funds would not be diverted to pay the social responsibility levy. There are numerous examples of successful voluntary projects that involve licence holders, which work towards national health and social objectives. In England, community alcohol partnerships, which aim to reduce underage drinking and antisocial behaviour, have had particular success. The industry recently substantially increased its support for Drinkaware and there is a great deal of good will from retailers to support the charity's campaigns and materials, through promotions to consumers at point of sale, display of information and leaflets, magazines and advertising. It is important that licence holders who support such activities are not disincentivised to contribute by having to pay a social responsibility levy on top of the resources that they allocate to the activities. The provision of a sliding scale of discounts to the levy would encourage wider support from the industry and recognise the good work that the industry does throughout Scotland. I welcome the cabinet secretary's support for amendment 33.

The worst aspect of the original set of proposals on alcohol that the SNP Government brought forward was the proposal to raise the drinking age from 18 to 21. We believe  that it is simply wrong to discriminate against 18 to 20-year-olds in this way. I can do no better than agree with the National Union of Students Scotland, which says in its briefing note that "it is inequitable that individuals aged 18-20 who consume alcohol responsibly in their own homes may be prevented from doing so, or criminalised if they continue to do so, in a country which considers them mature and responsible enough to vote, to fight for their country and to raise children." We would have the ridiculous scenario whereby a soldier who, on returning from active duty in Afghanistan, could not buy a bottle of beer to consume in his own home if he were under the age of 21. I am pleased to say that the proposals were roundly defeated when the Government brought them forward previously. I remember leading a debate in the Parliament two years ago that saw the defeat of the original universal ban. The Government has since made various attempts to bring back the proposals by the back door, not least by giving licensing boards the power at local level. We do not agree with the proposals, which are discriminatory and offensive to young people and should be rejected. For the reasons that I have set out, we will oppose amendment 7 and, as a belt-and-braces approach, support amendment 46.

The Scottish Conservatives will support Government amendments 4 to 6, and I commend the cabinet secretary for introducing them. Amendments 24 and 25 bring in a sunset clause in relation to the provisions of section 4, and it is with some trepidation that I propose them. The bill makes a number of wide-ranging changes to the way in which alcohol promotions and advertising can be conducted in Scotland. I believe that it is important that the new legislation is evaluated effectively, especially as many of the proposals will be tested in Scotland and will not apply throughout the rest of the United Kingdom. The Scottish Government should be prepared to be accountable to the Parliament and should review the legislation after five years, taking into account its likely impact on consumers—particularly those in lower income brackets—the economy and cross-border and online trade. By reporting to the Parliament on the impact of the legislation, the Government will enable MSPs to scrutinise fully the impact of the measures and to reach consensus on whether the restrictions on promotions have had the effect that the Government intended. It is in line with best practice that regulation is properly scrutinised in the Parliament and that an adequate assessment  of its impact is undertaken to ensure that there is a clear evidence base for legislation to continue after a set period. When, at stage 2, the cabinet secretary moved her amendment for a sunset clause on minimum pricing, she said the following: "I consider this to be a fair and reasonable way in which to introduce a new policy ... My suggestion ... is simple: let the policy run for six years, let ministers come back after five years with evidence of what impact it has had, and then take a decision on whether it should continue or be scrapped."—[ Official Report , Health and Sport Committee , 22 September 2010; c 3350.] I agree with those words. What is sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander. Given the fact that the Parliament has already voted for a sunset clause on a proposal that is not included in the bill, I trust that members will not hesitate to support a sunset clause on a part of the bill that still exists.

The arguments for and against minimum pricing  have been well rehearsed here in the chamber, at committee and elsewhere over the past years. In summary, we oppose minimum unit pricing, as we have made clear previously, because it would penalise moderate drinkers and the less well-off; it might well be illegal under EU law; it would damage the vital Scotch whisky industry; it would boost the profits of the supermarkets while not providing a penny for the health service or the justice system; and it could easily be got around, because people could buy their booze over the internet or do booze runs to Carlisle or Berwick. Despite all the assertions that we have heard, no compelling evidence has been produced in support of minimum pricing as a policy. All we hear is reference to the now widely discredited University of Sheffield modelling study, which even its own authors admitted had no greater currency than the weather forecast. Indeed, in proposing a sunset clause, the cabinet secretary in effect admitted that there was no compelling evidence in support of the policy. I know that the health lobby has been pressing on this issue. I read with interest the full-page advertisement in the Sunday Herald at the weekend with luminaries and health experts such as Ruth Wishart, journalist and Elaine C Smith, actress and comedienne, telling us what to do. Whatever next, Presiding Officer? Are we going to ask Dawn French for advice on university funding or ask Susan Boyle to give us advice on prison policy? I dare say that she would do a better job than the current justice secretary in that respect. I say two things to the health lobby. First, I believe that it is wrong to equate alcohol with tobacco. Tobacco is a product that is harmful if taken even in moderation, no matter how small the amounts are. Alcohol is a product that if taken in moderation is not only harmless but might actually be beneficial to health. [ Interruption .]

Secondly, I say as gently as I can to the British Medical Association Scotland, for which I have a great deal of respect, that if it wants to be taken seriously and have a constructive relationship with policy makers of all parties, it should not accuse those who take a different view of acting in bad faith. The Scottish Conservatives have proved over the past three and a half years that we will act constructively with the Scottish National Party Government, or other parties in the chamber, where we find common ground. Our opposition to minimum unit pricing is based not on party politics, but on our belief that it is a flawed policy. We have been consistent in that view for the past three years. There is no evidence to support the policy  and we believe that there is a better alternative: an increase in duty and alcohol taxation on a targeted basis. That is why we are in discussion with our colleagues at Westminster.

I am sorry, but I have no time. I urge the Parliament to reject minimum unit pricing, as the Health and Sport Committee did, because we can find a better way.

The minister will be aware of concerns about the rise in sexually transmitted infections among older members of the population. It might be comparatively simple to target messages at under-25s, who might be at college or university. What is the Government doing to try to target sexual health messages at more middle-aged members of society?

I welcome the opportunity that the Labour Party has given Parliament this morning to scrutinise all the spending commitments and promises that it has made, and its attempt to square try to square that with a reducing budget to the Scottish Government. After all, I am sure that we all agree that it is important that all political parties have credibility when it comes to finance issues. The public will not treat lightly any party that comes  forward with a huge list of uncosted pledges when there is not enough money to go round. That was exactly the point that was put to Mr Whitton on Monday evening when I was on the radio with him. His defence to the charge was an interesting one: he said that the SNP had broken all the promises that it made at the last election and that, because the SNP had not delivered on so many of its key pledges, it is alright for Labour to do so. His argument was rather like that of the little boy whose only defence, on being challenged when caught stealing a biscuit, is that his little sister had stolen two. I see that Mr Whitton is on his feet. I give him another chance to make his defence.

I listened very hard. Perhaps when Mr Whitton winds up for the Labour Party later in the debate, he can explain in detail how those commitments will be paid for. On the subject of daft things that Labour politicians have said, I have a word to say on the "ginger rodent". Members may be well aware of my long-standing interest in championing the red squirrel. Cynics and those in other parties may say that, as a Scottish Conservative, I have a natural affinity for an endangered species. That said, it is worth reminding the chamber that the Scottish public holds the red squirrel in very high regard. I remind members on the Labour benches—their leader, in particular—that such is the public affection for the red squirrel that a recent opinion poll showed that nearly 70 per cent of the population support a cull of the grey squirrel. I am glad to say that the high priestess of political correctness, Ms Harriet Harman, has now retracted her outrageous gingerist comments about the Chief Secretary to the Treasury, Danny Alexander, who is doing a fine job in the coalition Government of controlling public spending. Instead of resorting to playground insults, I wish that Labour would take a leaf out of his book. A serious challenge faces us in how to deal with the reduction in the Scottish Government budget. Let us be clear: the reduction is not as bad as the Scottish Government had anticipated. It is £900 million as opposed to the expected £1.2 billion. The SNP is claiming that the cut is larger than that. However, as the Scottish Parliament information centre has made absolutely clear, the bigger gap that the Scottish  Government alleges results from the Government having decided—entirely at its own initiative—to defer to next year the £300 million cut that was due to be made in the current year. Of course, that decision increases the challenge that we have in the coming year. On this side of the chamber, we have set out a range of proposals on how we would help to make the budget reduction. We have suggested a recruitment freeze, except for essential posts; taking Scottish Water out of state control; keeping prescription charges for those who currently pay; an initiative to cut absenteeism; and a public sector pay freeze for those who earn more than £21,000. Taken together, our proposals add up very close to the £900 million that needs to be found. In addition, we can find the money without having a negative impact on front-line services. If we listen to some of the comments that are made about the cuts that are coming, we would think that they were taking the country back to the dark ages. In fact, it is now clear that by the end of the spending review period, all they will do is put Scotland back into the spending position of 2006-07. In those days, we had a Labour-led Administration at Holyrood. Not even its harshest critic would now say that, at that time, we all were living in squalor and poverty. Difficult decisions will have to be made, but let us not overstate the impact of the cuts. What is Labour proposing? At its conference last weekend, the party came forward with a whole set of commitments. Notwithstanding Mr Whitton's protestations, the commitments have not been costed properly except by some very helpful researchers in the Scottish National Party who came up with a figure of £1.7 billion over the next four years. That is a tax bombshell of almost £3,000 for every Scottish household over the next session of the Parliament. [ Interruption .] If Labour members want to dispute the figures, let them say how Labour has costed the commitments and where the money will come from. Indeed, far from identifying where the money will come from, Labour is falling over itself to make new spending commitments. It is doing that, yet the same Labour party has the gall to criticise the SNP for playing the same trick at the elections three years ago. We should also not forget who has ultimate responsibility for the mess that the country's finances are in. In 1997, Labour inherited a golden economic legacy that turned to dust under its watch.

I am sorry, but I am in my last minute. Labour said that there would be no return to boom and bust, but delivered both. Those on the  Labour benches will argue that the cause of the recession was—

—the global crisis, as Mr Kerr has just said, and that the Labour Party should be absolved of blame because other countries were affected, too. They may say that, but we know that, on leaving office, Labour left us with the worst set of public finances in the G20. As Jeremy Purvis said, Labour left us with debts that cost us £120 million a day in interest payments alone. Let us not see any attempt by Labour to shift the blame on to anyone else. Labour was in charge; it made a mess of the public finances. Labour must bear the responsibility. What a pity that no member on the Labour benches has had the good grace to at least show a hint of contrition today over the problems that the country now finds itself in. The Parliament should reject the ludicrous and impertinent motion from the Labour Party—a party that is clearly not fit to be back in office.

If Mr Kerr is correct, why did Britain have the worst public finances in the entire G20 when Labour left office? Whose fault was that?

I thank the cabinet secretary for his statement and for advance sight of it. I join him in welcoming the decision to continue the building of the two aircraft carriers, which is an important one for the Scottish economy, and I also welcome the fact that there will be no reduction in the Scottish infantry as a result of the defence review. We are all acutely aware of the threat to the Moray economy. My father served in the Royal Air Force and was stationed at Kinloss for a while. The loss of the base will be keenly felt. The Scottish Conservatives will be part of the cross-party campaign to support the Moray task force. Annabel Goldie has already been in contact with the Prime Minister and the Secretary of State for Defence to make a robust case for Moray, and I can confirm that she will attend the rally on 7 November. Will the cabinet secretary say what consideration is being given to making a case to the Ministry of Defence for Kinloss to be used as a location for other defence establishments, such as a base for infantry regiments returning from Germany, and whether that process, currently scheduled for 2015, might be accelerated? Furthermore, are Scottish Enterprise and HIE involved in trying to identify how the existing skills base in the area could be used to attract inward investment?

To ask the Scottish Executive how the economic benefits from Scotland's Roman heritage are maximised. (S3O-11758)

I welcome the minister's response. Along with members of the Antonine Guard, I visited Ardoch fort at Braco in Perthshire on Monday. It is the best-preserved Roman site in Scotland, if not the whole United Kingdom, yet people could drive past Ardoch and not know that it is there. As a result, we are missing a great economic opportunity. Does the minister agree that much more needs to be done to capitalise on great Roman sites such as Ardoch? Will she look again at the case for a Roman heritage centre in Scotland, which would be a focus for the economic and educational opportunities that that important part of our heritage presents?

We on this side of the chamber have argued for the retention of the RAF bases in Moray, we will continue to do so and we will be happy to be associated with any cross-party campaign on that basis. Does the First Minister accept that the current UK Government inherited from its predecessors a £38 billion black hole in the defence budget, which made cuts inevitable? Will he join me and my constituents in Mid Scotland and Fife in welcoming the retention of the aircraft carrier contracts that will protect 6,000 jobs at Rosyth and on the Clyde, many hundreds of apprenticeships and the future of the Scottish shipbuilding industry?

To ask the Scottish Executive what its position is on supporting a council tax freeze in 2011-12. (S3O-11571)

The cabinet secretary should be clear that, in that ambition, he will have the support of the Scottish Conservatives. Does he agree that, as hard-working families across Scotland struggle with the consequences of Labour's recession, they would welcome a council tax freeze for a further year? Will he join me in condemning a Labour Party that is determined to hit those hard-working families with punishing council tax increases at a time when they can least afford to pay them?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to improve standards of literacy. (S3O-11469)

I hope that the minister will agree that when it comes to literacy standards and good English, the Scottish Government and its agencies should be setting a good example. Driving home the other night on the M90, I was horrified to see an illuminated sign with the message, "Fuller cars less queues". We know that the Scottish National Party has form for incorrectly using "less" instead of "fewer", but that is no excuse for the Scottish Government to do the same. How can we expect our young people to have a good standard of English when this Government sets such a shockingly bad example?

The debate has been extremely useful and has helped us to understand the approaches that different political parties take to higher education funding, which is an important issue. However, anybody who watched it looking for solutions or substantial proposals would have been disappointed by the speeches other than those from Conservative members. Indeed, the other parties seemed to spend all their time attacking each other for not making any concrete proposals while having none of their own. I hope that the irony of that was not lost on them. Let us be in no doubt that we face a serious situation in higher education. As we heard earlier from Gavin Brown, the principal of the University of Glasgow—Anton Muscatelli, who was well quoted throughout the debate—warned a fortnight ago that the university could run out of cash by 2013. That is only the latest in a series of comments that senior figures in higher education in Scotland have made about the unsustainability of the current funding model. The Scottish Conservatives have been talking about that for years. We were always concerned that the Labour Government's introduction of top-up tuition fees in England would provide a substantial funding advantage to universities down south and that, if the cap—currently £3,000 per year—were lifted, it could have serious consequences for the Scottish universities. We await the outcome of the Browne review to discover what will happen with the cap or whether some alternative funding method such as a graduate tax—much loved by Vince Cable—will be  proposed. In the meantime, it is clear that, in Scotland, the status quo is simply not an option. I welcome the fact that others have now joined the Scottish Conservatives in calling for a new approach. At the higher education conference that we ran last week, a diverse range of figures from across the political spectrum called for a new approach to university funding. They ranged from John McTernan, a former adviser to Tony Blair and Jim Murphy, to Liam Burns of NUS Scotland. I pay tribute to NUS Scotland for the mature approach that it has taken to the issue. I understand the pressure that its leadership is under from its members, who say that it must support free education and nothing less, but at least the leadership is realistic enough to understand that the debate is now not about whether there should be a graduate contribution but about what form it should take. Let me address the important issue of access for people from deprived backgrounds. Margaret Smith mentioned the NUS Scotland briefing for the debate, which talks about the Australian model. However, the NUS briefing quoted selectively from one Australian study. In fact, numerous studies have confirmed that the participation rates in Australia of those from deprived backgrounds have not declined since the introduction of deferred fees. Indeed, as I pointed out earlier to Margaret Smith, we in Scotland—alone of the four home nations—have so-called free education, but that has been coupled with a poorer rate of participation of those from deprived backgrounds than in England, Wales and Northern Ireland. As Gavin Brown said, even the NUS accepts in its briefing that participation in England has gone up following the introduction of top-up fees, albeit by a modest amount. However, that is completely the opposite of what the NUS warned prior to the introduction of top-up fees, when it said that levels would be decimated. We do not support up-front tuition fees and never have done. We need to base the debate on facts and evidence and not on assertion.

I am sorry. I will not. For the past four years, the Scottish Conservatives have been calling for an independently chaired review of higher education to consider a range of issues, not least funding. We still believe that an independent review would be useful but the funding issue has become so urgent that it is incumbent on all political parties to bring forward their proposals. We should not, as Karen Whitefield did, use calls for an independent review as a cover for having no positive ideas of our own.  I welcome Mike Russell's announcement that there will be a green paper from the Scottish Government later this year. I look forward with great interest to reading what he says, although, having heard the contributions from SNP back benchers such as Ian McKee and Bob Doris, I seriously wonder what options are left open to him. All political parties should come forward with their own proposals and we must strive to find a consensus on the best idea to safeguard the quality of Scottish higher education, while ensuring that we do not put an unreasonable burden on new graduates or deter new students from non-traditional backgrounds and poorer families. We believe that up-front tuition fees have failed that test, and we are happy to restate our opposition to that model. As David McLetchie reminded us, we have consistently opposed it since the Parliament was established. We are sceptical about proposals for a graduate tax, not least because it could mean some graduates paying back many more times the cost of their education. Our preference has been set out in this debate in the form of deferred fees with income contingent loans, based on a model that already exists in countries such as New Zealand. We appreciate that others will take a different view, but it is up to all parties to come forward with their proposals and to contribute to the debate—a debate that we have been proud to lead until now. For the sake of our universities, doing nothing is no longer an option. I listened to the contributions from the other parties and was disappointed that Claire Baker for Labour had nothing concrete to offer. I understand the Labour strategy in the run-up to the election is to refuse to be pinned down on the basis of any policies or to fall out with NUS Scotland, but for a party aspiring to be in government within seven months, it is not good enough to have nothing concrete to say on such an important issue.

If the Labour Party wants to hang its hat on the proud introduction of tuition fees in Scotland, I will leave that to the Labour Party to celebrate. Today, however, it has nothing concrete to say on the issue. The only exception to that was Hugh Henry, who made some positive comments.  I turn to the Liberal Democrats, as I fear I must. Margaret Smith had no new ideas—indeed, no ideas of any kind. When it came to Mike Rumbles, his idea was to increase income tax. It does not seem so long ago that the Liberal Democrats in this Parliament proposed cutting income tax by 3p in the pound. Now, it seems, they want to increase it.

Sorry. I do not have time. Has Mike Rumbles asked Mr Clegg or Danny Alexander? Thank goodness—

Thank goodness the resident Liberal Democrat intellectual pygmies are overshadowed by the towering intellectual colossus that is Vince Cable, a man who supports a graduate contribution.

Let me give Margaret Smith some statistics on the percentages of people from deprived backgrounds who go to university. Across the UK, the average is 32.3 per cent. In England, where there are top-up fees, the figure is 32.4 per cent. In Wales, where there are top-up fees, the figure is 32.5 per cent. In Northern Ireland, where there are top-up fees, the figure is 41.7 per cent. In Scotland, the figure is only 28.2 per cent. Does that not completely give the lie to the case that Margaret Smith is making?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

I apologise to the committee convener: due to my late arrival at the debate, I missed her speech, which was clearly a sad loss on my part. As I intimated earlier to the Presiding Officer, I had another appointment that unavoidably detained me elsewhere. Nevertheless, I have gained the flavour of the convener's remarks from complimentary comments that other members have made and I look forward to reading her speech in the Official Report  tomorrow. The convener was probably a little unfair to say that the report was dull. Perhaps we could characterise the debate as worthy but dull, and I was grateful to Mr Thompson for enlivening it a little with his speech.

I will step back from describing the convener as a little gem and move swiftly on to the substance of the debate. The background to the report is the experience of large IT systems in the NHS and other areas of government. It is fair to say that that experience has not been universally positive. Indeed, there are examples north and south of the border of a great many problems being identified with large IT systems that are intended to provide patient information to the NHS, which everybody would agree is an entirely desirable objective. I recently wrote to the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing to raise with her concerns that one of my constituents has raised with me about IT systems within NHS 24. Having been contacted by individuals who work in the sector, my constituent was concerned about the fitness for purpose of the IT systems that are being commissioned by the health service. When we are dealing with large-scale, public sector IT projects, it is almost inevitable that a large number of things will go wrong. Perhaps that is a function of the scale of those projects. We can all agree on the importance of a clinical portal and how valuable it would be. My local  health board, NHS Tayside, has made the most progress on that, along with NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, and we can learn lessons from that. As the report says, "The advantages of a clinical portal to improve the treatment of patients are clear". Health professionals believe that there is a great benefit to be had from "having immediate access to up-to-date patient information" and that that "is especially true in emergency care situations". There is some concern about patient confidentiality, which is always a concern when large amounts of information are being transferred to an IT system that is accessible at different points by a variety of individuals. BMA Scotland raised that point in its briefing for today's debate, and Ian McKee, who clearly has some experience in the field, went into the issue in more detail, raising concerns about the sharing of user names and passwords. The Government's response to the committee's report states that patients should be given access electronically wherever possible, perhaps through the future development of a patient portal or other digital medium, and I encourage the Government to go down that road. Telehealth is an area in which I have a greater personal interest. There are tremendous benefits to be derived from it for the NHS and for patients. During the debate, we have heard a number of examples of how it could be of benefit, and I was particularly taken by Helen Eadie's contribution on her experience with eye treatment in Fife, which has clearly been a great success. On a personal level, I pay tribute to the Airlie silver surfers, who are based near Kirriemuir in Angus, for the work that they have done to promote telehealth. I have seen them do a demonstration of telehealth in practice. Despite their age, they are real enthusiasts for the technology. Telehealth is a real benefit, particularly in rural areas. In parts of rural Angus and Perthshire, which I represent, journey times to local hospitals or health centres can be long. Members will know of my interest in health provision in highland Perthshire, particularly in and around Kinloch Rannoch, where for many years there have been concerns about the removal of out-of-hours GP cover. Part of the reason for that concern is the long distances that would have to be travelled by local residents if they had to visit a hospital, and journey times, particularly in winter, can put patients at risk. A quality telehealth product would certainly make a difference and help to alleviate some local concerns.  In avoiding unnecessary journeys, a proper programme of telehealth would undoubtedly mean a cost saving to the NHS. According to the briefing provided by Tunstall Healthcare, a leading provider of telehealth services, there is evidence that the average reduction in admissions to the NHS can be 30 per cent to 40 per cent over all long-term conditions. That means a better quality of care being provided to patients of the NHS in Scotland and a substantial cash saving, which must be welcomed in the current climate. There is one important prerequisite for telehealth use, which is good-quality broadband—and a number of members have raised that point. Over the years and on numerous occasions, I have raised my concern that rural areas in Scotland suffer from second-class broadband services compared with those available in urban settings. I was interested in Mr Thompson's contribution, which was no doubt made with an eye on a not-too-distant election in the Highlands and Islands. To Mr Thompson I say gently that it is not helpful to pass the buck entirely to Westminster on that issue. The Scottish Government has the opportunity to take the initiative to extend broadband in rural areas. It has already done that. We all know about the Avanti contract, which I believe had serious flaws and was not fit for purpose in many rural areas; I have the mailbag to testify to that.

Do I have time, Presiding Officer?

I will give way briefly.

Perhaps Mr Thompson and I can agree that what is needed is a partnership approach, in which the Scottish Government does its bit and the Westminster Government does its bit as well. That would be to everyone's benefit. The Government's approach to encouraging health boards to develop telehealth has not been a great success so far. More could be done. Having seen the Government's response, we need to question whether the Government is addressing the issue with sufficient urgency. Michael Matheson pointed out that the issue requires leadership, but from the evidence thus far I am not convinced that leadership is being provided. The  one clear message that comes out of today's debate is that the Parliament is unanimous in the view that telehealth is worth supporting. However, we require leadership from the Scottish Government. I look forward to hearing about that in the minister's response.

To ask the Deputy First Minister when the First Minister will next meet the Prime Minister. (S3F-2556)

As we speak, the pipes and drums are playing, the crowds are lining Princes Street and saltires are waving in the air. I hope that the First Minister will not be too disappointed when he finds out that they are not there for him. Talking of the First Minister, when he announced a bonfire of the quangos three years ago he said: "That means smaller, fitter and better government—more money for the people's priorities". We learn this week that, since he said that, we have 3,000 fewer teachers but an additional 1,400 bureaucrats are employed in central Government core staff. In the same period, the cost of quangos has soared by more than £600 million a year. When is the SNP Government going to do what it promised and cut the cost of the quango state?

This is not about the number of quangos or the number of brass plates on doors; it is about their total cost, which has gone up year on year. John Swinney has promised that he will save £39 million a year from quangos, but that comes nowhere near the massive increase in the cost of our quangos of £600 million in three years. Alex Salmond promised smaller, fitter and better government, but the quango state is alive and well with the SNP. Will Alex Salmond's legacy be a bigger, bloated bureaucracy?

I thank the cabinet secretary for providing advance sight of her statement. I welcome her reassurance that there were no adverse outcomes attributable to the breakdown. I also welcome the existence of the buddy system with the Northern Ireland Ambulance Service and the North West Ambulance Service, which is a clear example of the union dividend in practice. The cabinet secretary acknowledged that distress was caused to individuals. It is therefore vital that lessons be learned and steps taken to prevent any repetition, if possible. The Scottish Ambulance Service is conducting an investigation, but did the cabinet secretary consider an investigation by an external agency rather than an internal investigation? Secondly, what will be the timescale for implementation of any recommendations in the final report when it is produced?

Has the Scottish Government made any assessment of the percentage of Scottish gross domestic product that an independent Scottish  Government would have had to spend on bailing out the Royal Bank of Scotland and HBOS in the same way that the UK Treasury did?

Notwithstanding Joe FitzPatrick's claims, does the First Minister not accept that there is no evidence in support of all the extravagant claims for minimum unit pricing, other than the now widely discredited University of Sheffield modelling study that was commissioned by the Scottish Government, which even its own authors accepted in evidence to the Health and Sport Committee had no greater currency, authority or standing than a weather forecast?

Having heard the First Minister's statement, the question in everyone's mind is this: what is the point of this SNP Government? It started with such high hopes. I know people who voted SNP for the first time three years ago.

I know lots of people who voted Tory, and I can tell Mr Paterson that there will be many more who will vote Tory in the future. Those people believed that Scotland needed a new start. They were beguiled by the First Minister—as we know, he is sometimes a very beguiling chap—and they thought that he would be a breath of fresh air in the Government of Scotland. One by one, they have been disappointed. They include parents and teachers who voted SNP because they believed in having smaller class sizes and classes of no more than 18 in primaries 1 to 3. They include students and their parents who voted to dump the debt, to bring back student grants instead of student loans and to get rid of student debt. They also included young couples starting out in life who voted for the SNP's first-time buyers grant of £2,000 and pensioners who voted for the SNP because they found attractive the idea of a local income tax. People in all those groups have been let down and will not be voting SNP again. Frankly, it is not good enough for SNP members to trumpet the fact that they have delivered 77 out of 94 of their headline commitments, because the ones that they have not delivered are the key policies for which people voted for them three and a half years ago. There is nothing in the programme that has been announced today to make up for those broken promises. With the greatest respect for legislation such as the proposed long leases bill and health (certification of death) bill, which I am sure are extremely worthy and important, they do not make up for all the SNP's broken promises. The disappointment of the ordinary voter is surely as nothing compared to the disappointment that must be faced by long-serving SNP supporters over the last greatest betrayal: the refusal to bring a referendum bill to Parliament. It is an astonishing U-turn by the First Minister who, on 3 September, told us: "Our aim to introduce a referendum bill on Scottish independence is widely known, so I am delighted to reaffirm to the chamber our intention to introduce it in 2010, in line with our manifesto commitment."— [ Official Report , 3 September 2008; c 10308.]  That commitment was repeated by Nicola Sturgeon, who said: "Let me make it clear, as the First Minister has, that we will fulfil our manifesto commitment to introduce a referendum bill in 2010."— [ Official Report , 3 September 2008; c 10328.]

I will not, at the moment.  It is a betrayal of the loyal and sheep-like members on the SNP back benches, who have told us for years that the referendum bill is coming. It was only in December that my good friend Mr Doris said: "In 2010, the SNP will legislate for a referendum, and Parliament will decide whether to vote it through or bring it down. That will be the Parliament's democratic decision."— [ Official Report , 9 December 2009; c 22001.]  Today, Mr Doris performed a U-turn that the Stig would have been proud of, while denouncing others for having no principles. It is not just Mr Doris. Linda Fabiani said: "I am pleased that the national conversation will come to a climax with the referendum bill, as was laid out in the manifesto on which we were elected—we are bringing it on exactly on timetable."— [ Official Report , 3 September 2009; c 19222.]  Kenneth Gibson, not usually shy of giving us his opinion, said: "I am delighted that a referendum bill is included in the programme for government."— [ Official Report , 3 September 2009; c 19287.]  All of them disappointed and all of them let down by their party leadership.

No, thank you. There is worse still than the treatment of SNP back benchers in the Parliament. The people who we should really feel sorry for are the SNP diehards throughout the country. Let us pity those poor souls, in their but and bens, the kilt about their knees and the tartan tammies on their heads, Dougie MacLean playing on a CD in the background, who were sold the gradualist line by the SNP. Let us remember the narrative from the SNP that went: "What we will do as a party is we will build up support in opposition, and we will then win an election and get into Government. We will demonstrate competence in Government, we will hold a referendum and we will get independence"—a strategy that has now disintegrated into dust. How must those poor SNP diehards feel now? The first SNP Government in history has bottled out in its biggest test, has failed spectacularly to achieve its aim of independence and is scared even to put that to the test of the Scottish Parliament. We had a flavour of that from Margo MacDonald earlier in the debate. Margo spoke more sense on the issue than was spoken in the entirety of the contributions from the SNP benches. SNP supporters throughout the country must be asking themselves, "What is the point of the SNP Government?" That is without even mentioning the £2 million cost of the national conversation, which was referred to by my colleague, Jackson Carlaw.  How much better that money could have been spent. Now that we are not having a referendum, can we please have that money back from the SNP? What we have seen today is a sad apology for a legislative programme from a sad apology for a Government. There is no point to the Government. It is an Administration that is past its sell-by date, and which is led by a lame duck and a feartie First Minister. An election cannot come soon enough, so that Scotland can get the fresh start that it desperately needs.

Even though I disagree with Margo MacDonald, she has made by far the best argument that I have heard in the Parliament for Scottish independence. Should she not stand for the SNP leadership?

Bring it on!

I am sure that, being a fair man, the First Minister will want to acknowledge the decision of the UK Government to scrap Labour's jobs tax, thus saving the NHS in Scotland more than £50 million a year.

Come on.

According to paragraph 34 of Audit Scotland's report, "The steering group members were not informed of the Scottish Government loan." EventScotland was represented on the steering group—indeed, the group's chair was from EventScotland—but, in his statement, the minister said: "The Scottish Government made senior EventScotland officials aware of the loan—that was appropriate, and that was done." Those two statements cannot both be true. Who is telling the truth?

Not nobody; 17 per cent of people wanted it.

I start by thanking our friends in the Liberal Democrats for giving us the opportunity to debate this important subject, and I congratulate Ross Finnie on his magisterial opening speech. The Scottish Conservatives are proud of the policy of free personal care, which was introduced with our support in 2002. Free personal care means that, regardless of income, capital assets or marital status, all those who are assessed as needing personal nursing care will have it paid for for them. It is an important policy, not just because it protects those who have worked hard all their lives, acquired property and saved for their retirement in order that they can protect themselves and pass money on to their families,  but because it protects the dignity and independence of our older citizens, to whom we owe so much. It is worth mentioning as an aside that the policy of free personal care is one area in which we in Scotland do things differently from our counterparts south of the border. That applies to the Conservative party as much as it does to others. Free personal care is a policy that we support but which is not supported by our UK counterparts, and it is therefore one of a number of areas of difference between us. Cynics might suggest that, unlike our colleagues south of the border, the Scottish Conservatives support personal care while, unlike us, our colleagues in England and Wales have success in winning elections—but I would not want to make that point. I am sure that all of us from our constituency mailbags can remember having been contacted by elderly people, or perhaps their relatives, who are in a state of real distress at having to sell family homes to fund expensive long-term care. The introduction of free personal care has not solved those problems entirely, as food and lodging costs still have to be paid and can be extremely expensive, but a major contribution has nevertheless been made to removing what was often a heartbreaking situation for many families. That is not to say that the policy is without its challenges. Free personal care is an expensive policy to implement, and it is becoming more so. As we have heard, the major driver for that will be demographic changes. The fact that people are living longer is a good thing, but it comes at a cost. In his independent review of free personal and nursing care in April 2008, Lord Sutherland found that, although the cost of the policy was anticipated to be £136 million in 2006 rising to £227 million in 2022, in reality the total bill was £256 million in 2006 and it was estimated that it would rise to £813 million in 2031. No one can deny that there are serious financial challenges ahead. Notwithstanding all that I have said about costs, the Scottish Conservatives value the policy, and for that reason we are pleased to support the terms of the Liberal Democrat motion. However, if the policy is to be affordable in the long term, we will have to find savings elsewhere to help to pay for it, which is the point that is addressed in my amendment. We have to find more savings within administrative costs throughout the NHS in order to protect front-line services. The Audit Scotland report on locum doctors that came out last week gave a very good example of where savings can be found, when it identified £6 million that health boards could find quite easily if they were to operate more efficiently.  On free personal care, Lord Sutherland suggested a single budget for health and social care and a common commissioning policy to eliminate duplication. That reflects a measure for which the Scottish Conservatives have been calling for years. It was also the unanimous recommendation of this Parliament's Health and Community Care Committee when it looked at the issue as far back as 2000. It would represent a way of doing things differently and would result in a transfer of social care budgets from local authorities to the NHS or possibly to some other body. However, we believe that we need to consider that seriously if we are to free up the savings that are required. That is the point of our amendment. The Scottish Conservatives are proud to support free personal care, and we support the Liberal Democrat motion. However, if the policy is to be affordable in the longer term, we need to find savings. For that reason, I have pleasure in moving the amendment in my name. I move amendment S3M-6633.2, to insert at end: "; urges the Scottish Government to continue to identify savings in administrative costs that can be reinvested in frontline services, and, in this context, calls on the Scottish Government to give serious consideration to the proposal from Lord Sutherland to merge health and social care budgets."

Will Mr Kerr take an intervention?

To ask the First Minister, in light of the recent comments by Lord Sutherland on free personal care, whether the Scottish Government considers that this policy is affordable in the long term. (S3F-2483)

I welcome the First Minister's response. I am sure that all members value the policy of free personal care and welcome the Westminster coalition Government's pledge to protect health spending, which will mean that funds in the area will be available to the Scottish Government through Barnett consequentials. The First Minister will know that Lord Sutherland has called for a single budget to be established for health and social care, to provide savings to  plough into front-line services. Will the Scottish Government give active consideration to the idea?

I congratulate Christina McKelvie on securing the debate and commend her for her excellent motion, which I was pleased to sign. I join her in congratulating and thanking Duncan Brown for his considerable achievement, which she set out in her speech. As we have heard, the Victoria Cross is the highest and most prestigious award for gallantry in the face of the enemy that can be awarded to British and Commonwealth forces. Some say that we use the term "hero" too often these days but, without doubt, individuals who receive the Victoria Cross are true heroes who have put their lives at great peril or have lost their lives serving this country and protecting their comrades. Christina McKelvie's motion rightly highlights recipients of the Victoria Cross from Lanarkshire, as we would expect. My region of Mid Scotland and Fife is the birthplace and resting place of many men who won the Victoria Cross. If members will indulge me for a moment, I will mention one or two of them. Kirriemuir cemetery in Angus is the resting place of two Victoria Cross winners: Private Charles Melvin of the Black Watch, who won his VC at Istabulat, Mesopotamia—modern-day Iraq—on 21 April 1917 and Corporal Richard Burton, who won his VC at Monte Ceco in Italy on 8 October 1944.  Captain William Stewart of the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders was born in Grandtully in Perthshire and is buried there. He won his VC at Secundra Bagh during the Indian mutiny on 16 November 1857. Flight Lieutenant William Reid of the Royal Air Force won his VC during the raid on Düsseldorf on 3 November 1943 and now rests in Crieff cemetery. Sergeant Alexander Thompson of the Black Watch won his VC at Fort Ruhya during the Indian mutiny on 15 April 1858. He lies in Wellshill cemetery in Perth. Dunfermline's cemetery is the final resting place of Dunfermline's Sergeant David Hunter of the Highland Light Infantry, who won his VC at Moeuvres in France on 16 September 1918. The spread of those names and the different conflicts in which they fought in all parts of the world illustrates the tremendous contribution that Scottish soldiers have made over the centuries as part of the British Army. Of course, those men are just some of the brave men who have risked their lives for their country and the cause of freedom. I welcome the opportunity to put on the record my gratitude for their unflinching courage in the face of the enemy. I am sure that Christina McKelvie and all members present will want to join me in thanking Michael, Lord Ashcroft, who has the largest Victoria Cross collection in the world, for allowing his collection to go on public display, following his £5 million donation to the Imperial War Museum. I am sure that we are all grateful to Lord Ashcroft for his generous support of many good and worthwhile causes. Lord Ashcroft is also the author of the book "Victoria Cross Heroes", which was published in 2006 to mark the 150th anniversary of the creation of the Victoria Cross. I hope that Christina McKelvie and all other members present will take the opportunity to read that publication if they have not already done so. The nation genuinely owes a debt of gratitude to Lord Ashcroft for bringing together so many VCs, which in themselves are worth several million pounds, and providing the funds for a new gallery to show them to the public. It is hard, if not impossible, to set out in words the bravery, devotion and sacrifice of all the individuals who have been mentioned in the debate and in Duncan Brown's book. I hope that the debate goes some way towards showing our respect for and debt to those men. I thank Christina McKelvie for giving us this opportunity.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has had further discussions with the National Trust for Scotland since September 2009 regarding the future of the Bannockburn heritage centre. (S3O-10876) I refer to my membership of the National Trust for Scotland in asking that question.

I thank the minister for that welcome news. As we know, the 700th anniversary of the battle of Bannockburn, which is during the 2014 year of homecoming, is coming up. I am sure  that the minister agrees that the Bannockburn visitor centre is now looking very tired and in need of refurbishment. Will she consider the model that the National Trust developed at Culloden battlefield, for example, as one that could be followed to develop a fitting visitor centre at Bannockburn that will attract visitors to the Stirling area and, indeed, to Scotland?

I accept that there is a link between price and consumption, as I made clear in my speech, but the matter is complex. The link is not simple, which is why simply bringing in minimum pricing will not cure the problem. That is also why, at a UK level, we are committed to targeted increases in duty on problem drinks. We believe that that is the right way forward.

The Scottish Conservatives agree that Scotland has a growing problem with alcohol abuse and that action is needed to tackle it. Although we may disagree with some of the measures that it has proposed, we commend the Scottish Government for taking the issue seriously and for at least attempting to take action to try and address it. Some of what is in the bill we can support, some of it we are sceptical about and some of it we must oppose. In the time that is available, I will try to set out our position and explain the rationale behind my amendment. I should say at the outset that it must be a source of real regret that we as a Parliament have not been able to find a set of proposals about which we can all agree. I believe that everyone here understands that alcohol is a problem in our society, that Government action is required and that there is a link of some sort between price and consumption. However, we have been unable to agree on the Scottish National Party Government's plans for minimum pricing and I am truly sorry that the SNP's obsession with this one element has allowed it to dominate the debate and has prevented us from moving on to discuss other areas where there might be consensus on what can be done. In the past, we in the Scottish Conservatives have set out our beliefs that minimum pricing would penalise responsible drinkers, that it is of dubious legality and that it would do serious damage to the vital Scotch whisky industry and Scotland's economic interests. Our position in that  respect has not changed, but there is now another important and relevant factor, which is the signalled intent of the coalition Government at Westminster to increase alcohol taxation and pricing to ensure that it tackles binge drinking without unfairly penalising responsible drinkers and important local industries. Coupled with that is an intent to legislate to prohibit sales of alcohol below cost price.

If the cabinet secretary is patient and waits for the budget that is due in a couple of weeks, she will soon learn by how much the duty on such problem drinks will increase. As I said, that is the UK Government's signalled intent, which is precisely why I have called on the cabinet secretary to be patient. If she is prepared to wait a couple of weeks instead of rushing headlong into progressing the bill, she might well see concrete proposals with which she should be working. In any case, all of that means that minimum pricing as a policy has been overtaken by events; it is yesterday's solution, so the sensible move would be for the Scottish Government to put its plans on hold and to engage with the UK Government on a shared way forward. Notwithstanding all that has been claimed on the issue by the Scottish Government, the fact remains that there is no evidence base to support the introduction of minimum pricing. All that we have is the now widely discredited University of Sheffield study that the Health and Sport Committee analysed in detail. That study did not amount to evidence; it was simply modelling using available data. Indeed, Dr Petra Meier, the principal investigator, admitted to the committee that modelling was "like the weather forecast". I am sure that all of us who are old enough to remember Michael Fish on the BBC all those years ago confidently telling us that there would no hurricane will have regarded Dr Meier's claim with wry amusement. Serious public policy proposals require a more secure evidence base than the one that is provided by the Sheffield study. Moreover, in its devastating critique of the Sheffield report, the Scotch Whisky Association identified a number of key failures, not least the fact that although alcohol consumption over the past five years has either been stable or decreasing, there has in that period been an increase in alcohol deaths and alcohol-related hospital discharges. That disproves the central contention in the Sheffield report that there is a clear link between price, consumption and harm. There are many other weaknesses in the  Sheffield report. Time does not permit me to list them all but it is clear, as our amendment says, that the evidence to support minimum pricing is simply not there.

I accept that there is some link between price and consumption. However, I do not accept that the modelling in the Sheffield university study is entirely accurate or is based on evidence. Indeed, Nicola Sturgeon earlier conceded that the evidence base is not there, and I think that that is a very important element in this debate. The committee looked at a range of other issues around minimum pricing. It was highly sceptical, for example, about whether minimum pricing could not be got around by cross-border or internet sales. More and more people are buying their alcohol over the internet: that trend would be likely to accelerate if minimum pricing were introduced. If I buy my wine from Laithwaites or Tesco and I can save money by having it delivered to my door from a base in Carlisle or Berwick, that is what I will do. There will be thousands like me. As for the question of legality, the best that can be said is that the matter is still in doubt. Without knowing the price, it is impossible to say for sure whether minimum pricing would be legal. We are therefore being asked to take a leap of faith. The Government is asking us to support a policy when we do not know whether it would be legal and enforceable. That is highly unsatisfactory. There is serious concern in the spirits industry about the economic impact of minimum pricing. The Scotch Whisky Association has argued that a minimum pricing policy could lead to international copycat practice whereby key export markets would be expected to follow a Scottish health-justified trade barrier precedent. Already, South Korea has tried to introduce a health tax on Scotch, and Thailand is trying to impose warning labels on whisky bottles. According to the SWA, minimum pricing could result in a loss of exports worth £600 million a year. The Scotch whisky industry has damned the policy of minimum pricing as being the most serious threat to its future competitiveness. Those warnings should not be dismissed lightly by the SNP Government, particularly at a time of recession.

With the greatest of respect to Dr McKee, if I were to take advice on such matters, I would listen to the experts in the field from the industry body, which is the Scotch Whisky Association. It represents the whisky producers and is concerned about the impact of the proposed policy. With respect, the Scotch Whisky Association, which has a huge legal team that spends its entire time legislating in countries around the world to protect the Scotch whisky brand, knows more about the situation than Dr McKee or the SNP Government, so we should respect its views. Given all the problems with the minimum pricing policy, it must make more sense to go down the tried, tested and legal route of tackling the problem through taxation. As I stated earlier, we agree that action needs to be taken on the easy availability of cheap alcohol, which is why the coalition Government at Westminster has proposed to take action on alcohol prices by means of the tax and duty system, and to legislate on a ban on the sale of alcohol below cost price. Should the ban be introduced in only England and Wales, we would wish to see a similar measure in Scotland, which could be done by a legislative consent motion. I turn briefly to other parts of the bill. We have some sympathy with the proposals to restrict promotional activity, but like the Scottish Grocers Federation, we wish to see more detail on those before we come to a final view. We support the introduction of legal-age verification at age 21 or, as Labour's commission suggested, at 25. In relation to the sale of alcohol to under 21s, the Scottish Parliament previously saw off an attempt by the SNP Government to introduce a blanket ban on such sales. It is regrettable that there has been an attempt to reintroduce the measure by the back door, giving local licensing boards discretion as to whether to implement the bans on a territorial basis. We believe that that would cause a confusing postcode lottery that might well lead to a displacement of drink-related problems among the 18 to 21 age group so, like the Health and Sport Committee, we oppose the proposal. Finally, we cannot support the social responsibility levy as a blanket provision. We have sympathy for the polluter-pays principle, whereby those who are responsible for problems have to pay the cost of them, but what is proposed in the  bill is simply another form of taxation and that is inappropriate, particularly at a time of recession. The Scottish Conservatives regard the bill as being flawed. For the reasons that I have set out, we cannot support minimum pricing. We see merit in some of the proposals, so we will not oppose the bill's passage to stage 2 where, if it survives, we will look to lodge amendments to strike out section 1 of the bill and some of the other provisions with which we have difficulty. As I said earlier, we would much prefer that the Scottish Government wait and see exactly what proposals on tax and duty will be introduced by the UK Government before it proceeds further with the bill. Above all, we believe minimum pricing to be a policy that will penalise responsible drinkers. It is of dubious legality and it will be highly damaging to the Scotch whisky industry. For those reasons, the proposed policy must be struck from the bill, and accordingly I have pleasure in moving the amendment in my name. I move amendment S3M-06511.1, to insert at end: "but, in so doing, believes that there is no evidence to support section 1, which would introduce a minimum price per unit of alcohol, and accordingly calls on the Scottish Government to lodge and move an amendment at stage 2 to delete section 1."

Given everything that the cabinet secretary has said about the lack of political support for minimum pricing, and given that we know that the UK Government is determined to take forward proposals on taxation and a ban on below-cost selling, would not it be sensible for the Scottish Government to pause, wait and see what the UK Government does and work in conjunction with colleagues south of the border, rather than run down the road of minimum pricing, for which it does not have support?

They will be higher.

I congratulate Peter Peacock on his motion on what is an interesting and important subject. As somebody who is still on occasion an active hillwalker and who has climbed just over half the Munros—I will get there eventually, I hope, if I am spared and well—I share many of the concerns that Peter Peacock raises about intrusions in the Scottish landscape. We should be concerned when there are intrusions of that nature into our wild land, which is a precious asset to us in Scotland. The Highlands of Scotland represent the last wilderness certainly in western Europe and perhaps further afield. We must recognise that people who come to Scotland and the Highlands come predominantly because they want to see our landscape. We need to remember that the tourism industry in Scotland, particularly in the Highlands, is our most important one. People come to see an unspoilt landscape—they do not come for the weather and, despite the fact that we have some very good restaurants, they do not come for the food. They do not come because it is cheap. They come because we offer landscape and heritage, so we should be careful not to put either of those at risk. I share many of the concerns that have been raised about intrusions into the landscape, but I will qualify that in two ways. First, there must be a balance, because, just as there is a legitimate concern on the part of recreational and landscape groups about intrusions into the rural landscape, those who derive a living from the land also have a legitimate interest in being able to do so without being unduly hampered by legislation. In that respect, I agree with many of the comments of my colleague Sir Jamie McGrigor. I read with interest  the briefing notes that were provided by NFU Scotland and the Scottish Rural Property and Business Association. We must remember that the economies of many of our upland areas are fragile. Hill farming is in a precarious state and the economies of many of our sporting estates are not much better. Our sporting estates, for all that they are viewed as a rich man's paradise, sustain a level of employment in many remote and rural areas that would not otherwise be possible. We should be careful not to put up barriers to people deriving an economic living from those remote areas.

Maureen Watt makes a perfectly reasonable point. As I said a moment ago, it is a question of balance and trying to ensure that one set of interests does not override another. My second and final point is about perspective. Although it is true that hill roads intrude on the rural landscape, there are much greater intrusions. I refer to the proliferation of the industrial structures—the wind turbines and associated pylons—that are being constructed all over upland Scotland. Members will know of my interest in that subject, which I have spoken about over many years, not least in relation to the consent given to the Beauly to Denny power line. It seems to me that those who complain vociferously about hill tracks without having too much to say about wind turbines or pylons are disobeying the biblical injunction not to strain at gnats while swallowing camels. When most people look at our rural landscape, they find 400ft-high wind turbines on our hills far more intrusive than the odd hill track at ground level, which is probably not visible from terribly far away. Indeed, as Jamie McGrigor pointed out, many of the wind turbine and pylon construction projects require hill tracks to be constructed, albeit with planning permission. Those projects are responsible for many of the hill tracks that cause offence. With those qualifications in mind, I say to Peter Peacock that I would be nervous about supporting his call to bring all hill tracks within the remit of planning permission but, nevertheless, I welcome his giving us the opportunity to discuss these important subjects this evening.

To ask the First Minister what the benefits to Scotland will be of designating 2014 as the next year of homecoming. (S3F-2446)

I thank the First Minister for his reply and for the interest that he takes in my press releases. What lessons does he believe that the Scottish Government can learn from homecoming in 2009? I know that he said that it was a great success for Scotland. Why then have we seen the disgraceful sight of Scottish National Party ministers briefing the press against the current chief executive of VisitScotland, the very agency tasked with that important job?

I agree with Nicola Sturgeon. What has been laid bare this morning is what will for the next 11 months undoubtedly be the Labour Party's line of attack on the SNP Government and—when it fits better—on the parties of the United Kingdom coalition Government. The line is to raise the spectre of cuts in the NHS and elsewhere and to try to lay the blame for them at the door of the Scottish Government or the Conservative and Liberal Democrat parties as it so fits. That is a deeply dishonest line of attack with which we should have no truck. After listening to Jackie Baillie setting out the case for the prosecution, I fear that she has watched too many screen adaptations of John Grisham novels. Picture the scene in a crowded courtroom in a hot southern US state: Jackie Baillie is the dogged district attorney, in the Susan Sarandon role, and Nicola Sturgeon is cast as Sandra Bullock playing the sparky young defence attorney. Sadly for the prosecution, its case is full of holes and the jury of the Scottish people is unlikely to be convinced. The argument that Labour sets out in its motion is that cuts are being made to the NHS, that they will have a detrimental impact on patient care and that the cabinet secretary should intervene urgently to prevent them. The motion's subtext, which is not made explicit, is that the cuts result from NHS budget cuts. It is curious that, when I intervened to press Jackie Baillie on the point, she denied that the Labour case was that the overall NHS budget had been cut; she was less convincing later in her speech. I am now altogether confused about what Labour blames the cuts on—is it management in the NHS or cuts  in the overall budget? If Jackie Baillie would like to intervene to provide clarity, I would be delighted.

Jackie Baillie makes a different point from that which she made in response to my intervention. The Labour Party's position is now that not enough money is being spent on the NHS. However, as Nicola Sturgeon said, the fact is that NHS spending in Scotland has risen, as it has in previous years. If cuts were made to the Scottish budget, the responsibility for them would rest fairly, squarely and solely with the Labour Party, which was responsible in government for the most chronic mismanagement of the public finances in our country's history. Any cuts that are coming to the Scottish budget are Labour cuts—not Tory cuts, SNP cuts or even Lib Dem cuts. If the Labour Party were honest in its concern about NHS funding—if it were really concerned that Barnett consequentials were not coming through to the NHS in Scotland—we might have expected it to make proposals to increase NHS spending in this year's budget discussion. However, the Labour Party lodged not a single amendment to the Budget (Scotland) (No 4) Bill to provide for additional funding for the NHS. Neither has the Labour Party indicated which budget lines should be cut to fund an increase in the NHS budget. Any party that argues seriously for more money must make it clear where that will come from. Labour has failed on that score. Like the rest of the public sector, the NHS has of course been tasked with finding efficiency savings. Those efficiency savings of 2 per cent per year are lower than those that were recommended by Jackie Baillie's good friend Wendy Alexander. When Wendy Alexander was Labour leader, in a period that has now been conveniently airbrushed from Scottish Labour history, she famously called for efficiency savings of 3 per cent per year—half as much again.

The important point is that efficiency savings mean that money comes out of the budget. I am interested to hear that the Labour  Party is retreating from the position that Wendy Alexander took. I reject Labour's proposition that efficiency savings will automatically have a negative impact on front-line services. The challenge for the NHS is to ensure that savings can be made but that front-line services are protected. We believe that that can be done. As we pointed out last weekend, by changing the way in which drugs are procured—moving to generic drugs from brand-named drugs—six health boards have been able to save more than £20 million per year; the others could follow suit. There are savings to be made. We reject the nonsense that that will automatically have a negative impact on patient care. The final and most damning criticism of the Labour case on cuts is that it is sheer rank hypocrisy. After all, as the Minister for Health and Community Care, Jackie Baillie's colleague Andy Kerr—a man who, unsurprisingly, is now rarely seen at health debates in the Parliament—proposed real cuts to front-line services: namely, the closure of the accident and emergency units at Monklands and Ayr hospitals. Voters in Lanarkshire and Ayrshire will remember that those real, front-line service cuts were proposed by Labour, not by the Scottish Government or the Conservative party. I welcome the terms of the Government amendment, especially the reference to the UK Government's commitment that health service spending will be protected. The Barnett consequentials from that will mean additional money from the Scottish Government. I welcome Nicola Sturgeon's commitment last week, which she has repeated today, that all of those Barnett consequentials will be applied to the health service. Even with the additional sums, there will be a need for efficiency savings. What is important is that front-line services are protected. In the NHS, we should measure outcomes, not inputs. By doing things differently, we can find money to be reinvested. We should test the NHS not by the number of people who are employed in it but by the quality of patient care. It is important that we shift our perspective. My amendment makes a further point about NHS funding—that Labour's jobs tax would have removed £40 million from the budget of the NHS in Scotland. Thank goodness that the new coalition Government at Westminster is reversing that proposal, which will mean more money for the NHS. I am sure that that decision will have the full support of Labour members, so concerned are they about NHS funding north of the border. I fear that, today, the district attorney will be disappointed. Having heard the case for cuts that  Jackie Baillie has set out, I fear that it is not so much a question of the case being not proven as of there being no case to answer. I move amendment S3M-6469.1.2, to insert at end: ", and also welcomes the commitment from the UK coalition government to reverse Labour's increase in national insurance, which would have cut £40 million from the budget of the NHS in Scotland."

I congratulate Jackie Baillie on having a grammatically correct slogan, in contrast to the Scottish National Party. I ask her to tell us, so that I can properly follow her line of argument, whether the Labour Party's position is that the NHS in Scotland is underfunded. If it is, by how much is it underfunded?

This is my first speech in my new role as Conservative shadow cabinet secretary for health and wellbeing, so I thank Nicola Sturgeon and Jackie Baillie for their warm welcome. I am very conscious of the fact that I am breaking into what has until now been—with apologies to Mr Finnie—very much a woman's world. I am sure that Mr Finnie will welcome the fact that I bring some gender balance to the front benches for health debates. At the outset, I pay tribute to my predecessor, Mary Scanlon, for all her excellent work on the health brief in the previous three years and, indeed, in previous parliamentary sessions. Of course, Mary Scanlon remains a very important member of the Conservative health team and will continue to sit on the Health and Sport Committee,  where I know her contributions are valued. I also pay tribute to Jackson Carlaw, who is moving on to pastures new from his work as shadow minister for public health and sport. I welcome back to the health brief Dr Nanette Milne, who brings a huge wealth of experience both in the field and, indeed, in the Parliament. The Government's motion welcomes the progress that has been made in reducing waiting times for patients. It would be churlish to do other than join in that welcome. If we expected Jackie Baillie to be churlish this afternoon, we were disappointed. However, I strike a note of caution. In the past, the Conservatives have voiced scepticism about an overemphasis on target setting within the NHS. Waiting times should not be considered the most important indicator of performance, because overall patient outcomes and a range of other measures are more important. For that reason, we have sympathy with the terms of the Liberal Democrat amendment in Mr Finnie's name and, in the spirit of the new Conservative and Liberal Democrat relationship, we will support the Liberal Democrat amendment. [ Interruption .] I see that Mr Finnie is thrilled by the support that he has from the Conservative benches. Nevertheless, we should accept that waiting times are important to individuals and we have undoubtedly seen real progress in recent years in bringing waiting times down. Like Nicola Sturgeon, I remember that waiting lists and waiting times were a regular feature of parliamentary debate and tussles at First Minister's question time in previous parliamentary sessions. The fact that we rarely hear those issues discussed in the Parliament and rarely hear individual cases being raised at question time speaks for itself about the welcome progress that has been made and the hard work and dedication of individuals in the NHS. In the past decade, substantial extra sums have gone into the NHS. Although we might question whether we have had value for money from all that additional investment, the reduction in waiting times is one area in which we can see that the money has had an impact. It is to the vexed issue of funding that I must now turn, in referring to the amendment in my name. The Conservative party believes strongly in the NHS and we believe that NHS funding must be protected at a time of severe downward pressure on the public finances. I and my family use the NHS, like all other members of the Conservative team, and we want to ensure that we have a strong, well-funded public health system. That is why we are pleased to welcome the Westminster coalition Government's commitment to guarantee real-terms increases in health spending in each year of the Parliament. That does not mean that  there will be a standstill in front-line NHS funding, because it is complemented by a commitment to cut the cost of NHS administration by a third and transfer resources to support nurses and doctors on the front line. I believe that the lead that Westminster has set should be followed by the Scottish Government. That is why my amendment asks that the Scottish Government makes a similar commitment to that of the UK Government to protect health spending.

I welcome that response from the cabinet secretary. I did not think that my first run out as health spokesperson for the Conservatives would turn out to be such a love-in, but there we are. Protecting the overall health budget does not mean that we will not still have challenges. Demographic changes, the fact that people are living longer and increases in the cost of treatment and drugs will mean that there is additional demand for money within the NHS. Demand is always likely to exceed supply, which means that there will be a need to reconfigure services from time to time. As we heard earlier this afternoon at question time, we should not get hung up on protecting either individual establishments or levels of employment in the NHS, which seems to obsess the Labour Party. What matters is not inputs but outputs, and in particular the level of patient care. We have as much of a duty to drive through efficiency savings in the NHS—to free up more money for front-line services—as we have to find efficiency savings in other parts of the public sector. We should never forget that the pressure on the public finances comes as part of Labour's legacy or that, had Labour's job tax gone through, it would have removed £40 million from the Scottish NHS budget. I welcome what has been done on waiting times for patients, I join others in applauding the hard-working NHS staff who have helped to achieve that, and I welcome the Scottish Government's commitment to protecting NHS spending. I have pleasure in moving amendment S3M-6393.1, to insert at end:  ", and urges the Scottish Government to ensure that such progress is not compromised by either reductions in its budget or by efficiency savings within NHS boards."

Will the cabinet secretary join me in congratulating the Conservative-Liberal Democrat Government in Westminster on scrapping Labour's jobs tax and, therefore, saving the NHS in Scotland £20 million each year, which will help to protect jobs and front-line services?

I echo Robert Brown's and Bruce Crawford's remarks in welcoming Cathy Jamieson and Margaret Curran back to the chamber, and I join others in congratulating them on their election to another place. We shall be sorry to lose them both in due course, but our loss will be Westminster's gain. The debate has provided a worthwhile opportunity for us to discuss the greatly improved relationship between Her Majesty's Government and the Scottish Government and Scottish Parliament. Let us be clear: the relationship was broken. In his three years as Prime Minister, Gordon Brown did not once set foot in the Scottish Parliament. By contrast, as my good friend—or, I should say, having heard his speech, my excellent  friend—Mike Rumbles reminded us, within three days of becoming Prime Minister, David Cameron was here at Holyrood and then at St Andrew's house to meet the First Minister. There could be no clearer signal of the intention of the new UK Government to have a more fruitful relationship with Scotland than did its predecessor. The coalition Government means a much-needed fresh start for our country. The programme for government is based on the principles of freedom, fairness and responsibility, and it includes action to tackle Labour's recession, to sort out the banks, to get business back on its feet, to restore our civil liberties, to devolve power to individuals and communities, to promote a green economy, to protect the national health service and to reform our political system. It is a radical and ambitious programme, which is exactly what our country needs at this difficult time. Unaccustomed as I am to saying nice things about the Liberal Democrats, I must praise the constructive role that they have played and are playing in the new Government. We particularly welcome the constructive role that is being played by the excellent David Laws as chief secretary to the Treasury. We know that the Government has difficult decisions to make, and it is helpful to have our Liberal Democrat friends on board to share the responsibility. David Laws is the man who received the famous letter from Liam Byrne that has been referred to throughout the debate. As far as Mr Byrne's career is concerned, I suspect that it will go down as one of the shortest suicide notes in history. It is a bit rich for Des McNulty and Margaret Curran to drone on about the spectre of cuts in the public sector, as if somehow the budget deficit emerged overnight on 6 May 2010. Let us not forget that the sole reason for any cuts that we now face is Labour's mismanagement of the British economy and its ruination of the public finances. Labour left us with the worst set of public finances in the G20. Any cuts that we now face are Labour's legacy. They are not Tory cuts or Tory-Liberal cuts or even SNP cuts; they are solely Labour cuts, and we will not let Des McNulty, Margaret Curran or anyone else forget that basic fact. As Annabel Goldie set out, the coalition Government is determined to develop a positive relationship with the Scottish Government and the Scottish Parliament. That ambition was signalled at the outset by the willingness of David Cameron and Danny Alexander to engage with the First Minister and his ministerial team. I understand that that initial meeting has been followed up by a number of other contacts at ministerial level. As is mentioned in our motion, and as Gavin Brown  highlighted, the issue of Scotland's share of the climate change levy is actively being considered. The most important part of the new Government's programme as it relates to Scotland is probably in connection with the proposals of the Calman commission on enhancing devolution. In that regard, the intent of the coalition Government is clear: we will introduce legislation to implement proposals from the Calman commission that will pass to Scotland and the Scottish Parliament responsibility in a wide range of additional areas, including, crucially, powers to vary taxes and take on a greater share of financial responsibility. Over the years, many in my party have argued for this Parliament to have a greater degree of financial accountability. The Calman commission certainly did not go as far as to propose full fiscal autonomy, but its proposals are an important step in improving the accountability of this institution and of the ministers of the Scottish Government.

I disagree with Margo MacDonald. I do not believe that the full fiscal autonomy that she sets out is compatible with the maintenance of the United Kingdom, so I reject that approach. There are sceptics, including members of the Labour Party, who suggest that moves are afoot to water down Calman's financial proposals—we heard such scaremongering from Pauline McNeill. They say that we are prepared to have further discussions around the financial powers, which they regard as some form of retreat. I gently remind Labour that it was in power at Westminster for 13 years. If it wanted to devolve more powers to the Scottish Parliament, it had ample opportunity to do so. We have been in power for three weeks, and we will look carefully at what has been proposed. As Derek Brownlee set out, it is time to look again at the Calman tax proposals, not least because the Scottish Government has approached us in a constructive manner and asked us to do so. As Fiona Hyslop fairly said, some of the tax changes that the coalition Government has proposed, not least the increase in personal thresholds, will have an impact on the Calman tax proposals. We are prepared to listen, but far from retreating on tax-varying powers, it is more likely, as Derek Brownlee said, that the direction of travel will be towards enhancing and extending those powers. I welcome the new engagement that the Scottish Government is having with the coalition Government. Alex Salmond has dropped his usual  negative rhetoric about Westminster and about the dreaded Tories, which is an important shift, because the respect agenda cuts both ways: it requires respect and co-operation on both sides. In that spirit, I welcome the tone of the speeches of Fiona Hyslop, Bruce Crawford and many SNP back benchers. We are keen to consider issues such as Scottish ministerial representation as part of UK delegations to Europe and elsewhere. We are happy to have constructive discussions on such matters, which the previous Labour Government never was. That is a stark contrast. We are now seeing a new start for Scotland and a new era of co-operation between the Scottish and British Governments, which is a dramatic improvement on what went before, when Labour and the SNP were at daggers drawn. I believe that Scotland will be the winner from that new approach, which is why I am so pleased to support the motion in the name of Annabel Goldie.

I gently remind Lord Foulkes that I was 13 in 1979 and that, sadly, I was involved in no campaigning of any sort.

The member was doing so well.

I was going to be so kind to the cabinet secretary, but I might have to rethink my strategy. Does he agree that the priority is to protect spending on front-line services in schools. If we can find savings in administration and management, we should go down that road. In that respect, does he welcome the action that is being taken by East Lothian Council, as outlined at its excellent recent conference, to promote the idea of trust schools?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will exceed its target of 2 per cent cash-releasing efficiency savings in 2010-11. (S3O-10494)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his response. The First Minister has said that the Scottish Government can achieve efficiency savings of 2 per cent per annum on an on-going basis to help to avoid cuts in front-line services. Does the finance secretary agree?

I congratulate Stewart Maxwell on securing this important debate, and I commend him for the motion. Although it is now more than 65 years since VE day, the conflict of world war two will always be remembered. It is important that we mark VE day, as well as remembrance day, veterans day and other poignant moments when we remember the great wars of the 20th century. World war two was a conflict that touched every corner of the world. The archive pictures and film of the celebrations at Trafalgar Square and across the United Kingdom on VE day remind us of the relief and joy at the end of the war in Europe and are a stark reminder of why we should only ever go to war in the gravest of times and for the noblest of causes. World war two embodies one of the closest bonds between the different nations on these islands—Scotland, England, Wales and Northern Ireland—which, along with the Commonwealth, came together to fight Nazi Germany. We should remind ourselves that, in 1940, these islands were the last beacon of hope against the Germans. Europe had already been swept aside after gallant France had been struck down. We struggled on single-handedly for a whole year until we were joined by the military might of Soviet Russia and then the power and resources of the United States of America. Men and women from every community in Scotland fought or contributed to the war effort. My region of Mid Scotland and Fife is proud to be home to the famous Black Watch. Its service during world war two underlines the commitment and sacrifice that so many made for the United Kingdom. Battalions of the Black Watch fought in almost every major British action in world war two, from Palestine to Normandy. Black Watch units held the line against the Germans at Dunkirk, fought in the battle of El Alamein, took part in the allied invasion of Sicily and landed in Normandy on D-day. Those men served Scotland, the United Kingdom and the free world with distinction and dedication. I agree with Stewart Maxwell: we owe so much to all those who fought in the second world war. Our armed forces faced unimaginable horrors. They were called upon to go to the extremes of humanity and they faced up to the  enemy with valour, dignity and defiance, as they have done in other conflicts. I was very taken by what Stewart Maxwell said about our veterans, particularly the fact that, because of recent conflicts, not all veterans are old men. When I was very young, I was allowed to stay up late to watch the festival of remembrance from the Royal Albert hall in London. I recollect very clearly the Chelsea pensioners parading in their famous red jackets, as they do to this day. I remember that the parade included veterans of the Boer war—I am revealing how old I am, Presiding Officer. None of the veterans of the first world war remains with us, and even veterans of the second world war are getting older and older. Sadly, those veterans are being replaced by more and more veterans from recent conflicts—such is human nature. Like Stewart Maxwell, I agree that we owe a deep debt of gratitude to the soldiers who put everything on the line for our country, but I fear that we are not doing enough to repay that debt. Our soldiers should never again be sent into battle ill equipped, and they should never again have to walk into battle when they could be flown in. Also, their families should not have to live in substandard homes. In marking VE day, one of our most important duties is always to remember the heroism and sacrifice of our armed forces. I am glad that we are having this debate today so that we can put on record our eternal gratitude.

This short debate has covered a range of subjects and has clearly demonstrated members' interest in our relationship with Europe. I reassure Helen Eadie that her old friend Ben Wallace was re-elected to the House of Commons. Apparently, his majority was nearly 16,000, so she need have no concerns about Mr Wallace's parliamentary future in another place. Iain Smith raised the issue of the euro. It is now highly unfashionable for Conservatives and Liberal Democrats to fall out on such matters, but the general view that is taken on the situation in Greece is that if Greece had not been in the euro zone and had had a free-floating currency, it would perhaps have been easier for it to absorb some of the pressures on its economy. In other words, it was Greece's membership of the euro that exacerbated the situation. However, that is a debate for another day. Earlier, I mentioned issues to do with the economy and justice. I will now turn to two other issues, the first of which is reform of the CAP and the CFP, which is crucial to rural Scotland. Jim Hume focused on reform of the CAP. The Conservatives supported the Pack inquiry into the future of the CAP, and we believe that continuing support for agriculture is vital to food security and to our farmers, and to providing for a vibrant rural economy. However, as Brian Pack's interim report warns, tough times might be ahead because increasing economic pressures are certain to hit the CAP, given that it currently accounts for around 41 per cent of the total EU budget.  A number of members mentioned the common fisheries policy. We believe that it is now right to fight for wholesale reform in order to encourage sustainable practices, to give communities a greater say over the future of their fishing industries, and to bring an end to the scandal of fish discards. Among the more welcome EC policies are modernisation, its proposal to go beyond the 2012 objective of reducing the administrative burden by 25 per cent, and its focus on fitness checks to reduce the bureaucratic burden. Anyone who speaks to businesspeople will be familiar with the business community's call to reduce the burden of red tape. At a time of economic recession, that is probably more relevant than ever, so I welcome what the EC has said about that. I do not expect it to change dramatically the overwhelming burden of European red tape, but it is a step in the right direction, and I encourage the Scottish Government to offer some input on that. I am sure that our farmers and the members of our business community could come up with plenty legislation that is coming through the pipeline that they would like to see fitness-checked. Many of the concerns that have been raised about the European Commission's work programme will be addressed by the new approach to Europe that is being taken by my colleagues in the Government at Westminster. Crucially, as part of all that, there will be a new relationship between Westminster and Holyrood. I agree with Sandra White that the minister should seek a meeting with the UK Government to discuss the way forward. That call will be received warmly by the new Conservative-Liberal Government at Westminster, so I encourage the minister to go down that road. We all have varying visions of Europe. I do not agree with Pauline McNeill when she calls for a United States of Europe but, as we celebrate a new Conservative Prime Minister, I remind her that it was a previous Conservative Prime Minister—Winston Churchill—who called for a United States of Europe, although he did not believe that Great Britain should be part of it. Nevertheless, there was a vision there that people might wish to follow. Whatever our view, the economic crisis in Europe will continue to have an impact, not least because Europe is our largest trading partner. European legislation will continue to affect businesses, the criminal justice system and government in Scotland. I therefore welcome the European and External Relations Committee's work in that area, and I look forward to its report on the impact of the Lisbon treaty later in the year.

I apologise on my colleague Ted Brocklebank's behalf. As a member of the European and External Relations Committee, he would have liked to be here, but he could not join us. I welcome the opportunity to debate the European Commission's work programme. Any such debate must touch on the new UK Government's approach to Europe. If the Presiding Officer will forgive me, as the first Conservative to speak in the chamber after yesterday's momentous events, I would like to record my delight that we have a new Conservative Prime Minister and a new Conservative-led Government. In that vein, I owe you, Presiding Officer, and the Parliament an apology. If members have listened to speeches by me and many of my Conservative colleagues in the past few years, they might have gained the impression that we had a negative view of our excellent friends in the Liberal Democrats. If I ever inadvertently gave that impression in my remarks, I can only humbly apologise. I confirm that my view all along has been that the Liberal Democrats are the finest collection of individuals ever to walk on God's earth.

I will come to that point in a moment. It is clear that we have much to learn from the Labour Party's relationship with the Liberal Democrats. Perhaps Mr Macdonald will share some of that experience with us, from which I am sure we would all benefit. The new UK Government will mean a new approach to Europe. We await exact details of that approach, but I am sure that we are in interesting times. In the meantime, it is vital that the Scottish Parliament is kept up to date with new legislation and policies from Europe. I welcome the minister's commitment to tracking EU legislation and alerting the relevant committees. The Law Society of Scotland has warned that the protection that is afforded to the Parliament under subsidiarity will be difficult to use, as the extremely short timescales for consultation might lead to the Parliament being overlooked. It is therefore essential to establish a good working relationship with Westminster to ensure that we are consulted on relevant issues. David Cameron has pledged to strengthen the working relationship between the UK and Scottish Governments and I am sure that the new Secretary of State for Scotland will play a role in that important task. I am therefore confident that an approach from the Scottish Government or the committee to work with the Foreign Office to design an early-warning system would be welcome. I cannot but feel that the 2010 work programme is already out of date, as it refers repeatedly to the economic crisis in the past tense, whereas recent economic turmoil in Greece has proved that the crisis is anything but over, especially in the euro zone. Of course, if the Scottish Government had its way, Scotland would—as a new EU member—have to join the euro and would now suffer from the euro's destabilisation following the debt crisis rather than be part of an independent Great Britain that is in charge of its own currency.

No—I am sorry to say that I am in my last minute. It is clear that repairing the damage to the euro and its partners will take up much of the EU's focus in the coming year, as it acts to prevent other countries from following Greece. I was pleased to hear that the Liberal Democrats seem to have put on hold their ambition to join the euro, at least for the duration of this UK Parliament.  Only last week, the EU's Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs called on the new British Government to take early measures to reduce the country's huge deficit and stabilise the debt. That is a huge priority for the new Government. I will touch on justice issues, which are important. Europe will continue to have a heavy impact on Scotland's justice system. There are many positive advances, such as cross-border co-operation in criminal cases, but many challenges will face our justice system and individual freedom. I commend the Government's intention to send a Scottish minister or law officer to all justice and home affairs council meetings as part of the UK delegation. The Law Society has highlighted several major concerns for Scotland about the Lisbon treaty. The first is about the creation of the European public prosecutor, which threatens to cut across the Lord Advocate's functions, and the second is about the impact of the European charter of fundamental rights. The Conservatives have said that they would halt the public prosecutor. I am sure that the committee will consider the charter in detail during its inquiry and I look forward to its report. There is more to say, but I will deal with other points in my closing speech.

Will the member take an intervention?

Let us see whether we can extend the debate by having this discussion. I was interested to hear Des McNulty's argument—which is entirely reasonable, albeit that I might not agree with it—about why people who have accumulated wealth should make a contribution out of their own pocket. Does he not recognise that there is a moral hazard attached to that? If people know that they will have their wealth taken away from them later in life, they might, during their working life, decide not to save money, buy a house or put money aside for a rainy day only to be penalised when they retire.

I commented to the minister as we entered the chamber earlier that I hoped that this would be a fiery debate. He said that, if I was expecting that, I was clearly in the wrong place. Nevertheless, it has been an interesting debate, and I congratulate  all the speakers, not least Jamie Stone on a gratuitous mention of Jeremy Thorpe, which is not a name that we often hear in the chamber. The debate has served to bring to the fore an important issue that deserves our attention. We have heard from speakers throughout the debate how the efforts of social workers and social care workers across the country are vital to many people's lives. Their work is often carried out in the most arduous and challenging of circumstances. The demographic challenges that are outlined in the Labour amendment and which were mentioned by both Karen Whitefield and Irene Oldfather, and the rising number of children who are looked after by local authorities, mean that it is more important than ever that we do what we can to provide and maintain an effective social care workforce. As Elizabeth Smith said, more than 15,000 children are now in social care, and there has been a rise every year since 2001 in the number of those who need to be looked after. Despite that, the number of staff employed by Scottish local authority social services is decreasing, according to figures released last June. That leads to the clear conclusion that we are simply not doing enough to help the most vulnerable in our society. I listened with great interest to the minister's comments at the start of the debate about the need for us to deliver joined-up services against the backdrop of the serious budget cuts that we know are ahead. I welcome the minister's mature approach. We will face some difficult times in the public sector, and if we are to ensure that the most vulnerable do not suffer as a result we must look at new ways of doing things. I was also interested in what the minister said about how, when looking at the effectiveness of social work services, leadership is more important than resources. There are lessons to be learned in that. With all those statistics in mind, I welcome the "Changing Lives" review of social work services. The review's findings on the importance of clear and efficient leadership in supporting our social services workforce are an important step towards developing a more effective service. However, given the extent of the problems that social care in Scotland faces, more must and should be done to tackle them, which is why I fully support my colleague Elizabeth Smith's amendment. In the report that it published in March, the Social Work Inspection Agency emphasised several vital areas that need to be addressed. Potentially the most worrying point that the agency made was about the postcode lottery that exists in social services. That affects the future of children in care. On average, more than half of those children who were still in contact with social  services were not in employment, and the figure went up to 100 per cent in the worst-performing council areas. The quality of risk assessments and of the care that is provided was found to vary hugely between councils, which is hardly surprising, given the variation in funding from council to council. We think that if a consistently valuable service is to be established throughout the country, it is important that we have an accurate picture of the current situation. That is why we have called for an independent review of social work services, so that we can identify, as soon as possible, where we are failing those who rely on social care the most. We think that the backdrop of demographic changes that we have heard about is a powerful argument for holding such a review. Although we accept that we might still have to convince the minister and other members of the need for it, we hope that they will understand our arguments about why it is important for us to get a picture of the present situation. Up to 60,000 children in Scotland are affected by a parent's drug problem and seven out of 20 children who are referred to the children's reporter have a parent or carer who has abused drugs, so it is essential that we tackle the issue of drugs in our society. We believe that by doing so, we can destroy the problem at its roots and help prevent more children from having to enter care in the first place. We can take further steps to help fix our broken society by making better use of the voluntary sector and reducing the amount of Government interference and red tape, which act as a huge hindrance to many voluntary agencies. The funding of the voluntary sector is an issue that comes up continually, and it is one that I raise in the Parliament whenever I have the opportunity. When budgets are squeezed, there is always a temptation to cut off funding for outside agencies and the voluntary sector. In the coming years, with the budget squeeze that will apply to the Scottish Government budget, which will be passed down to local government budgets, there will be tremendous pressure on the voluntary sector. I would like the minister to provide as much reassurance as he can that the Government acknowledges the problem, that support will be given to that sector and that he will try to ensure that long-term, secure funding is put in place. One of the most debilitating aspects of voluntary sector funding is the uncertainty that surrounds it from year to year, which means that organisations simply cannot plan ahead or offer secure employment because they do not know whether their funding will be sustained. It is vital that that is addressed if we are to tackle the serious issues that face the most deprived people in society.  It is always the most vulnerable in our society who are affected by Government failings. That is why we think that an independent review of social services is necessary. Although UK-wide policies to support families through the tax and benefits system will undoubtedly aid the situation, more needs to be done to ensure that people in the system receive the best that our tremendous social care workforce has to offer. An independent review would be useful in identifying gaps in service provision, particularly in the context of the likely increased demand for services and the downward pressure on budgets. I hope that other members will understand why we make that case. I have pleasure in supporting Elizabeth Smith's amendment.

The only piece of evidence in support of minimum pricing was the University of Sheffield study, which has been fatally undermined this week by the revisions to its figures. Why will the First Minister not drop the unwanted and probably illegal policy of minimum pricing, so that we can get on, develop a consensus and move on with proposals on which we can all agree, such as the proper enforcement of the current laws?

I welcome the opportunity afforded by the Scottish Greens to debate the topical issue of voting systems. I regret that that is where the consensus ends, because I do not agree with the terms of the motion that the Greens have lodged and the aim to introduce a single transferable vote for Westminster elections. Having heard Paul Martin's contribution, I think that there is a degree of consensus between us and those on the Labour benches, not least on the basis of the sedentary intervention from George Foulkes, with whom I have some sympathy—at least on certain occasions.  The first-past-the-post voting system has served us well over many years. It has delivered stable Governments at Westminster, with a parliamentary majority that has allowed them, whatever their political complexion, to tackle the difficult issues facing the nation. At a time of economic recession—the worst in recorded history—and crisis in our public finances, now is not the time to change the voting system to prevent any party from achieving an overall majority. The great advantage of the first-past-the-post system is that it puts the voters in charge. When they feel that the Government has run its course, they can vote for it to be replaced in its entirety. Of course, that is exactly what happened in 1997, when, as my party knows to its cost, a Conservative Government that had been in power for 18 years was replaced wholesale with a Labour Government. Although that was a very uncomfortable experience for my party, I have no doubt that it reflected the mood of the country at the time. The difficulty with proportional representation is that it transfers power from the people to the politicians.

I am sorry—I have only four minutes. Let me make some progress. There has been much debate about the issue in the past few weeks and talk of the possibility of a hung Parliament. Let us imagine that we had proportional representation and were virtually guaranteed hung Parliaments in every election. If that was the case, we could even have a situation in which, post election, the Liberal Democrats do a deal with Labour, who might have come third in the election, and put it back into power. That outcome would clearly be unacceptable to the people, but that is what happens if we have proportional representation. Robert Brown referred, rather inaccurately, to the history of Margaret Thatcher, who never obtained less than 40 per cent of the popular vote. Under proportional representation, we could face a scenario after the election in which Gordon Brown continues in office as Prime Minister with the support of the Liberal Democrats. Someone who has been rejected by the people could be propped up in office by the Lib Dems under PR. That is why PR is wrong. The worst aspect of PR is that it has allowed the extreme socialists of the British National Party to gain a foothold in the European Parliament as representatives of English constituencies. Under the first-past-the-post system, those extremists would have no prospect of being elected, but under PR they have been given a leg up, which has provided them with a platform for promoting  their pernicious policies. The election of two BNP members of the European Parliament is the best possible argument against the use of PR for Westminster elections.

It is deeply to be regretted that the use of PR has resulted in the BNP being given a platform in the European Parliament. It was a mistake to move away from a first-past-the-post system. We do not believe that the current system is perfect; indeed, we have called for it to be reformed. Far too many constituencies in which Labour MPs are elected have very small electorates in comparison with those in which Conservatives MPs are elected. We need a fairer distribution of seats, and we believe that the Boundary Commission should be given that remit. A more equitable distribution of seats would provide a fairer outcome for all and would mean that the good aspects of the first-past-the-post system in delivering strong and stable government would be preserved. I move amendment S3M-6215.1, to leave out from "UK" to end and insert: "first-past-the-post electoral system has delivered decades of strong and stable government in the United Kingdom; regrets that the adoption of proportional representation for European elections has resulted in the election of members of the British National Party; supports the retention of first-past-the-post for Westminster elections, and calls for the necessary reforms to be made to the system so as to ensure a fairer outcome in future UK elections."

To ask the Scottish Executive how it will assess the benefits to Scotland of its engagement in Scotland week in North America. (S3O-10157)  I fear that we may have covered this ground already.

I thank the minister for her full and varied reply. Does she share my concern that as part of that taxpayer-funded trip, her colleague sitting beside her—the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning—used a platform in the USA to set out the case for Scottish independence? Surely if the Scottish ministers are to use such trips for party-political purposes, those trips should be funded from the coffers of the Scottish National Party and not by the Scottish taxpayer.

To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government is taking to tackle youth unemployment. (S3F-2344)

We learned this week that youth unemployment in Scotland has increased by 89 per cent in two years as a result of Labour's recession. Does the First Minister agree that, although the first priority must be to help youngsters to find employment, we need to help those who cannot do that, with structured volunteering programmes to keep them active and contributing to society? Will he therefore support the Conservatives' plans for a national citizens service to help our young people become active and responsible members of society?

Will the member give way?

When I heard that the Labour Party had scheduled a debate on the economy this morning, I thought that we might have had just a hint of contrition from its members or perhaps a scintilla of an apology for the state that our country is in. We heard the extraordinary Labour proposition set out this morning by Andy Kerr that the entire responsibility for the state of our economy must rest with Alex Salmond and the SNP. I do not entirely absolve the SNP of responsibility for some of its actions or the state that we are in, but let us be clear that the ultimate responsibility for our economic mess rests firmly with the Labour Government and Gordon Brown.  The man who was Chancellor of the Exchequer for 10 years from 1997 inherited from Kenneth Clarke a golden economic legacy and proceeded to squander it. In those 10 years as chancellor, Gordon Brown presided over an irresponsible inflationary boom fuelled by easy money, cheap credit and dodgy lending practices, 125 per cent mortgages and people being lent money at five times their salary, soaring house prices and a boom that could not continue. Of course people felt good; they felt the good times and spent money like there was no tomorrow, believing the Government that the economic cycle had been abolished. As Linda Fabiani said, Gordon Brown repeated endlessly that there would be no return to boom and bust. Gordon Brown promised us that the good times would last forever, people foolishly believed him and went out and spent money. It was inevitable that that crumbling edifice, built on foundations of clay, would soon come tumbling down and that is exactly what happened. The Labour Party's approach today is reminiscent of a burglar who breaks into someone's house, cuts his hand on the kitchen window that he smashed, and then tries to blame the home owner for his injury. That is the state that we are in. Let us look at where we are after 13 years of Labour. We had the longest and deepest recession on record; we were the last country in the G20 to emerge from recession; we have the second-largest deficit of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries, after only Ireland; and we have seen a doubling of the national debt that our children and grandchildren will be paying off for decades to come. That is Gordon Brown's golden legacy and Andy Kerr and his colleagues should apologise for it this morning. Far from trying to make things better, what do we see from Labour now? A policy on national insurance that demonstrates that it has learned nothing from its mistakes and will make the situation much worse. It is determined to push ahead with its damaging national insurance rise. We are continually lectured by Gordon Brown and Alistair Darling that the Government should do nothing to harm the recovery and make the situation worse, yet their national insurance rise will do precisely that and suck money out of the economy at just the time that we should be keeping money in people's pockets. That is why business leaders from across the UK and Scotland have been queueing up to oppose the Labour policy to impose national insurance rises. If we stop that rise, as the Conservatives propose, seven out of 10 Scots will be better off and none will be worse off. We will save the Scottish public sector £63 million that will otherwise be taken out of health, education and justice. How many teachers, nurses, doctors and  policemen will lose their jobs as a result of that proposed rise in national insurance? Labour should think again. When it comes to ludicrous tax rises, let me move swiftly on to the Liberal Democrats and their proposal to put VAT on homes when the construction industry is already on its knees. Theirs is a policy so mind-boggling in its daftness that it was denounced yesterday by the industry body, Homes for Scotland, as "sheer madness". So daft is that policy that even Tavish Scott, leader of the Liberal Democrats, did not know that it existed in the Lib Dem manifesto. In what has to rank as the biggest laugh of the election campaign so far, yesterday Tavish Scott was quizzed five times by Glen Campbell of the BBC about whether the policy existed and five times Tavish Scott denied that the Liberal Democrats had any intention to change the rules on VAT. In the gospels, St Peter denied Christ a mere three times, but St Tavish had to do better than that until, of course, the angel Carmichael flew in to put him right. I have every sympathy for Tavish Scott—I cannot imagine a worse chore than having to read the Liberal Democrat manifesto—but surely it is not too much to expect that the party leader would have got past the pretty pictures and read some of the text of his own manifesto. How can the Liberal Democrats expect voters to take their manifesto seriously when even they do not take it seriously? I offer a word of advice to Mr Scott and his colleagues for future elections: they should read their manifesto before they come to a press conference to launch it and then they might be better placed to answer questions on the details and will not look quite so ridiculous. In the moments remaining to me, I return to where I started. History seems to be repeating itself. I am old enough to remember 1979, when we had a discredited Labour Government that had run its course, the economy was in crisis, public finances were in a horrendous state and the Government had no ideas about how to get us out of the mess. Thirty-one years on, we are in an identical position. Let us be in no doubt that, when the history of these times is written, responsibility for the state that we are in will rest firmly at the door of one man—James Gordon Brown, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom from June 2007 to May 2010.

I commend Nigel Don for his well-worded motion, and I congratulate him on securing the debate. Over the past year, I have expressed my regret that the Scottish Government was not intending to mark this important anniversary in a suitable fashion. Like my separated brother, Michael McMahon, I hope that the minister will give us some good news in that regard in his winding-up speech. Presiding Officer, if you look down at the cobbles under the bell tower of the chapel of St Salvator at the University of St Andrews, you will see that they spell the initials P H. In 1528, Patrick Hamilton, a student at St Andrews, became Scotland's first Protestant martyr, and those stones mark the spot where Hamilton was burned at the stake after having confessed to charges of heresy. With a Bible in his hand he went to the pyre but, due to the dampness of the wood, it took him an horrific six hours to die. The example of Hamilton, a good young man whose only fault was to put forward ideas contrary to those of the clergy, was acknowledged by the people in the crowd. One observer famously commented: "the reek of Maister Patrik Hammyltoun has infected as many as it blew upon." Nevertheless, it would be 30 more years before the reformation, one of the most significant events in Scottish history, the 450th anniversary of which we celebrate this evening. Although the ideas of Luther and Calvin had been present throughout Europe and in Scotland for some years, it was not until John Knox's return to Scotland in 1559 that widespread opposition to the Roman Catholic Church began. In May 1559, Knox travelled to Perth, where in the parish church of St John's, which is still standing, he gave his first of many inflammatory speeches against idolatry and roused what he called the "rascal multitude" to riot. They destroyed the charter house and two of the town's friaries in two days. The sole remnant of Catholicism that remained was the banner of St Bartholomew, which happened to be at the mender's. At the beginning of the 16th century, Scotland was a Catholic nation, but by the end of the century, we would be a Presbyterian country.  When the reformation Parliament met in August 1560, it abolished the authority of the Pope and forbade the practice of mass. By the end of 1561, of the thousand or so parishes in Scotland, a quarter had either a Protestant minister or a reader. By 1574, almost all the parishes had a Protestant ministry and, in 1592, the golden act would establish the Presbyterian kirk with its three-tier court system of kirk session, presbyteries and general assembly, which is still in place today. The reformation changed more than just the nature of religion—it was a social and political revolution, too. The reformation was the beginning of a new era in education, highlighting the need for a school in every parish. Before the reformation, there were approximately 100 parish schools in Scotland. Between 1560 and 1633, almost 800 schools were established, with almost half of them being in or nearby a parish. What had been outlined in Knox's books of discipline continued to be used even in the 19th century as a point of reference for Government and the church when developing their respective education policies. It was not solely the education of children that was the imperative, but the continued education of the literate commonality. The ideas of Luther—that every individual's conscience was capable of determining God's will—inspired the reformation movement, which demanded that scriptures should be available to the commonality in their language, so that people might read and debate the nature of their religion, rather than have it dictated to them from the pulpit. Although progress was slow, by the 1630s, the Bible was widely available at a reasonable price and in a language that the commonality could understand. The reformation radically changed the nation's religious practices. It signalled a change in the way in which children were educated and the poor were provided for and it was the beginning of a new era in foreign relationships. However, the reformation was also a revolution of thought. The ideas of the reformation—of freedom of thought and of one's relationship with God and one's monarch—would be felt long after 1560, through to the covenanters and to the philosophers, scientists and writers of the enlightenment and beyond. Ultimately, the reformation would shape the Scottish national identity and encourage the Scots to become a people of which Patrick Hamilton would have been proud.

The report to which Dr McKee refers confirms that anti-English sentiment in Scotland appears to increase during major sporting tournaments such as football's world cup. In that context, I welcome the example being set by the First Minister in saying that he will support England at the world  cup, and ask him whether he will encourage the rest of his party to follow his lead.

The debate has been better tempered than the one that started the morning—at least, so far—perhaps because we are missing the running commentary from a sedentary position of Mr Tavish Scott, who has no doubt gone off to hone his witticisms for First Minister's question time. We will find out shortly whether it was worth it, although from past experience I fear that we will be disappointed again. We are grateful to the Liberal Democrats for giving us the opportunity to discuss the important issue of fuel prices. Many of us have been horrified to see the rising prices at the pump in the past few weeks, with prices of at least £1.20 a litre in many rural areas, and in some places much more. As was pointed out earlier, that has a major impact in rural areas where there is no realistic and affordable public transport alternative and the motor car is a necessity of modern life. It is interesting that the Liberal Democrats have concentrated on "a mechanism to reduce the price of fuel in specified remote rural and island areas of Scotland". Perhaps surprisingly, there was no mention in Mr McArthur's opening remarks of Alistair Darling's fuel duty hike, although Mr Rumbles subsequently referred to it. I am glad that he did, because I am genuinely confused about the Liberal Democrat position on fuel duty taxation. I had the misfortune to watch "The Politics Show" on BBC Scotland on 21 March and I enjoyed the sight of somebody called Nick Clegg, who is apparently the leader of the Liberal Democrats at Westminster, being asked to confirm the Liberal Democrat position on the fuel duty rise. He confirmed that Liberal Democrat policy was not to seek to reverse the increase. Moments later on the same programme, we heard an interview with somebody called Danny Alexander, who apparently holds the elevated title of Mr Clegg's chief of staff. Mr Alexander said:  "I don't think that the Government should be pressing ahead with trying to increase fuel duty yet again in April with prices going up so far and so fast over the past few weeks." Glenn Campbell asked Mr Alexander: "Do you want the Chancellor to postpone or cancel the planned increase from April 1st?" Danny Alexander replied: "Yes, I do." When it was put to Mr Alexander that that contradicted what his boss Mr Clegg had said a few moments before, he was left floundering and embarrassed. [ Interruption .] Perhaps the Liberal Democrats who are here today could confirm the Liberal Democrat position on the rise, instead of shouting at me from their seats. Are they on Mr Clegg's side or Mr Alexander's side? The two are far apart.

If that was supposed to provide clarity in the debate, it was an absolute joke. None of us is any the wiser as to the Liberal Democrat position. Nick Clegg says, "We can't reverse it." Danny Alexander says, "Yes, we can." For goodness' sake, let them make up their minds. For our part, the Conservatives are clear that measures need to be taken to help to protect those who live in rural Scotland, in particular, from the impact of rising fuel prices. As Alex Johnstone pointed out, we have said that we will consult on the introduction of a fair fuel stabiliser to help to keep prices at the pump more consistent. Our proposal was warmly supported by Edmund King, the president of the AA, who said: "It is right that political parties are addressing the problem of fuel duty now we have record prices at the pumps." A major advantage of our proposed fair fuel stabiliser is that, unlike with the Liberal Democrats' proposal, there is no doubt about its legality. As we have heard, both today and in earlier debates on the subject, there are questions about the legality of having a derogation in different parts of Scotland. Surely we should concentrate on what we know we can do rather than on what might be possible. It is a pity that, in the year that has passed since our previous debate on the issue, the Liberal Democrats are no further forward on trying to convince us about the legal position on a derogation. They would have been more  convincing in this morning's debate if they had done that. Another dimension to the debate about fuel that has become particularly acute in recent weeks is the business rates that are paid by filling stations in rural areas. That, too, was mentioned earlier. Just before the recess, the transport minister, Mr Stevenson, told me in the chamber that we have lost a third of the rural petrol stations in Scotland in the past 10 years.

Many more are going to close, and the Government must take some action on the matter.

Will the member give way?

What is the Liberal Democrat position on the increase in fuel duty that was introduced on 1 April, announced by the chancellor, Alistair Darling? Do the Liberal Democrats support or oppose it?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it will next meet representatives of NHS Tayside. (S3O-10013)

When the cabinet secretary next meets NHS Tayside, will she raise with it the Angus community medicine rehabilitation and design project, which, given that it proposes to remove beds from Brechin infirmary and Montrose infirmary, has caused a great deal of concern to local people, particularly the 22 North Angus general practitioners? Does the cabinet secretary accept that NHS Tayside has lost the confidence of local people and health professionals as a result of the way in which the matter has been handled? Will she ask for an independent investigation into the matter in order that public confidence can be restored?

Two days' notice—ridiculous!

I commend my colleague Elizabeth Smith on her motion and congratulate her on securing the debate. Like Stuart McMillan and other colleagues, I had the pleasure of meeting representatives from the cadet forces earlier today and was impressed by them. I associate myself with the comments that Elizabeth Smith and Jim Hume made about the Knox academy Combined Cadet Force. It would be a tragedy if we lost that resource now. As we have heard, the cadet forces are voluntary youth organisations for boys and girls aged 12 to 18, and the central aim of the cadet movement is to promote citizenship and team building, which provides youngsters with a real sense of achievement. I cannot commend the movement enough. I take this opportunity to thank all of the adult volunteers who are involved with the movement, make it work so well and give up their time for the youngsters. In my region of Mid Scotland and Fife, we are fortunate to have a large number of cadet detachments. In Perth and Kinross, there are detachments in Auchterarder, Blairgowrie, Crieff, Dunkeld, Kinross, Perth and Stanley, as well as  numbers throughout Angus, Stirling, Clackmannanshire and Fife. Having the opportunity to take part in military and adventurous activities is a highlight for the youngsters who are in the cadets, who are also actively involved in helping their communities. It is clear that those young people highly value being part of a detachment and feel pride in their accomplishments. Blairgowrie has a tremendous local detachment that I have had the pleasure of visiting on a number of occasions. Like many in the area, it is part of the Black Watch battalion Army Cadet Force, which is mentioned in Elizabeth Smith's motion. Young people from the Blairgowrie detachment get involved in an astonishing range of opportunities, from adventure weekends to military training to flying planes. Such has been the success of the detachment that it is helping to set up a new detachment in Pitlochry. The initiative is spearheaded by Major Douglas Pover, John Gregory and other volunteers, who have held three open nights so far to introduce the Army Cadet Force to Pitlochry. So far, 21 young people have registered to be involved. Since February, the detachment has held training nights in Pitlochry high school, with youngsters regularly attending. Senior cadets from Blairgowrie are helping out and training the new cadets, to ensure that there will be a successful new detachment. The previous detachment at Pitlochry closed in the mid 1970s, whereas the nearby detachment at Aberfeldy shut down in 1980, so the cadet movement is reforming in Highland Perthshire. That will be much to the benefit of the area, given that at present the nearest detachment is some miles down the A9, in Dunkeld. What is happening in Pitlochry goes to show that the hard work and dedication of a few individuals can have an enormous effect on a whole town of youngsters. I pay tribute to individuals such as Major Douglas Pover and John Gregory for their work, which is having a lasting and positive impact. I also put on record my thanks to the commandant of the Black Watch army cadets, Colonel Martin Passmore, whom I had the pleasure of meeting earlier today; the honorary colonel of the Black Watch battalion Army Cadet Force, Lorraine Kelly; and the Lord Lieutenant of Perth and Kinross, Brigadier Mel Jameson. It is tremendous that individuals of that calibre are prepared to give up their time to support this worthwhile cause. The Black Watch is a proud regiment that is intertwined with the Tayside area. All soldiers of the Black Watch throughout its history would be proud of our current cadets. I doubt that those cadets would seek any higher honour.

To ask the Scottish Executive how many petrol stations in rural areas have closed in the past 10 years. (S3O-9870)

The minister may be aware of the serious situation that is faced by filling stations  with attached retail premises, some of which have just seen increases of 50 per cent or more in their rateable values that may well threaten their viability. Does the minister agree that we cannot afford more closures of petrol stations in rural areas? If so, can he tell us what action the Scottish Government will take to try to address this serious situation?

It is customary for winding up speakers to praise the quality of the debate and the well-informed contributions from all sides of the chamber. However, try as I might, I cannot bring myself to do so at the end of a debate that, with few exceptions, has been tedious and full of speeches that, on the one hand, were full of empty praise for international education and, on the other, were tiresome Opposition rehashes of criticisms of SNP Government policy that we have heard many times before. If I feel sorry for anyone, it is the pupils from St Ninian's who have joined us this afternoon and have had to sit through this drivel for the past two hours. At least we can console ourselves with the fact that we are being paid to be here; they have no such consolation. I assure them that it is not always as bad as this and that occasionally it gets better. As a number of members have pointed out, given all the education issues at the moment, it is something of a surprise that the Government decided to lodge a motion on international education. That is not in any way to diminish the subject's importance but, as Jeremy Purvis has just reminded us, we debated it less than two years ago, and I am not convinced that much has moved on in the meantime. With all the issues about standards of literacy and numeracy, with the debate raging about the structure of education and the Government's indication that it is prepared to consider trust schools, with the issues about falling teacher numbers and probationers' difficulties in finding employment, and with the Government's failure to deliver on its class sizes policy, I am left wondering why this subject is seen as the burning issue in Scottish education. In saying that, I realise that I am just as capable as anyone else of tiresomely rehashing criticisms of the Scottish Government.

Indeed. Thank you, Mr O'Donnell. The amendments have allowed us to broaden the debate's scope—and thank goodness for that. The Labour amendment expresses concern about curriculum for excellence and the fact that there is still uncertainty in our secondary schools about how it will work, and highlights the need for a refocused skills strategy. My colleague Elizabeth  Smith again stressed the importance of youngsters acquiring basic skills before they leave the school system. Any such approach must be backed up with rigorous testing, and we must ensure that new exams are more suited to individual pupils' needs. The Liberal Democrat amendment makes a fair point about the need to teach modern languages, a point that Margo MacDonald has made throughout the debate, and to ensure that teacher training is as good as it can be. Like Ken Macintosh, however, I find the Government motion to be too self-congratulatory. At one time, Scotland might indeed have enjoyed an "international reputation ... for excellence in education" but I fear that in more recent times that reputation has slipped. The cabinet secretary referred rather disparagingly to international league tables. However, international comparisons show clearly that, over the past decade or so, Scottish education has more or less flatlined while other countries' performance has improved and, indeed, overtaken ours. Although historically we had a reputation for excellence, suggesting that we necessarily have the same today shows a worrying degree of complacency on the part of the cabinet secretary. For that reason, we have difficulty with that section of the Government motion. There is much that is good in the Scottish education system, but we cannot afford to rest on our laurels and believe that everything in the garden is rosy. I welcome the part of the motion that "notes the Scottish Government's determination to learn from other countries' education systems". As members know, we on this side of the chamber have taken a close interest in the Swedish education system, in which parents and other groups are allowed to set up their own schools with state funding. I assure Jamie Hepburn, who I know is interested in that subject, that if he waits patiently until next Thursday, he may well hear more about it in Conservative debating time. [ Interruption. ] I hear how delighted Labour members are that we will have another education debate next Thursday morning. I am glad that there is so much interest in the subject in the chamber. We always hear from the SNP that we should take a lead from small European countries, so I hope that it will be prepared to consider structures that are being employed in countries such as Sweden. Indeed, the cabinet secretary is on record as saying in the past that he supports choice and diversity in the education system. I hope that he genuinely has an open mind about learning from other countries.  Elizabeth Smith mentioned vocational education. There is a growing consensus that we should be doing more in that area. In particular, we should consider examples from countries such as Germany, which does vocational education well. It is interesting that Germany still has a strong science, technical and manufacturing base—I am sure that Professor Harvie would confirm that. It is no coincidence that youngsters there are encouraged to develop skills in those areas while they are still at school. In a YouGov poll last weekend, Scottish voters were asked which political parties would handle education problems best. It is perhaps unsurprising that Labour came out on top in that poll, but the Conservatives came in second place—they beat the SNP into third place. If the cabinet secretary wants to improve his poll ratings, perhaps he should start to take lessons from us on how Scottish education should be reformed and consider what happens in the other countries that I have mentioned. I hope that my modest contribution to the debate has raised its quality—although I doubt it—and that members have found my speech slightly less tedious than I found theirs. I also doubt that. I am pleased to support the amendment in the name of Elizabeth Smith.

I thank all those members who have signed my motion and I welcome to the public gallery the provost of Perth and Kinross, John Hulbert, and other representatives of the local council. In 1210, King William the Lion granted the royal charter to Perth. The charter declared some of the privileges that Perth could subsequently enjoy and stated various regulations for trade within the sheriffdom. Although there is evidence elsewhere that confirms that Perth was a royal burgh from the 1120s, the 1210 charter is the earliest surviving document that details the royal charter that was awarded to the fair city. It is the anniversary of the granting of that charter that Perth will celebrate this year through Perth 800, a series of events that has been designed to commemorate Perth's prestigious past and to recognise its status as one of the best and most vibrant places to live, work and visit in Scotland today. I pay tribute to Perth and Kinross Council, which has put together a programme of activities for the year. The overall purpose of Perth 800 is to celebrate the 800 th anniversary of the royal charter in 1210, but the year-long programme has other ambitious aims. Perth 800 hopes to develop a sense of civic pride among residents by engaging the local community with Perth's past and present; seeks to enhance Perth's profile both nationally and internationally and to encourage the growth of the local economy through the promotion of Perth as a tourist destination; and aims to entice businesses and academic institutions to the area.  With more than 100 events designed to showcase Perth's culture, sport, heritage and burgeoning economy, Perth 800 has something for everyone to enjoy—old and young, locals and visitors. Events include an exhibition at Perth museum entitled "Skin & Bone: Life & Death in Medieval Perth"; the Perth festival of the arts; and the first geocaching mega event to take place in Scotland. Until this afternoon I had no idea what a geocaching mega event was, but it is apparently a high-tech treasure hunt. There will also be a mini-Olympics, with competitors from the towns of Aschaffenburg in Germany and Cognac in France, with which Perth is twinned. Events will include badminton, swimming, football and gymnastics. Perth 800 has encouraged local businesses to become involved in the celebrations. The development of the Perth 800 brand is growing in popularity among local organisations, businesses and manufacturers, who are enjoying the promotional opportunities that are provided by the celebrations. Perth 800 will build the perfect foundation from which Perth can launch its campaign to gain formal city status—a campaign ably led by the provost and the lord-lieutenant for the county, Brigadier Mel Jameson. The campaign hopes that we can achieve that in 2010 for our 800 th anniversary, failing which we have a second bite at the cherry in 2012 during the Queen's diamond jubilee. Lord Mandelson has already announced that there will be a competition for a new city to be created. Many local people are surprised to learn that the fair city is not officially a city at all. When I raised the issue back in 2005 I was even accused by some local politicians of talking Perth down. Fortunately, those sceptics have been won over, and we have a true cross-party consensus in favour of gaining official city status for Perth. Why should Perth aim to attain that status? For a start, we have only to consider Perth's role in Scottish history. In an age when the capital was determined by where the King held court, Perth was the nominal capital of Scotland. James I spent much of his time at Perth. Of his 16 Parliaments, 13 were held there; only one Parliament was held in Edinburgh. James enjoyed the accommodation at the abbey of Blackfriars in Perth, commenting that it was also a good place for a game of tennis. Unfortunately, it also turned out to be a good place for his assassination, in 1437. The only time that James VI returned to Scotland after his crowning as King of both England and Scotland, he came to Perth in 1617. The last coronation of a British monarch to take place outside Westminster was that of Charles II at Scone on new year's day 1651, the crown being placed on his head by the Marquis of Argyll.  As well as acknowledging the historical significance of Perth, the award of city status would mean that Perth would be recognised as one of the leading places in Scotland for business, culture and sport. Historically, Perth had an important role in commerce as an inland port. With the lowest crossing point of the River Tay, Perth was exceeded only by Berwick-upon-Tweed in trade. Today, Perth continues to have a role as a European trading port. Perth is renowned for its gardens and parks. In 2008 it was the gold medal winner of the Britain in bloom competition, and in recent years it has achieved awards in the beautiful Scotland contest. Perth was the first Scottish town to join, in March 2007, the cittaslow movement—an international network of more than 100 towns and cities, which, through supporting local businesses and protecting and conserving the environment and historic buildings, is dedicated to enhancing quality of life for residents and visitors. Perth now wants to join the exclusive club of Scotland's six official cities. The prestige that comes from being awarded city status would help to boost tourism and the city would hope to benefit from the targeted campaigns by the Government and VisitScotland that currently promote Scotland's six cities. Although the cities growth fund, which used to promote Scotland's six cities, no longer exists, a future Administration might restore it, and Perth would not want to miss out. The campaign for city status has had great support from the local media, including the Perthshire Advertiser and Perth FM. The Courier and Advertiser , which is a great supporter of Perth, has produced car stickers so that locals can display their backing for the campaign—I have a supply with me, if members want to display them on their vehicles. I ask the Parliament to lend its support to Perth's bid to gain formal city status, either this year for Perth 800 or as part of the Queen's diamond jubilee celebrations in 2012. The cause is long overdue.

I welcome the content and tone of the Deputy First Minister's statement, which stands in stark contrast to the utterances of the First Minister on the issue. In light of her statement, does she accept that, in providing a reference, she was in danger of breaching paragraph 7.7 of the ministerial code?

The minister has just been talking about the voluntary severance scheme at Skills Development Scotland. Is he aware of the concerns that have been raised by the Scottish Training Federation that many of the experienced officials in SDS who were handling apprenticeship funding and organisation have left, and have been replaced by people whose backgrounds are in the careers service and who lack the necessary expertise? Can the minister address that matter when he next meets representatives of SDS?

I congratulate Peter Peacock on securing a debate on the important subject of broadband. He was kind enough to contribute to my members' business debate on broadband in December, and I am happy to return the favour this evening. The same day that I held my members' business debate, we heard an announcement from the Scottish Government on the upgrading of around 70 new rural exchanges. I did not notice a similar announcement today; perhaps that shows that I am more persuasive with the Scottish Government than Mr Peacock is, or perhaps—and more likely—he has just been unlucky with his timing, as it is the day of the budget vote.

I am grateful to Peter Peacock for clarifying that—I must have missed it. I am sure that the minister will elaborate in due course.  I declare a personal interest, as I moved house last week and spent many dismal hours battling on the telephone with BT to try to get the existing broadband connection transferred to my name. I am pleased to say that that has now eventually been resolved; I am grateful to Ian Shanks of BT for his endless courtesy and patience, and his personal intervention. That was my experience of dealing with broadband, but it is a mere shadow of what I know some of my constituents have to go through. I have spoken to many constituents in Angus and Perthshire since my members' business debate took place in December. Although many of them welcomed the announcement about upgrading the exchanges, many have pointed out to me that that is only part of the solution. There are still widespread problems with broadband availability in rural and remote parts of Scotland, and I will be interested to hear an update from the minister today—if he has time—on the progress of the exchange upgrades. The first of those was due to be completed by March this year, and we are still waiting on a date for the upgrading of the Fern and Menmuir exchanges in Angus. It is frustrating for people in rural areas to see the continual improvement of broadband connectivity in our cities while they cannot get broadband access at all. My colleague Elizabeth Smith pointed out that in Madderty in Perthshire, where she lives, she has no access to broadband at all. It is the two-tier system of broadband connectivity that frustrates so many people in rural areas. Peter Peacock refers in his motion to the situation in the Western Isles, which the "Digital Britain" report identified as one of the problem areas. It is that lack of service in rural areas that is most frustrating when we see the cities powering ahead with superfast broadband. Peter Peacock was kind enough—clearly, he is in generous mood tonight—to refer to the announcement this week by the Conservative party at Westminster that, if elected, by 2017 we will make the United Kingdom the first major European country to have internet speeds of up to 100Mbps per second. We intend to allow private investors from companies such as Carphone Warehouse and Sky to be given permission to use BT cables to provide the service. That will allow the market a greater opportunity to deliver. However, crucially, we have also said that if the market does not deliver, a Conservative Government will extend the 3.5 per cent levy on the BBC licence fee that is currently being used for digital switchover to pay for broadband expansion. That will mean that media organisations will drive forward greater broadband speeds, and it will allow cabling in rural areas to be extended, which  will be paid for by private investors with the licence fee making up the shortfall. We believe that we must end BT's local loop monopoly and allow other operators to move in with their own ducts and fibre cables, which is an approach that has proved successful in countries such as Singapore and South Korea. Rural communities in particular would welcome those improvements. Investment in broadband in rural communities is essential, and we need to end the two-tier approach. I look forward to hearing the Scottish Government's attitude in response to those initiatives.

My Conservative colleagues and I have long held the view that it is not a good use of money from a hard-pressed health budget to provide free prescriptions to people such as me, who can well afford to pay for them. A mere 6 per cent of all prescriptions that are issued must be paid for in full. They are paid for by people such as me who, when we need the odd prescription, have no difficulty whatever with paying the £5 charge that accompanies it. Indeed, many people who are  richer than me, including no less a person than the First Minister—a man in receipt of three salaries—can well afford to pay. It hardly seems to make good sense to take money out of the health budget to put it into the pockets of people such as Mr Salmond, particularly at the time of a squeeze on the public finances, as we heard yesterday afternoon in the budget debate. It saddens me to know that some SNP members take a different view from me. However, I was delighted and encouraged to hear the comments of my good friend the Minister for Housing and Communities, Mr Alex Neil, on "Good Morning Scotland" just last week. Mr Neil, a man who is well known for his robust and outspoken opinions, was being quizzed on the Scottish Government's opposition to a general boiler scrappage scheme and its favouring of an approach that is targeted at those in low-income groups. He said: "Why should people earning £50, £60, £90, £100 grand get a bigger share of the cake when we have got so many people in fuel poverty?" In taking my stance against universal benefits, I did not expect to be able to pray in aid a Government minister of Mr Neil's standing. Clearly, he has seen the sense of a targeted approach, not one that lines the pockets of those who are already on high salaries. What a pity the cabinet secretary cannot similarly see sense.

We think that it is perfectly legitimate that those who are retired and no longer earning an income should get free prescriptions. We support the current exemptions, but our view is that, at a time of pressed resources, we should not extend exemptions to people such as Dr McKee and me, who can pay—

I had not realised that Dr McKee had achieved that age. I congratulate him on that and for doing so well. Later in the interview, Mr Neil seemed to become rather confused. When pressed by Aileen Clarke on why the same principle should not apply to free prescriptions, he said: "Well, er, one of the reasons for that is, er, because, er, the cost actually of administrating a discriminatory pay prescription scheme has become so expensive. We are actually probably saving money and the evidence so far actually shows in terms of prescriptions we are actually in the long run going to save money because we are providing free prescriptions and a lot of the bureaucracy around the current regime can be eliminated."  Almost persuaded by the powerful and articulate argument that Mr Neil put, I went to check the cost of administering the so-called "discriminatory pay prescription scheme". The latest figures that I found were from 2005, when the Scottish Executive revealed that the cost of administering the NHS prescription charging scheme was £1.54 million per year. Even allowing for inflation since then, it is hard to see that an argument can be made that the cost of administration could approach anything like the £40 million-plus that we are talking about. If the cabinet secretary has figures to support Mr Neil in his contention that the administration costs outweigh the costs that would be taken out of the health budget, I would be delighted to hear them. I note that she is not rising to her feet—[ Interruption. ] She is. Excellent!

Sadly, that is not what Mr Neil said. Clearly, he and the cabinet secretary are at odds on the issue. I am sure that she will put him right when they meet very shortly. Mr Neil is not the only one who seems to be confused about his party's stance on the issue. As we have heard, while the Labour Party was in government, its members were very firm in their view that free prescriptions should be opposed. In January 2006, during the stage 1 debate on the Abolition of NHS Prescription Charges (Scotland) Bill, the then Minister for Health and Community Care, Andy Kerr, said: "What is right is that those who can afford to contribute towards NHS dispensing costs should do so."— [ Official Report , 25 January 2006; c 22646.]  In the same debate, Helen Eadie MSP argued against the proposal to provide free prescriptions for all, saying: "We are definitely not happy to throw away £45 million when that money could be spent in some of the most deprived communities."—[ Official Report , 25 January 2006; c 22665.] The self-same Helen Eadie, at a meeting of the Health and Sport Committee last year, voted against the attempt by my colleague, Mary Scanlon, to stop further reductions in prescription charges. I remarked in a previous debate that the appointment of Jackie Baillie as health spokesman  for the Labour Party had brought a much-needed backbone to Labour's health brief. Thanks to her, Labour has developed a much more robust position against blanket minimum pricing of alcohol, as proposed by the SNP. Unfortunately, the consequence of that is that poor Cathy Jamieson is jumping off to Westminster. I had hoped that it would not be too much to expect a similar stiffening of resolve when it comes to the provision of free prescriptions for all, but I fear disappointment in that regard. As David McLetchie pointed out, it is particularly ironic that the Labour Party opposed free prescriptions when we had a rising health budget but is supportive of the proposal now, when the budget is under severe pressure. The confusion on the Labour benches is as nothing to what we see from our friends in the Liberal Democrats. Like Labour, when in government, the Liberal Democrats opposed the abolition of prescription charges. They subsequently supported abolition, voting against Conservative attempts to stop the process at a meeting of the Health and Sport Committee last year. At the end of 2009, however, they changed their position again and now seem to oppose abolition. Even by Liberal Democrat standards, we would be forgiven for being confused. I was able to do a little research on the position of the Liberal Democrats in Wales. Originally the Welsh Liberal Democrats were in favour of free prescriptions, then they were against, and now they are in favour of them again. In contrast, the Scottish Liberal Democrats were against, then they were in favour, and now they seem, again, to be against. Are members keeping up? Winston Churchill was supposed to have said that consistency is the hobgoblin of small minds. That dictum appears to have been adopted enthusiastically by members of his former political party. It really would be helpful to get some clarity and decisiveness from both Labour and the Liberal Democrats on the issue. In contrast, the Scottish Conservatives have at least been consistent in our view that scrapping prescription charges for those who can well afford to pay is not the best use of resources. We believe that the money can be much better spent on improving access to health visitors, for example, as we outlined earlier in the debate. I urge all parties in the chamber to follow the lead that we have taken—ably supported by Alex Neil—and to support our motion.

In that spirit of openness, will the member tell us whether the Liberal Democrats support the principle of a pay freeze for those earning more than £18,000?

I am somewhat confused about the Scottish National Party position on Trident. Until now,  various SNP defence spokesmen have always taken the stance that, if Trident were cancelled, all the money would be put into alternative conventional defence spending. If that is no longer the SNP's position, when did the position change?

I welcome the opportunity that the Labour Party has given us to debate the literacy commission's report. Today's motion from Labour, despite being a little self-serving, makes some fair points and, accordingly, the Scottish Conservatives will be pleased to support it. Labour members should listen carefully at this point, because I will do something that I do not do often, which is praise the Labour Party for the good service that it has done in the formation of the literacy commission and the production of its report. I do not always agree with Judith Gillespie, as I am sure that she will know, but on this occasion I praise her and her colleagues for the sterling work that they have done in preparing the report that we are considering.  The report's headline statistic, which is staggering and deeply worrying—we have heard it repeated many times this morning—is that 18.5 per cent of pupils leaving primary school are not functionally literate. That desperate statistic should worry us all. The importance of basic literacy cannot be overstressed. Speaking at the Scottish Conservatives education conference in September last year, Professor Lindsay Paterson of the University of Edinburgh said: "Literacy and numeracy are not merely optional extras: they are fundamental to everything else. You cannot hope to understand science without them. Without these basic skills, you cannot read imaginative literature, or respond to great art or music, or understand where the country has come from or is going to, or hold our politicians to account intelligently." I am sure that we all agree with those words. The literacy commission's basic recommendation is that, as a nation, Scotland should make a formal commitment to zero tolerance of illiteracy. I hope that we can all support that. It is a scandal that any child can leave primary education after seven years in the classroom without a basic grasp of reading and writing. We know from our survey of parents' opinions that the great majority of them think that the top priority in our schools should be the teaching of those basic skills. So, what is to be done? First, we believe that there should be a much greater focus in our primary schools on teaching basic literacy and numeracy. We often have education debates in which regular calls are made for a range of initiatives on what should be taught in schools, whether they are to do with children becoming more active; promoting healthy eating; financial education; greater access to music or art; anti-bullying initiatives; or greater access to Scottish history—and so the list goes on. Of course all those things are important, but we have to remember that the school day is strictly limited and it has not expanded at all in the past 30 or 40 years. The more time we spend teaching all those other things, the less time is available for the teacher in the classroom to concentrate on basic skills. We need to look again at our priorities. Teaching our children to read, write and add up in primary school has to be the top priority. That means that all of us who are involved in education have to exercise a bit of self-restraint when it comes to addressing all those other matters. Secondly, we have to look at teaching methods. Only last week at education question time, I raised with the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning the issue of teaching by synthetic phonics, which has been used in Clackmannanshire and West Dunbartonshire and  which has delivered spectacular results. I do not believe that the Scottish Government should dictate to local authorities or individual schools specific teaching methods, but where there is a proven track record of success, the Government should ensure that all local authorities and schools are aware of the benefits of using synthetic phonics and that the materials are available. Thirdly, we need to test our youngsters properly to ensure that they have acquired these basic skills. The Scottish Government has proposed testing on literacy and numeracy from secondary 3 onward. In our view, that is far too late in the day. Testing should take place no later than the end of primary 7, so that when a child goes up to secondary school, everyone, from the teacher to the child's parents, is aware of their grasp of these basic skills. Putting such rigorous tests in place would focus minds much more seriously at primary school level on the importance of the three Rs. We believe that that is an absolutely fundamental point. Just over a year ago, on 7 January 2009, this Parliament unanimously backed an amendment in the name of my colleague Elizabeth Smith, which called for tests of literacy and numeracy by the end of primary 7. Perhaps I should repeat that for the benefit of Mr McNulty: the Parliament unanimously backed that amendment, which was identical—word for word—to the amendment that we have lodged today.

Yes, in a second. I am concerned and somewhat disappointed by Labour's U-turn on that vital issue, for which we have had no explanation as yet from Mr McNulty. I will give way to Mrs Brankin, who I hope will explain why her successor as Labour education spokesman has torn up Labour's previous approach.

Rhona Brankin is dancing on the head of a pin trying to find differences between what we support and what the Labour Party supports. The fact is that the Labour Party needs  to make up its mind what it believes on these issues. It is suggesting today that it will reject wording that it supported unanimously just over a year ago. I really think that the Labour Party needs to sort itself out. Of course, it was not just the Labour Party that supported our amendment this time last year. The Scottish National Party Government did so too. We had hoped that in the year that went by we would have seen the Government make progress on the issue of testing. Despite our getting a lot of warm words from Fiona Hyslop, the previous Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, very little has been done in the past year to take the issue forward. We had hoped that the new broom that is Mr Russell would be progressing this issue but, alas, it appears that he, like the Labour Party, has performed a U-turn by trampling on his predecessor's legacy and throwing her judgment into doubt. We expected better of Mr Russell. There is time for him to recant before 5 o'clock and we live in high hope that he will come to his senses.

Is that another U-turn?

I am a little bit confused by Labour's position, given  that Mr McNulty and all his Labour colleagues voted on 7 January 2009 for exactly the same wording as is in our amendment.

I thank the minister for providing me with an advance copy of his statement and welcome the fact that, at long last, we have a decision on this, the most controversial planning application in Scottish history. Few people would dispute the need to upgrade our grid infrastructure if we are properly to exploit Scotland's potential in offshore renewables. Nevertheless, today's announcement will be greeted with dismay by residents in Stirling, Perthshire and the Highlands who have campaigned against the line and by environmental  groups such as the John Muir Trust, the National Trust for Scotland, the Ramblers Association and many others. I have three short questions for the minister. First, what detailed consideration did he give to alternatives to the line, such as strengthening the east coast link, as proposed by Sir Donald Miller, or a subsea cable? Secondly, it seems that undergrounding sections of the line in areas of high scenic value has been ruled out, although without the decision letters being available it is impossible to be clear about that. Can the minister be precise about the matter? If he has ruled out undergrounding of the line, why did he not require that to be done to protect landscapes in sensitive locations such as around Stirling, where the new pylons will have a major impact on views to and from the castle and the Wallace monument? Finally, what compensation will be paid for loss of trade or amenity to those who are adversely affected by the new pylons or their construction?

To ask the Scottish Executive what its position is on the Finance Committee's "Report on scrutiny of the Draft Budget 2010-11". (S3O-8856)

I refer Mr Swinney to paragraph 126, in which the committee asked the Scottish Government to provide "an indicative profile of all capital projects and their expected annual costs over the next 10 years". Will the Scottish Government accept that recommendation and provide the information? If so, where on the list will upgrading of the A9 appear?

To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government will take in response to calls for investment in new nuclear capacity as a means of meeting emissions targets. (S3F-2098)

If we are serious about our climate change targets, is it not time that we had less hot air and grandstanding in Copenhagen from the First Minister and, instead, some practical solutions? When will he start listening to the growing chorus of voices in support of safe low-carbon nuclear capacity? Nuclear energy is supported even by Ian Marchant, the chief executive of Scottish and Southern Energy, who is the man whom the First Minister personally appointed to chair the Scottish Government's 2020  delivery group to ensure that we meet those important targets?

I congratulate Claire Baker on bringing the debate to the chamber and commend her on her motion, which I was happy to sign. As we have already heard from Ms Baker, the Open University has for 40 years provided the opportunity for education for all through innovation and communication. The OU helps about 200,000 students a year to access and benefit from education, and it is committed to providing education for all, regardless of age, location, ability or previous qualifications. Claire Baker rightly paid tribute to the vital work of Jennie Lee in the establishment of the OU 40  years ago. When Harold Wilson appointed Jennie Lee as minister for the arts, he asked her to develop the university of the air project. Through her tenacious work a white paper was published in 1966 and a commitment to the concept was included in Labour's 1966 general election manifesto. The efforts of Jennie Lee in establishing the Open University were recognised when her name was given to the Open University's first library. In 2004, a new university library opened, which housed her political archive. That new library showed the continuing commitment of the OU to distance learning, as it is a centre of digitalisation—that is a big word to say at this time of the evening—that enables users to access and enjoy OU library resources wherever they are. Of course, Jennie Lee was not the only female politician to play a vital role in the OU's early days. In 1970, after the formation of the OU, a new Conservative Government was elected, led by Edward Heath. It was committed to cut public spending—some might say that times never change—and the Open University was perceived as a project on which savings could be made. Having found no negligible saving in reducing the OU's intake, Mr Macmillan, the Chief Secretary to the Treasury, suggested that it could be closed, but the then Education and Science Secretary was attracted to the concept of the OU and won the argument for its continued existence. Her name was Margaret Thatcher. So now we know that Maggie saved not just Hampden park, as we learned this week, but the Open University. The quality of teaching in the OU is remarkable. In 2004, the Sunday Times university guide wrote that only Cambridge, Loughborough, York and the London School of Economics had a better teaching record. According the national student survey that was published in November 2008, 94 per cent of the OU's students mostly or definitely agreed that they were satisfied overall, ranking the university second among the 258 UK institutions that took part. That is a remarkable record. The OU in Scotland has 98 staff and 523 part-time tutors who support 14,000 local students. More people in Scotland choose to study part-time with the OU than with any other institution and it has been the largest provider of part-time study in the Highlands and Islands for more than 30 years. Nowadays, through OpenLearn Scotland, the Open University provides free access to OU learning resources related to all aspects of Scotland's history, politics, literature and technology, which means that everyone is able to access high-quality and valuable information about our country. The OU continues to collaborate with the BBC through Open2.net, an on-line learning portal, and together they create fascinating,  engaging and educational programmes such as "Life" and the much-debated "A History of Scotland". Just last year, I was pleased to help launch a new OU course in Scots law here at Holyrood. What Iain Macleod MP once described as "blithering nonsense" has far surpassed all expectations. The Open University is a brilliant, vibrant and, for many, invaluable institution that is dedicated to lifelong and distance learning for all. Its inclusive nature is what makes the institution such a success, and I congratulate it on its 40 th birthday.

It might be the pantomime season, but if the statement that we have just heard sets the tone for the new cabinet secretary's stewardship of Scottish education, heaven help us all. It consisted of little more than pathetic attempts to pass the buck for SNP failures to previous Governments of different political hues. Today is a double humiliation for the SNP Government, as not one, but two manifesto pledges have been broken—on  the delivery of smaller class sizes and universal free school meals. I hold no candle for the Labour Government, but it is laughable for the cabinet secretary to blame Labour's recession for the SNP's failure on its class size policy because we know that senior civil servants were admitting as far back as summer 2007 that the policy was unachievable, long before the start of the economic downturn. Will the cabinet secretary tell us when he was made aware of the advice given to his predecessor by the civil service that the policy on smaller class sizes could not be delivered?

I have a question before the minister moves on from the exchange upgrades, which I very much welcome. I mentioned that no date has been given for the work on the exchanges at Fern and Menmuir. If the minister cannot tell us when that will happen, can he tell us when he can tell us?

I thank members who are staying behind for the debate and all those who signed my motion on broadband for rural Scotland. I welcome the establishment of the new cross-party group on digital participation and pay tribute to Willie Coffey for his work setting it up. As I say in my motion, I believe that good-quality broadband is essential in today's Scotland. We use the internet to connect with family and friends and to do business. It is also an important educational tool and resource. A study conducted by the Communications Consumer Panel in June 2009 found that 73 per cent of respondents, which included 2,000 members of the public and 16 focus groups, believe that a high-speed web connection is as essential as basic utilities such as electricity and water. Quite simply, broadband is now seen as a necessity. I will concentrate on two issues: first, the problems with exchanges in rural areas and the need to upgrade them; secondly, the problems with, and shortcomings of, the Scottish Government's Avanti Communications contract. I fear that rural Scotland is being short-changed. There is no better way to outline the frustrations and problems of my constituents than to quote their own words. A resident in highland Perthshire e-mailed me the following: "We do our bit for tourism by letting a farmhouse for high quality self-catering holidays and are greatly hindered by the slowness of the broadband speeds. When they talk about 8mb/s being slow they should try our 0.5mb/s. The  quality of the lines to the exchange and the type of exchange itself needs to be upgraded." Another constituent near Kirriemuir in the Angus glens wrote: "There is an absolute ground swell of people - ordinary people, not business - who are demanding better quality broadband - and this won't be stopped. Several local people here drive regularly 50 miles or more to receive and send material from Dundee. How do you send fine architectural drawings on the facilities BT gives us here?" The Kirkmichael session house in rural Perthshire serves as an important community centre and provides distance-learning courses from Perth College, so access to broadband is essential. The session house had access through ISDN, but that was withdrawn and, because the local exchange was full, it could not access broadband. The session house wrote to the chairman of BT, saying: "We have been left high and dry. We have no internet connection and are unable to conduct our day-to-day activities." We have a persistent problem with other rural exchanges, including those at Fern and Menmuir in Angus, operating at capacity. I was pleased to see the Scottish Government announce a few weeks ago a £3 million programme of exchange upgrades. I was equally pleased to see earlier today that the Scottish Government announced a detailed programme. When I asked for this members' business debate, I did not expect so early or so easy a victory. If only the Government caved in so easily to all my demands—I would request members' business debates all the time. It is welcome that our pressure has paid off and that the Government is taking action, but before the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism gets too complacent I point out that the information that the Government released today states that the timetable for two exchanges that I have just mentioned—Fern and Menmuir—has still to be announced. I would like the minister to tell us in his reply when we can expect details of the timetable, which is of great interest to my constituents. Through Avanti, the Scottish Government provides those who are more than 5km away from an exchange with a wireless service. I believe—I am sure that this will be reflected in other members' speeches—that there are real problems with the speed, reliability and cost of the Avanti service. One resident in the Angus glens wrote to me with the following description: "The Avanti contract will provide broadband to some currently without access; however the broadband access provided will be very slow and relatively expensive compared to that available in cities and urban areas. Furthermore it will not provide universal availability of  access to broadband since Avanti has informed us that they are under no obligation to provide a service to all those registered on the scheme." Another individual who registered for the Avanti scheme was told by Avanti that the scheme could do nothing for her because a hill to the south of her house blocked out the signal. That problem is duplicated across rural and remote parts of Scotland. Residents and businesses tell me that Avanti is not the answer and that the contract is failing them. I do not believe that it is right that, while most of Scotland enjoys high levels of broadband availability and our cities benefit from ever faster services, rural parts of Scotland are left completely behind and, in many cases, are unable to obtain any service at all. Individuals and businesses in Angus, Perthshire and across Scotland are extremely frustrated that they cannot receive broadband connectivity at all. That is holding back businesses and rural communities. Already, we have a two-tier communication system in Scotland. Every year, there seems to be a greater gulf between the technology that is offered to the cities and that which is available to rural areas. We all want vibrant rural communities in which people can work from home to help meet our climate change targets, but that will not happen without better broadband access. In September 2009, it was announced with great fanfare that broadband-enabling technology, which allows broadband to be provided to homes that are currently too far away from their local exchange to receive a broadband service, had been successfully trialled in the Highlands. More trials are planned to take place in other parts of Scotland. Although I welcome the commitment to upgrade some exchanges and to undertake further trials of BET, I remain concerned that there is still no long-term broadband solution for our rural communities. From speaking to many people who signed up to Avanti, it is clear that Avanti has not solved the problem of enabling people in remote and rural areas to access adequate broadband. That is why I think we need to have a fresh look at this important issue. I believe that inadequate broadband for rural Scotland is a social injustice that must end. As we enter the season of good will, I hope that the Scottish National Party Government will give rural and remote Scotland an early Christmas present by making a commitment to much-improved broadband connectivity for households and businesses.

Will the minister give way?

I assure Mr Crawford that it is dearly at my heart. However, if the end point of the journey is quite clear to him and his Government, why is there no mention of it in the motion?

When members consider how many lively and heated debates we have had on the constitutional issue in the chamber in recent years, it is remarkable how quiet and low key this debate has been. I think, to be honest, that that reflects the public mood on the issue. People are concerned about the economy, about losing their jobs, about public services and about cuts down the line. I do not think that the constitution rates at the top of their concerns at present. That is why I share the criticism that many others have made of the national conversation and the complete waste of money that it has been at a time when there are other priorities. I welcome Fiona Hyslop to her new position in Government. I am disappointed to see her leading the debate, although that is not in any way a personal comment. Like others, I had understood that, after last week's reshuffle, the First Minister, Mr Salmond, would be taking personal responsibility for constitutional matters.

If Ms Hyslop wants to explain where Mr Salmond is, I am delighted to give way.

I am sorry that Ms Hyslop's intervention has taken up most of the time that I had left for my speech. I notice that we did not get an explanation as to where Mr Salmond is—perhaps he is busy signing his Christmas cards. Like Wendy Alexander, I was surprised that the SNP Government's motion made no mention at all of the national conversation or, indeed, of independence. The SNP has had a bruising couple of weeks with revelations about Michael Russell's cyber-nat employee, Fiona Hyslop's  sacking from the education brief and the accusation that the First Minister misled Parliament on what he knew about the Government's class size policy. Little did we know that things had got so bad for the SNP that it would have to hide away its principal policy of independence. We need only imagine the dismay on the faces of SNP back benchers that its motion on the constitution makes no mention of the notion of independence. I heard Alasdair Allan's clarion call for change. He should start by persuading his own party's front bench of the need to take up that call. Indeed, the best case that I heard for independence this afternoon came from not the SNP benches but Margo MacDonald, an ex-SNP member. Despite her charms, I am not persuaded in any way on the subject. I say that for the avoidance of doubt. I am pleased that the SNP Government has welcomed the recommendations of the Calman commission—a commission that, of course, it rubbished from day one. That demonstrates the stark contrast between the work that the Conservative, Labour and Liberal Democrat parties have done on the constitution, in the Parliament and elsewhere, and that which the SNP has done. We are working together to see Scotland better governed while the SNP sits girning on the sidelines, sniping and criticising, before trying to join the party at the last possible moment. As we heard from Mr Doris and other SNP members, the SNP wants to pick and choose which bits of Calman it wants to implement. The SNP is not interested in the parts with which it disagrees.

I am not sure where Mr Adam has been for the debate. As my colleagues Mr Brownlee and Mr McLetchie made perfectly clear, when we are in Government, we will publish a white paper and legislate using Calman as a starting point. What could be clearer than that?

I am deeply disappointed by the approach of my friends—if I can call them that—on the Liberal Democrat benches. Once again, they are propping up the SNP—the party of independence. I do not understand where the idea has come from that we should make a wholly unrealistic and  headlong rush to implement part of the Calman proposals. The Government motion, which the Liberal Democrats are signed up to, refers to the "dissolution of the current UK Parliament." We do not know when dissolution will be. How can the Liberal Democrats possibly argue that we should do something before a date that has not been fixed? Of course, it was Tavish Scott who said during the last debate on the subject: "I am no unionist".—[ Official Report , 25 June 2009; c 18846.] The attitude of the Liberal Democrats in today's debate has made that crystal clear. I turn to Calman's financial powers. As a party, we have long argued that the Scottish Parliament needs to have greater financial accountability by way of greater powers over raising and spending taxes and borrowing. As George Foulkes and Derek Brownlee said, the advantage is that that would end the blame game. The SNP's default position on everything is to blame someone else for Scotland's ills. At least if we move forward on Calman, we will take away the prop that it uses at every opportunity. I genuinely believe that there is a great deal of consensus on how to improve the powers of the Scottish Parliament so that it can operate better and, in so doing, to strengthen the United Kingdom. It is a pity that the SNP came so late to the table in support of that agenda; it is an even greater pity that it is determined to waste millions of pounds of taxpayers' money on its unwanted national conversation. In a spirit of consensus, I make an appeal to the new minister: drop the wasteful national conversation and the plans for independence—an idea that is more unpopular that it has been at almost any time in our history—and join us in making devolution work better.

When I saw that a debate on GIRFEC was scheduled for this afternoon, I wondered why we were having another debate on the subject just short of three months since our previous debate. Certainly, this afternoon's debate stands in marked contrast to this morning's rather more lively kick-around on education policy. Nonetheless, the debate has been valuable and, if anything, might prove to be more important in the long run than our debate earlier today. We have heard some excellent speeches from different sides in the debate. In particular, I was struck—as I always am—by Duncan McNeil's speech, which brought to our attention some startling and sobering statistics about the high mortality rate among young children who are under referral. His comments should be a wake-up call to us all, but I particularly want to hear from the minister, when he winds up the debate, what action he intends to take to address the issues that have now been brought to the Government's attention. The Highland pathfinder report was mentioned by several members—Mary Scanlon went into it in some detail—including the minister. In his opening speech, he set out some of the pathfinder project's successes, especially the important outcome of a reduction in the number of children on the child protection register. From my reading of the report, a key success of the Highland pathfinder project has been the reduction in bureaucracy, which has allowed professionals to spend less time writing reports and attending internal meetings and has freed up more time for direct work with children. Another outcome is better information sharing, with a move away from using paper records, which are terribly time consuming and hard to access, to keeping electronic records. That has also reduced the burden on staff. Therefore, I very much welcome the minister's commitment to implement  the GIRFEC programme throughout Scotland on the back of the successful pilot in the Highlands. The important role of midwives and health visitors was mentioned by the minister and by several members, including Dr Ian McKee, who highlighted the important role that they play in dealing with low-birth-weight babies. On Monday, I met members of NHS Tayside's community midwifery service at Perth royal infirmary. I should perhaps declare an interest, in that my family has recently—albeit not as recently as Mr Hepburn's family—utilised the midwives' excellent services. From my encounter with them, I discovered an extremely interesting point about midwives' level of contact with families—both mothers-to-be and new mothers—in the home. Given that GPs now perform very few home visits and none at all out of hours—the situation has moved on considerably from perhaps a generation ago, when many GPs were familiar, through home visits, with the environment in which their patients lived—the few health professionals who still visit people in their homes include midwives and health visitors. That contact with families in the home enables those health professionals to identify, at an early stage, likely problem areas and potentially vulnerable groups. We have heard a great deal about the importance of early intervention. Mary Scanlon mentioned the consequences of the neglect of children under two, which is a crucial factor in poor health outcomes later in life. Given that we understand the importance of early intervention, we must be able to identify the problem areas, which is why midwives and health visitors play such an important role. As my Conservative colleagues have said on a number of occasions, we support additional investment in health visitors and think that we should protect the investment in midwives, on whom more and more responsibility is being placed. They are doing a vital job, but they need to be properly resourced. There has been some discussion of children's hearings, about which Karen Whitefield and Elizabeth Smith raised concerns. I agree with Ross Finnie, who welcomed the withdrawal of the Government's initial proposals on the children's hearings system. We look forward to engaging with the Government when it brings new plans to update and reform that system. I was struck by the excellent points in the briefing from Children 1 st , which I read in advance of the debate, two of which I want to highlight. First, it states: "The Scottish child protection system does not need more strategies or tick boxes around child protection. Instead it needs the resource, training and confidence to allow professionals to make good, supported decisions that are in the best interests of the child."  In other words, we must focus on resources and training. Secondly, there needs to be "Stable and adequate funding for the voluntary sector, particularly for services which provide therapeutic support after abuse". We all know—because we have debated the issue many times—that serious times are coming for the public finances and that serious cuts will have to be made. The temptation, particularly at local government level, is to let the voluntary sector bear the brunt of those cuts in the first instance. That is what often happens, because councils want to preserve core services and direct employment. Children 1 st asks us to ensure that we do not put the voluntary sector in the firing line and that we safeguard the vital services that it provides. We will support the Government's motion and the Labour amendment, which makes the important point that the HMIE report showed that "almost half of the 30 councils inspected were assessed as weak or unsatisfactory in relation to the assessment of risks and needs". That was referred to by Karen Whitefield and elaborated on by Hugh Henry. We must put that right. I hope that we can now begin the process of ensuring that our councils are up to the job of protecting our most vulnerable children.

Can the First Minister tell us how many of the contributors to the national conversation online discussion are in fact cybernats who are working for SNP parliamentarians at taxpayers' expense?

I did not.

Will the member give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

I am grateful, Presiding Officer. Can you tell me how you can ensure under standing orders that, when a member speaks in a debate and patently peddles untruths and misrepresents what another member has said, it is possible for the record to be corrected to ensure that the truth is told?

For the second time this morning, I welcome Michael Russell to his new position as Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning. As has been said, Mr Russell is well known for his combative style and it will be interesting to see  how that develops as he tries to make progress with education policy on what we hope will be a consensual basis, although I must say that the signs so far are not encouraging. He is of course no longer employed in his previous task of steering through the national conversation and the SNP's plans for a referendum, but perhaps, without his cybernat employee blogging abuse all the hours in the day at taxpayers' expense, he was deemed to be no longer properly supported to perform that role. I will say a few words again about the outgoing cabinet secretary, Fiona Hyslop. It is fair to say that Fiona did not have the happiest time as education secretary, although she did some good work. In particular, I pay tribute to her for introducing legislation to help to protect rural schools, an issue in which I had a close interest. As Margaret Smith said, the failures in education policy were not the failures of the cabinet secretary alone but those of the entire Government. The concordat that was negotiated by Fiona Hyslop's Cabinet colleagues left her without the tools to deliver the wholly unrealistic SNP manifesto pledges. However, we have a new minister and surely it is time for a fresh start. Scotland needs not so much a change of face at the top of education but a change of direction. The Lib Dem motion details some of the well-known failures in education policy. We know that the policy on class size reductions is unachievable. We have calculated that, on current terms, it will be 2095 before it is delivered. We know that the SNP has been falling down on delivering new school buildings and that the Scottish Futures Trust has yet to fund a single project. We know that teacher numbers are falling, despite the SNP promise to maintain them. More worrying still, we know that, despite substantial increased investment in education in recent years, standards have been flatlining. That point is acknowledged by education experts. We are slipping down the international comparison tables and it is now clear that school education in England is consistently out-performing that in Scotland. The current situation cannot be allowed to go on.

I was just about to cover the very point that Mr Rumbles discusses. He will notice that our amendment highlights some of the fresh thinking that we have heard from the new cabinet secretary in the past. We are interested in exploring some of those ideas further with the  cabinet secretary. That does not necessarily mean that we are as yet convinced by some of them, but we are open to persuasion. We need fresh thinking as well as a fresh face. In that context, the appointment of Michael Russell augurs well, given all that he has written in the past about education. I was very interested to see that, in the tour de force that is the now famous—or notorious—book "Grasping the Thistle", which he co-authored with Dennis MacLeod, Mr Russell was prepared to embrace radical new thinking on education. Let me quote just a few extracts: "we want to rethink the prevailing Scottish orthodoxy, which continues to hold that health and education - and other services - must all be delivered virtually exclusively by the public sector ... Many commentators have noted the success in Sweden of education vouchers, and the debate about their utility in Scotland would be instructive, particularly if shorn of ideological prejudice. The consumer - the child along with his or her parents, the young person seeking to go to college or university and the mature student - would be able to choose the best facilities for their particular needs, and be able to force new provision onto the market by means of their purchasing power, provided by the state." My particular favourite is: "Choice and diversity are the hallmarks of a mature and confident society and such a system would ensure the emergence of new types of private provision, which are not seen as exclusive or class ridden." Those words are music to my ears and those of my Conservative colleagues.

No. I want to develop the point. If I have time later, I will give way. For some time, we have been interested in the Swedish style of education provision, which allows parents and other providers to set up their own schools. On this side of the chamber, we have always felt that there is a lot to be learned from the small, northern European countries such as Sweden that are part of the fabled arc of prosperity. I am delighted that the SNP now takes a similar view. Of course, the result in Sweden has been to drive up standards not only in the independent sector but in the state sector. Perhaps that is the recipe that Scotland requires. I raised my eyebrows on reading that the provision could be provided privately, which I assume means by profit-making bodies. Until now, the Scottish Conservatives have believed that there is an argument for allowing new schools to be created by groups of parents, charities and churches and other faith groups, but even we had not accepted that such institutions could be run by private bodies, for profit. We may be sceptical on the matter, but I say to the cabinet secretary that we are open to his persuasive charm on the issue.  Let him come and sell us the idea of private provision of education in Scotland, funded by the taxpayer but run for profit by the private sector, and we will not let our ideological prejudices get in the way of a mature and constructive discussion.

I would be delighted to hear what the cabinet secretary has to say.

I am deeply disappointed that so early in his tenure of office—less than an hour after being appointed as cabinet secretary—

If only he did, Mr Paterson. The cabinet secretary is already being whipped firmly into line by his new colleagues. Obviously, the First Minister had a firm word with Mr Russell before his appointment. The First Minister must have said, "Renounce all your past beliefs." Mr Russell is like a latter-day Archbishop Cranmer, being dragged to the stake, renouncing all his past conversions. I am deeply unhappy that the cabinet secretary has taken the stance that he has this morning.

Given that our amendment uses the cabinet secretary's words, I am sure that he will have no problem in voting for it. I reiterate the call, which we have made in the past and which has been supported by the whole Parliament, for primary school testing. My colleague Elizabeth Smith will say more about that later in the debate. The one thing that is clear about Scottish education is that we cannot go on as we are. The appointment of a new minister gives us an opportunity to make a fresh start. We cannot have another two and a half years like the period that has just gone by, in which no progress is made on standards and there are failures in a whole range of policy areas. I move amendment S3M-5334.3 to leave out from "regrets" and insert: "welcomes the appointment of Michael Russell to the post of Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning; believes, like the Cabinet Secretary, that 'choice and diversity are the hallmarks of a mature and confident  society' in the provision of state-funded education and that Scotland can learn from successful models in other European countries such as Sweden; trusts that such creative thinking will not be stifled by the Cabinet Secretary's promotion to higher Ministerial Office, and calls upon him to implement the terms of motion S3M-3164 as passed unanimously by the Parliament on 7 January 2009 affirming the need to ensure that pupils in Scotland are properly schooled and tested in the basic skills of literacy and numeracy by the end of primary 7."

I welcome this opportunity to make a few brief remarks on the sad demotion of Fiona Hyslop from the Cabinet and the elevation of Michael Russell to be her successor. It is right that we recognise the contribution, albeit modest, that has been made by Fiona Hyslop to education in Scotland. Just two weeks ago, I warmly congratulated her in this chamber on seeing through Parliament the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill, which implements additional protections for rural schools, a cause that she and I have championed. Beyond that, I think that it is fair to say that she did not have the happiest of times as Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, being lumbered by the First Minister with having to implement policies on class sizes, teacher numbers and school buildings without being given the tools or the support to do so. Indeed, the signing of the concordat with local government—a concordat that no longer seems to deserve the adjective "historic"—meant that poor Ms Hyslop's hands were tied. Frankly, even the angel Gabriel as education secretary could not have delivered the SNP's manifesto pledges.  Instead of the angel Gabriel, we now have Michael Russell. Mr Russell is well known across the Parliament and, indeed, Scottish public life for his modest and self-effacing manner, except when it comes to discussing his own abilities. He certainly has a huge challenge on his hands with the education brief and, in the debate to follow, I will be setting out some of the hopes and aspirations that we have for his new office, particularly given some of the interesting positions that he has taken in the past. I am sure that the remainder bookshops of Edinburgh have seen a remarkable uplift in sales of "Grasping the Thistle", just in time for Christmas. We should reflect for a moment on the extraordinarily rapid rebirth of Michael Russell's political career. After all, this is a man who lost his seat in Parliament back in 2003, when the ungrateful SNP membership decided that he was not worthy of a high-ranking position on the regional list. Following his time in the wilderness, he came back to Parliament a mere two and a half years ago, immediately finding himself in ministerial office. Today, his advancement takes him one step further, as he joins the Cabinet. There is, as I am sure that the First Minister is painfully aware, just one more step to go. Michael Russell's career to date is a living inspiration to all those who aspire to the top job in politics. It shows them that they should not worry about such trivial concepts as diligence, serving one's time or loyalty to one's leader. The fastest way to promotion is to stir, mix, cause trouble and indeed even go so far as to stand for leader against the man who is bound to become your boss. The First Minister should be sleeping in his bed just a little less soundly tonight, now that he has brought Mr Russell into the Cabinet. We in the Scottish Conservatives wish Mr Russell well in his new appointment. We will be watching his every move with close interest, but not, I suspect, as closely as will his own colleagues.

Given that support for independence continues to languish lowly in the opinion polls without showing any sign of increasing, surely it is time the Government dropped the national conversation nonsense and spent the money on something more useful?

Who won?

There is nothing like a lively debate on a Wednesday afternoon. However, I am sure that one thing that we can all agree on is that there is far too much ignorance among young people about aspects of our history, as was highlighted in a recent survey of children's knowledge of the second world war that was carried out by Erskine, the Scottish veterans charity. One in 20 children thought that Adolf Hitler was coach of the German football team and that the Holocaust was a celebration of the end of the war. One in 12 believed that the blitz was a European clean-up following the war, and one in 10 thought the SS stood for End Blyton's secret seven. When we last debated Scotland's history in January last year, I mentioned some other survey results, which showed that 37 per cent of young Scots thought that we became part of the United Kingdom when we were conquered by England, another 28 per cent thought that it was the result of a referendum, and 41 per cent thought that the battle of Culloden was a conflict between wholly Scottish and wholly English armies. So there is much to be done. We support the Government's intention to strengthen the teaching of Scottish history in the school curriculum. As someone who is passionate about Scottish history, I welcome the increased public interest in the subject. The BBC's "A History of Scotland" series, presented by Neil Oliver, has generated debate, with Professor Devine wading  in with his criticisms. Although he might be right to say that it is a rather superficial treatment of the subject, we are seeing Scottish history on prime-time television, so the BBC should be congratulated on its scheduling of such an important series at such an important time of the week. The Government's motion welcomes the Scotland's history website, to which Ken Macintosh referred. It is certainly a valuable resource that contains a great deal of information. However, I question some of the entries and the omission of certain key and relevant facts. The website is intended to teach about Scottish history—which is of course linked inextricably to the history of England, Wales, Ireland and France—but there is little mention of what happened elsewhere, despite developments in other countries often being highly relevant. For example, in the section on the reformation, there is reference to Martin Luther and the French regency in Scotland, but no mention at all of the reformation in England and how significant that was. The importance of that is highlighted in Harry Reid's excellent new book "Reformation: The Dangerous Birth of the Modern World". The website's section on devolution reads more like a party manifesto than an objective historical analysis. Ken Macintosh gave some other excellent examples of the website's dwelling on nationalist obsessions, such as the unsung second verse of the national anthem, about which no one in the real world is the least bit concerned. The Scottish Government has form for promoting a nationalist agenda in everything it does, and we must be extra careful to ensure that there is no attempt to distort Scottish history. In particular, historical resources that are made available to schoolchildren should never be used as a vehicle for propaganda.

Perhaps the cabinet secretary should have waited for a moment to hear my next concern about the funding of school trips to historic sites such as the battlefields of Bannockburn and Culloden and Robert Burns's birthplace. I should say for the record that I have no problem with encouraging schoolchildren to visit historic sites. I have not yet had the opportunity to see the new visitor centre at Culloden for myself, but by all accounts it is excellent and it gives a balanced view of the battle. The centre at Bannockburn is in need of a facelift and I have raised with the Scottish Government the hope that it will consider assisting  an improvement of that facility as we approach the 700 th anniversary of the battle. However, I question the focus of the initiative, given that two out of the three sites that have been selected were the scenes of conflict with our southern neighbours, although we know that there were as many Scots supporting the Hanoverians at Culloden as were supporting the Jacobites. So why restrict the initiative to those three sites? Why is there such a narrow focus? Why not have visits to the David Livingstone centre in Blantyre to learn about that great Scottish missionary and explorer, who led the campaign against the slave trade? Why not visit the People's Palace in Glasgow to learn about the social history of Scotland? Why not visit the Museum of Flight in East Lothian to learn about the Scots' role in the battle of Britain? Why is there so restrictive a choice of subjects? Again, the suspicion must be that it is about pursuing a narrow nationalist agenda.

I did not mention the stone of destiny in my remarks. All I would say—I am sure that Professor Devine would agree with me on this—is that if we are going to encourage schoolchildren to visit historic sites, which is a worthwhile initiative, why cannot we have a menu of opportunities for young people to see the richness of the history of Scotland and its place in Great Britain and its place in the world? Why should we have such a restricted choice?

No. I need to make some progress, if Mrs MacDonald will forgive me. The SNP Government's selective view of history again came to light when it was revealed in a parliamentary answer to me earlier this year that there were no plans to mark the 450 th anniversary of the Scottish reformation, which falls in 2010. It is without doubt that the reformation is a hugely significant event in Scottish history, not only in religious terms but also in that it marked the point at which Scotland as a nation started to turn away from our historic links with France and continental Europe and increasingly towards links with Protestant England—perhaps it is for that reason that the SNP is so uncomfortable with it. Historians  such as Tom Devine and Harry Reid, who is himself a nationalist, have also criticised the SNP Government, which is so keen to celebrate other anniversaries—such as those associated with Burns—for not being prepared to mark the reformation. We have learnt that even the Edinburgh hogmanay celebrations are to focus on the 450 th anniversary of the reformation, with a series of events and activities. Even now, it is not too late for the Scottish Government to join the party, so I hope that it seizes that opportunity. My amendment, which seems to have caused so much upset among SNP members, "regrets any attempts to promote a nationalist agenda through the use of public resources and the teaching of history." I hope that there are, in fact, no such attempts, although I fear that there is some evidence to the contrary. It is vital that our children have a balanced and objective view of history that is not dominated by any one political viewpoint. For that reason, I hope that the Scottish Government will support our amendment to put the matter beyond any doubt. I move amendment S3M-5266.1, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: "notes the recent launch of Scotland's History online and regrets any attempts to promote a nationalist agenda through the use of public resources and the teaching of history."

I am rather confused by what the cabinet secretary has said. I have read our amendment carefully and can see no attack on teachers in it. What I can see, potentially, is an attack on politicians for seeking to politicise Scottish history.

I agree with what the cabinet secretary has just said. Does she agree that one of the major flaws of many previous consultations by local authorities has been in relation to the financial consequences of school closures? We have seen that in a number of recent cases. Does she hope that one of the outcomes of the bill will be a substantial improvement in understanding at local government level of the financial consequences of the closure of a rural school?

Christmas eve.

That is why you are in the SNP.

I am delighted to support the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill at stage 3 and, if I am not being too presumptuous, to welcome its passing later this afternoon. There is an old saying that success has many parents, and the bill certainly falls into that category. At the last Scottish elections, the Conservatives had a manifesto commitment to bring in a legal protection for rural schools. In pursuance of that, I lodged a proposal for a member's bill on the subject earlier in the session. The Scottish Government had a similar view,  which meant that my proposed member's bill was knocked out. We are pleased to support the bill that is before us in its place. I pay tribute to the non-Executive bills unit for all its work with me in connection with my bill proposal. In relation to the bill that is before us, I record my personal thanks to the bill team, whom I found to be extremely helpful. They were always prepared to engage in discussions throughout the process. I attended a number of meetings of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee during the passage of the bill, and I thank the convener and other members of the committee, as well as the committee clerks, for their forbearance in allowing me to attend the evidence sessions and to put questions to witnesses. Finally, but perhaps most important, I thank the cabinet secretary for the consensual and co-operative manner in which she has handled the bill. She knows that it is rare for her work to be praised in the Parliament by Opposition education spokesmen, but on this occasion at least I put on record our appreciation for her approach to the bill and the manner in which she has pursued it. Who knows how long it will be before I say those words again? The genesis of the bill was in the excellent work of the Scottish rural schools network. I am sure that few members have not encountered that highly energetic organisation, which is ably led by Sandy Longmuir. He and his colleagues have lobbied extensively on the issue for years and have built up a huge reservoir of knowledge about the finances and sustainability of rural schools from their many years of experience of fighting rural school closures throughout Scotland. I know that there are directors of education throughout the country who tremble at the knees when Sandy Longmuir's name is mentioned. It is instructive to note that among the parents who pursue the issue in their spare time there seems to be a greater degree of knowledge of the finances of education than there is among directors of finance in some of our local authorities. There is a lesson for COSLA in that regard. It was the proposed closure of Arbirlot primary school, near Arbroath, that led Sandy Longmuir and his colleagues to take an interest in the process. It was fortunate that Arbirlot school was saved, but too many rural schools in Scotland have closed in recent years. The arguments against rural school closure were rehearsed in evidence to the committee and during the stage 1 debate—I am sorry that I missed that debate, but I was otherwise engaged in ensuring that there would be a next generation  of Scotland's schoolchildren. I do not intend to repeat all the arguments, but there is clear evidence that children who are educated in small rural schools often have better educational and social outcomes than do children who are educated in much larger schools. Such advantages are more marked among people who come from less-privileged backgrounds. Much of that evidence goes against received wisdom, which wrongly suggests that children who attend very small schools lack the social interaction skills that are required in later life. As we have heard, the debate about rural schools is not just about educational attainment. Rural schools are often at the heart of the community. In rural Scotland in recent years we have witnessed the closure of shops, filling stations, post offices, pubs and churches. In many rural communities the school is the only remaining public building and is often the focus of community life, because its buildings are used out of school hours for a variety of community purposes. If the school closes, the heart of the community goes with it. Families with small children are reluctant to move to the area and families who are already there are tempted to move out. The community slowly dies. I have seen that happen too often, which is why I have such a strong belief in maintaining rural schools. The bill will not stop the closure of all rural schools in Scotland. There will be occasions on which closure is justified. However, it will put in place safeguards that will ensure that the voices of parents and other people in the community are properly heard, so that, in future, closures will not happen on some of the spurious grounds that have been used in the past. This is a good day for Scottish education and for rural Scotland. The Parliament will legislate to introduce a protection for rural schools that will benefit pupils and parents in Scotland's countryside and strengthen our rural communities. I am proud to have played a part in making that happen. Today demonstrates the strength of the Scottish Parliament in allowing different parties to work together in pursuit of a common goal. I pay tribute again to the work of the Scottish rural schools network, without whose vigorous lobbying I am sure that none of that would have happened.

To ask the First Minister when the Scottish Government will announce the minimum price per unit of alcohol that it plans to introduce. (S3F-2021)

I am sure that the First Minister will agree that we need, before we can discuss the minimum price, to know whether such a policy would be legal. Three weeks ago in the chamber, the First Minister said about the legal advice that the Government had taken on minimum pricing: "I hope and believe that such information can be made available to members to enable us to discuss and address the issue in a serious way."— [ Official Report , 29 October 2009; c 20682.]  The following week in the chamber, his deputy said: "I want to work with other parties ... but we are working within the same constraints as the previous Administration. I have acres of quotations from previous ministers ... on why legal advice cannot be shared."— [ Official Report , 5 November 2009; c 20913.]  What is the Scottish Government's position? Is it that of the First Minister, who wants to share the legal advice, or that of his deputy, who does not?

The cabinet secretary will recall that, last month, the Parliament unanimously passed a Conservative amendment in my name that supported funding for rural colleges. I appreciate that such decisions are for the Scottish funding council, but the fact is that the cabinet secretary has powers of ministerial direction on this matter. Will she bear in mind the terms of my amendment when she considers future funding allocations?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

I am confused as to why the member thinks that that message is in support of minimum pricing; it could equally well be in support of increased taxation on alcopops and problem drinks, which is exactly what the Conservative proposal is.

I suggest that Mr Don should read the evidence that has been presented by the Scotch Whisky Association. It is extremely concerned that, if the Government in Scotland imposed an extra duty on spirits on health grounds, that would be a green light to every other Government in the world to do exactly the same. We know that countries such as South Korea have tried to impose punitive taxation on whisky imports in the past to protect the domestic market. The Scotch Whisky Association is concerned that that could happen elsewhere.

Will the member take an intervention?

I am grateful to Jackie Baillie for setting out for members why she has an open mind on the subject. When did her closed mind, which is clear from the statement on her website, become an open mind?

A policy of minimum pricing for alcohol is wrong because it will penalise responsible drinkers, may well be illegal under European Union rules and will cost jobs in our vital spirits industry. It is also wrong because, by focusing on that single measure, the Scottish National Party Government loses the opportunity to build a true cross-party consensus on measures that we need to take to tackle the scourge of alcohol in Scottish society. As our motion states, alcohol misuse costs an estimated £2.25 billion per year. Too many people drink more than the recommended maximum level per week. That is not a problem for everyone, but it involves a sizeable minority of men and women. For that reason, it is right that we have a debate on alcohol policy and what needs to be done. The Scottish Conservatives believe that we should concentrate on the areas on which we all agree that action should be taken. I am sure that we all agree that we need better enforcement of the current laws, particularly in restricting sales to people who are under age. I am sure that we all agree that we should have much better education on the adverse health effects of alcohol. I am also sure that most if not all of us agree that we need to clamp down on irresponsible promotions by retailers, which is why the Conservatives support a ban on retailers selling alcohol below cost price. We also support targeted alcohol taxation: a rise in excise duty on alcopops, as well as on super-strength beers and ciders. The measures that we propose, which many others support, are properly targeted, evidence based, effective and legally competent. They stand in sharp contrast to the SNP Government's proposals on minimum pricing, which pass none of those tests. Minimum pricing is wrong because, unlike our policy, it will penalise responsible drinkers. Based on a minimum price of 50p per unit, the policy would lead to an increase in the price of Stowells of Chelsea wine while the price of Buckfast would not go up by a penny. I do not know which of the two is the weekend drink of choice for the neds in constituencies like that of the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing, but I wager that they do not neck down a nice Stowells of Chelsea merlot at the start of a night out.  Secondly, minimum pricing is wrong because it may be illegal. Just last week, there was a ruling from the European Commission on minimum pricing for tobacco products, which has clear consequences for a similar policy on alcohol.

Nicola Sturgeon is playing the same game that Alex Salmond played last week at First Minister's question time, when he quoted selectively from the opinion that was given. It was made perfectly clear in the answer that the European Commission gave to Catherine Stihler MEP that a minimum price may have an adverse effect and thus constitute an obstacle to the free movement of trade in the internal market. There is a clear risk in that to the SNP's policy. It is instructive that, in its briefing for the debate, even Alcohol Focus Scotland—a body that enthusiastically supports the SNP's minimum pricing policy—says: "it is impossible to say that minimum pricing of alcohol would definitely withstand a challenge in the European Court of Justice". We have called previously for the Scottish Government to publish its legal advice on whether minimum pricing of alcohol would breach EU rules. If the Government is to be taken seriously on the issue, it must publish that advice without delay and not just share it with Jackie Baillie, which is what the First Minister promised at First Minister's question time last week.

There we go—yet another broken promise. The third reason why minimum pricing is wrong is that it will do immense damage to the vital spirits industry in Scotland. The Scotch Whisky Association estimates that whisky exports alone could fall by in the region of £600 million per year as Governments across the globe sought to copy the Scottish Government's lead and increased duties on whisky. The Scottish ministers consistently argue that, because Scotch whisky is a premium product, minimum pricing will not affect it, but that is not the view of the Scotch Whisky Association, Whyte and Mackay, Pernod Ricard UK—when it is not being bullied by the First Minister—or the other whisky producers, and I know whom the public are more likely to believe. If we needed to know what the Government's attitude towards the Scotch whisky industry was,  all we had to do was read yesterday's press release from the health secretary, in which she said: "I would call on everyone who cares about Scotland's health to listen to the real evidence about the benefits of minimum pricing, rather than being swayed by lobbyists whose only concern is their own profits." There we have it: the Government and the health secretary think that all the vital Scotch whisky industry—which supports thousands of jobs throughout Scotland and earns hundreds of millions for the Scottish economy from exports—is concerned about is its own profits. What a disgraceful attack on an iconic Scottish industry that is. Opposition to minimum pricing is widely shared throughout Scotland and among politicians from all parties. Gordon Brown and the Labour Government at Westminster rejected the policy, arguing that it is important to take properly targeted and effective action. I am delighted to welcome as the new Labour health spokesperson Jackie Baillie MSP, the same Jackie Baillie who states on her website—a print-out of which I have with me—that she is "Working Hard for the people of Dumbarton". Her website also states: "Jackie believes more can be done to enforce the legislation already in place instead of bringing in new measures, such as minimum pricing, when there is insufficient evidence that this will work." When I read those words, I expected that the Labour Party would be out in force in full support of our arguments, which are entirely in tune with the views of Gordon Brown, Jackie Baillie and even, as we learned this morning, Jack McConnell. Alas, Labour continues to equivocate and sit on the fence. I had hoped that Jackie Baillie's appointment would bring some much-needed backbone to the Labour front bench, but I have been sorely disappointed. To be frank, we have seen more backbone in a filleted jellyfish than from the Labour Party in Scotland. It is in danger of being had up under the Trade Descriptions Act 1968 for calling itself an Opposition party, so feeble has been its response on the issue. I say to Jackie Baillie that she needs to get her party sorted out and tell Ian Gray who is boss. Her views should prevail, not his. She would never have got that treatment from Wendy Alexander. I have set out positive proposals for how the Conservatives would tackle alcohol misuse in Scottish society. They are serious, targeted, effective and legally competent proposals, which should command the support of all members. I urge all members to join us in supporting them and to reject a policy of minimum pricing, which is  neither properly targeted, effective, evidence based nor legally competent and will do huge damage to our spirits industry and cost jobs throughout Scotland. I move, That the Parliament recognises that alcohol misuse cost Scottish society an estimated £2.25 billion in 2006-07, with almost one in three men and one in five women exceeding the recommended maximum level of consumption per week; believes that Scotland needs to examine its complex relationship with alcohol; further believes that to address this problem action needs to be taken that is properly targeted, effective, evidence based, and legally competent, and, accordingly, rejects the Scottish Government policy of minimum pricing on the basis that it will penalise responsible drinkers and damage Scotland's vital drinks industry.

I thank the cabinet secretary for the advance sight of her statement. As businesses throughout the country struggle with the effects of Labour's recession, it is important that the Government provides support to sustain employment and help with retraining, so we welcome many of the measures that the cabinet secretary announced. However, I agree with David Whitton, who is  muttering at me from across the chamber, that there was little new in the cabinet secretary's statement, although it is helpful to have a summary of what has already been announced. I have two questions for the cabinet secretary. First, there is reference in the statement to the skills strategy, which, as she will recall, was rejected by Parliament back in 2007. Since then, we have had numerous calls from across the chamber for the skills strategy to be refreshed and brought back to Parliament. When will that happen? I believe that now would be the perfect time to do that. If the cabinet secretary brought an updated skills strategy back to Parliament, she would probably find that the other parties would engage constructively on it. My second question relates to the cabinet secretary's announcement of the allocation of money to colleges. I am sure that she will recall the debate that we had a few weeks ago, when a Conservative amendment on the allocation of funding to colleges, particularly for those in rural areas, was accepted unanimously by the Parliament. Will she ensure that rural colleges get their fair share of future allocations of money?

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the concerns that have been expressed by commentators such as John McLaren of the CPPR that, despite substantial increases in spending on education over the past 10 years, we have not seen commensurate improvements in standards. Indeed, there is evidence that Scotland is sliding down the international league tables. I know that the cabinet secretary will try to put the blame for that on the previous Administration. However, given that we are all in this together, can she tell us what specific action the present Government is going to take to address the problem?

I thank the cabinet secretary for advance sight of her statement. The £30 million on offer for student support is, indeed, welcome, although it of course falls far short of the estimated £2 billion cost of implementing the now infamous Scottish National Party manifesto commitment to wipe out student debt. The Scottish Conservatives welcome the extra £2 million for child care and the increase in student loans that has been announced today. The latter element represents a substantial shift in stance from the SNP, which as recently as last week was maintaining the position, contrary to all the evidence from student groups, that reducing student debt on graduation was the priority for additional resources. Fortunately, the united front presented by the Conservatives, the Labour Party, the Liberal Democrats and the National Union of Students in Scotland has seen a change of heart, with an admission today from the Scottish Government that the key issue to tackle is, in fact, student hardship and putting more money into students' pockets. I am pleased that the SNP Government has at last acknowledged that. I believe that students will generally welcome the proposals. However, £30 million was never going to be enough to address entirely student hardship. Today, Sir Andrew Cubie is backing calls that were first made by the Scottish Conservatives for an independent review of university funding and student support so that we can take the next step forward. Will the cabinet secretary join the growing consensus in support of those calls? If not, why not?

To ask the Scottish Executive what recent discussions it has had with NHS Tayside regarding the provision of health services in highland Perthshire. (S3O-8118)

I know that the cabinet secretary met campaigners from Kinloch Rannoch who are fighting for the restoration of out-of-hours general practitioner cover in that remote and rural area. If NHS Tayside is not prepared to take action to right the wrong that it has perpetrated against that community, will the cabinet secretary be prepared to use her powers of ministerial intervention to force it to do so?

I thank Labour for bringing such an important subject to Parliament. My only regret is that just over an hour is not enough time to do justice to the subject. In the short time available to me, I shall concentrate my remarks, as others such as Bill Butler and Cathy Jamieson did, on ProjectScotland and its life-changing work—I use that phrase advisedly—for a great many young people. It is simply a mistake for the Scottish National Party Government to cut the funding for such an excellent volunteer programme. I confess that when ProjectScotland was set up by the previous Executive, I was initially sceptical. Why should the taxpayer fund volunteers? If they were genuinely volunteering, why did they need payment? My views on that changed as a result of my local engagement with ProjectScotland volunteers. More than 130 young people in Perth and Kinross have benefited from ProjectScotland placements. As other members, including Jackson Carlaw, have mentioned, staff and volunteers from the Strathmore Centre for Youth Development in Blairgowrie—known as SCYD—came to the Parliament in June, with young people from elsewhere in Scotland, to tell MSPs about ProjectScotland's work with voluntary projects such as SCYD. At SCYD, there is a young woman called Kimby Tosh, who Bill Butler referred to, who has been a trainee youth worker at the centre since the end of 2008. Kimby lives in the same town as me, Alyth, and I knew about the difference that ProjectScotland has made to her life. When Kimby came here in June, she explained to MSPs the huge difference that ProjectScotland and SCYD have made. At the age of 13, Kimby started drinking alcohol on a daily basis. She was getting into trouble and was eventually expelled from school. At that point, she got involved with the local youth centre, where staff worked with her and were so impressed with her progress that they encouraged her to become a ProjectScotland volunteer. Kimby explained to MSPs and other volunteers that the ProjectScotland placement had helped her to grow in confidence and ability. She now delivers local  community-based projects for young people in Blairgowrie and across eastern Perthshire. She is a role model for many youngsters in the area. When she came to the Parliament in support of ProjectScotland, Kimby said of its work: "Their support enabled me to volunteer at SCYD and I'm really pleased that I can do something for them in return. If it hadn't been for my placement I'd probably still be drinking and my life would be going nowhere." Not only that but, as Bill Butler said, Kimby Tosh is now a leading light in the campaign for ProjectScotland. She has lodged a petition that calls on the Parliament to urge the Scottish Government to keep youth volunteering high up the political agenda and to develop and implement a national youth volunteering policy for Scotland. Kimby Tosh is an inspiration, and her example proves why volunteering is so important. Here is someone who wanted to turn her life around; volunteering has allowed that transformation to take place. As a result of the SNP Government's cut in funding for ProjectScotland, only 13 young people were able to complete volunteer placements in Perth and Kinross in 2008-09, compared with 67 in the previous year. Organisations such as the YMCA in Perth, which has had a number of excellent volunteers through the programme, are missing out on that opportunity. That also means that young people in Perthshire are missing out on the opportunity to gain experience. The situation is duplicated across Scotland. We need more young people like Kimby Tosh in Scotland today, but that will happen only if the Government is prepared to restore funding to ProjectScotland. I was dismayed by the minister's dismissive and negative comments about ProjectScotland in response to my earlier intervention. I appeal to him, either in his closing remarks or in quiet reflection afterwards, to accept that the SNP has simply got this one wrong. There is still time for ministers to do the right thing; I will applaud them if they do.

Just before the minister leaves the subject of ProjectScotland, does he accept that a great many voluntary groups throughout the country do excellent work that has relied on ProjectScotland volunteers and that the consequence of the cut in funding by his Administration is that the work of many of those groups has been seriously hampered? Will he reconsider the level of Government support for ProjectScotland?

Last Thursday really was a sad day for SNP manifesto promises. Until that point, it had been assumed that the Scottish Futures Trust, although seriously ailing, might itself have a future as the provider of funds for capital projects and new school buildings. The matter was put beyond doubt at First Minister's questions, however, when Nicola Sturgeon, the Deputy First Minister, refused to answer a question from Johann Lamont on whether the SFT would provide any cash for Scotland's crumbling schools. It became clear that whatever the Scottish Futures Trust is, it is certainly not a source of funding. However, the SNP was quite clear in its 2007 manifesto, which stated: "We will match the current school building programme brick for brick, and offer an alternative funding mechanism through the Scottish Futures Trust. With better value bonds we can release more money to invest in the frontline." There is no alternative funding mechanism for the Scottish Futures Trust, no better value bonds, and no third way to funding schools as an alternative to traditional methods or PPP. In case we needed any clarity on that, we received—very late yesterday evening, as James Kelly said—a briefing from the Scottish Futures Trust in advance of today's debate. Note to highly-paid members of the SFT board: it is not helpful to send a briefing for a debate, which contains information to aid members in making their contributions, at 10 o'clock on the evening before we are due to arrive in the chamber.  The briefing states: "SFT is rapidly developing innovative funding approaches to meet the new challenges." We are now two and a half years on from the election, and we await those "innovative funding approaches" with bated breath. We on the Conservative side of the chamber are not churlish. If the SFT actually delivers value for money for the taxpayer, that is a good thing; and we await it with interest. It is now clear, however, that the SFT is a management mechanism rather than a funding mechanism. It is a million miles away from what the SNP promised in its manifesto; Fiona Hyslop and her colleagues should make that quite clear, and apologise for their failure. Because we are generous in spirit, and we still want to give the SFT a chance, we will not support the Lib Dem amendment.

If Mr Purvis will forgive me, I want to make some progress. I am rather confused by the Lib Dem amendment, because I saw a Lib Dem press release dated 3 February 2009, which was headed "Lib Dems secure serious measures for serious times". It states: "Tavish Scott, Leader of the Liberal Democrats ... has secured an economic recovery plan for Scotland with 'serious measures for serious times' following Budget negotiations with the First Minister." It goes on to say: "The SNP have changed their position on the Scottish Futures Trust. They will now give the quango a funding stream to restart school building in Scotland. Local councils and the construction industry had criticised the SFT for paralysing investment."

In a second. More recently, on 28 September—just 10 days ago—a Lib Dem press release stated: "Malcolm Bruce MP welcomes new Ellon Academy announcement". It quoted Mr Bruce as saying: "'As part of last year's Scottish budget, Liberal Democrat MSPs secured a commitment for a funding stream for the Scottish Futures Trust: I am delighted that this has now borne fruit with this announcement.'" Perhaps, Mr Purvis, it is just a "rubbish" press release?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I was enjoying myself so much that I did not realise I was running out of time. All I can say to the Liberal Democrats is that they need to get their lines right, in respect of what their members of the Westminster Parliament are saying and what their MSPs say in this chamber. For our part, we will support the Labour motion and, of course, we promote our amendment. It is important that we consider all funding mechanisms for new schools, but it is also important that the SNP realises that it has woefully let down Scotland's parents, pupils and teachers.

The Labour Party is having another one next week.

It makes a refreshing change for an education debate on a Thursday to be conducted in a spirit of consensus. I am sure that all members, not least the cabinet secretary, feel that keenly. We very much welcome the opportunity that has been afforded this afternoon to discuss colleges' important role in economic recovery. I know that all members are aware of the excellent work that the sector carries out in their own areas in providing skills and training to the local workforce. As we face the effects of Labour's recession, the role that is played by colleges has never been more important. Colleges across the country are reporting a rise in applications, in some cases of up to 300 per cent. With unemployment on the increase, that is not surprising. It makes sense that people who find themselves out of work should seek to access training opportunities to ensure that they are better placed to take advantage of the opportunities on offer when the economy recovers. Colleges tell us that they are facing a rising number of applications from school returners, mainly youngsters who left school at 16 with few qualifications either to go straight into work or to take up an apprenticeship but who, when faced with unemployment, decided to go back to college to take higher or advanced higher courses. As Claire Baker has pointed out, that has put greater pressure on the number of places available and  many in the college sector are concerned that less talented youngsters are being squeezed out as a result. Given the pressures on the college sector, it is clearly a priority area for additional investment to redress the recession's effects.

I cannot give a definitive answer to Margo MacDonald's question, but I agree with the sentiment expressed in it. I am certainly aware of anecdotal evidence of people who, instead of going to university, have felt that more vocationally focused training might make it easier for them to find employment. Of course, many people also go to college and then make the transition to university. I am pleased that the Scottish funding council has this year allocated additional funds to support colleges, reflecting the increase in demand. As we have already heard, £12 million of Barnett consequentials was announced for the college sector in September and targeted at 16 colleges that were deemed to be serving communities most in need. I accept that the additional cash is welcome in the areas that have benefited from it; Adam Smith College in Fife, for example, benefited to the tune of £1.4 million. However, other colleges understandably feel aggrieved at having been left out. Many colleges that lost out, including those serving my constituents in Angus and Perth, Banff and Buchan College, Borders College and Dumfries and Galloway College, serve rural areas, where the pressures are no different from those that are felt in the urban areas where the colleges that have benefited from the additional funding are located.

I understand that there is always a difficult balancing act for the cabinet secretary and the Scottish funding council. However, the cabinet secretary should understand that the principals of colleges in rural areas are concerned that their colleges have been ignored. Our amendment seeks to deal with that specific problem. We accept that the funds have been  distributed and that that is now an historical matter. However, I hope that, when the Scottish funding council distributes funding in future, it will not forget about rural colleges and will ensure that they get a fair slice of the cake. I appreciate that the Scottish funding council has operational independence, but nevertheless it acts following Government guidance. Our amendment therefore urges the Government to encourage the Scottish funding council to ensure the fair treatment of rural colleges. I was pleased to hear the cabinet secretary's comments on that in her opening remarks. The Labour amendment raises another serious and important issue, which is the number of new applicants who approach colleges in January. There has always been a cohort of school leavers at Christmas and, traditionally, they have sought to access college courses at the beginning of the year. This year, they faced much increased competition from those who lost out on a college place in August or September. It would be good to hear from the cabinet secretary about the steps that have been taken to try to address that. Claire Baker also mentioned the pressures on hardship and child care funds, an issue that is dealt with in the Liberal Democrat amendment. Many people who attend college, particularly those who have lost jobs, are in their 20s, 30s or 40s and have young children. The lack of provision for child care is a barrier to their accessing further education. I say to Mary Scanlon, who intervened earlier, that I am well aware that there are mature applicants to colleges. The average age of people attending colleges is now relatively high and much higher than the average age of those attending university. There is a real pressure in relation to child care and the cabinet secretary should address it. The college sector in Scotland is generally in good heart and is ready to take on the challenge of additional demand for further education. Much is already being done, through partnership with other agencies, to ensure a better-trained workforce for the future. I hope that all members will agree to support our colleges. In the spirit of consensus, I am pleased to support the motion in the name of Fiona Hyslop and all the amendments. I move amendment S3M-4956.1, to insert at end: "and urges the Scottish Government to encourage the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council, in allocating funds to the sector, to recognise the particular needs of colleges in rural areas."

This has been a serious debate and it has, rightly, been markedly different in tone from the first debate this morning. With the exception of a few party-political points that have been made, members recognise that we are dealing with very serious issues about some of the most vulnerable people in society. I have been struck by a number of the powerful speeches from members of different parties, and in particular by Duncan McNeil's comments on cases about which he knows. There has been a lot of discussion about the HMIE figures and there have been attempts by both sides to spin them. For my part, I say that it should be a source of great concern to us all that aspects of 23 per cent of child protection services in local authorities were evaluated as being "weak" or "unsatisfactory". I agree with Hugh Henry that that is a wake-up call for us and that much more needs to be done. Robert Brown made a fair point in his first speech about the briefing that we received from the Association of Directors of Social Work, which seemed to dismiss the statistics as not reflecting the true picture. We should be concerned, as we would be when a school gets a bad inspection report, that HMIE is saying what it is about child protection services. A number of members referred to cases in the media, such as the tragic case of Brandon Muir in Dundee. There has been debate for many years about the point at which authorities should intervene in family situations and remove children for their protection. If we go back 30 or 40 years, local authorities took a much more interventionist  approach than is taken today. I remember being at primary school with a group of youngsters from the local children's home, who were there for a variety of reasons, most relating to family breakdown. Nowadays, children's homes are very rare because most children are either supported in a family situation or, if they have to come out of that situation, they go into foster homes. That change has happened in my lifetime under Governments of all political persuasions. It is easy to understand why that change took place, as the record of institutional child rearing was not good and we now have the legacy of far too many incidents of child abuse that occurred in such situations. However, many people are concerned that the pendulum has swung too far and that we now have an in-built reluctance to intervene and remove a child from a difficult or dangerous situation. It is right that we have a debate about whether and to what extent we should redress that balance. Barnardo's, the children's charity, has been calling for a new approach and for more children to be removed from their parents. We must give the matter serious consideration. Just as the authorities seem to be too reluctant to intervene in some cases, in other cases they are far too enthusiastic. Earlier this week, there was a bizarre case at Livingston sheriff court, in which a mother who smacked her 14-year-old child, who was on drugs and alcohol and had head-butted her and stabbed her in the thigh with a pair of scissors, was taken to court and charged with assault. Fortunately, the sheriff at Livingston saw sense and granted an absolute discharge, but I have to wonder what on earth the point was of dragging that mother to court, at great public expense, when doing so was clearly inappropriate. Those resources could surely have been better spent elsewhere. I agree with a lot of what Christina McKelvie said about social workers. Social workers are, undoubtedly, underappreciated and they all deserve our support. However, that is not to say that we should refuse to criticise when there are failures. Parliament must set out where there is room for improvement. Elizabeth Smith referred to the important issue of parenting, which we have raised on several previous occasions. In some cases, we are dealing with second or third generations of parents who do not have the basic skills that they need to bring up their youngsters. I hope that the Government will address that. A society will always be judged on how it treats its most vulnerable members: few people are more vulnerable than are children in at-risk settings. We must do much more to ensure that we are getting it right for all children who are in that situation, so I  hope that the Scottish Government will listen to all the points that have been made in this morning's debate.

The Labour Party is quite right to highlight the crisis of the lack of employment for newly qualified teachers. I am sure that all of us in the chamber have been approached at our surgeries by, or have received correspondence from, newly qualified teachers who are in despair at being unable to find suitable permanent employment. They have often given up careers elsewhere to go into teaching believing that they could make a contribution and enticed by the message that was sent out to them by this Administration—and, to be fair, the previous one—that they would be welcome. Having spent a year at university, often at their own expense, they now find themselves struggling to find employment. The tragedy is that many are going back to their previous jobs, which represents a dreadful loss of talent to the teaching profession. I sometimes think that Opposition education debates on Thursday mornings have become the parliamentary equivalent of small boys pulling the wings off flies. The trend is for the Opposition parties to gang up on the hapless Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning and her team, highlighting the latest failures in education. I am not without sympathy for the cabinet secretary in some of the things that she is trying to do but, with yesterday's announcement of the ditching of the flagship class size policy and today's debate on teacher numbers, in which the Labour motion makes clear the awful situation that we are now in, it has not been a good week for her. I accept that local authorities find themselves in a difficult position. In that respect, I have to say that, in claiming that councils have more money than ever, the Minister for Schools and Skills mounted a quite extraordinary defence of the Government's position. It seems, therefore, that the entire blame for this scenario rests with local authorities, which, having been granted this largesse, are stealing money from education budgets to spend on invisible projects that we do not know about. If that is really the SNP's defence, it should say so clearly and tell us where the money is being spent in such an extravagant fashion.

If the minister wishes to elaborate, I will give way to him

I am grateful to the minister for that intervention. However, what he has not done is clarify where he believes all the extra money that councils are receiving is supposedly being spent. What is it that Glasgow City Council is spending all this money on that he thinks is extravagant and a waste? Everyone in education understands that money is tight; indeed, headteachers are being asked to make efficiency savings. The fact is that whoever was in government would be facing this situation. However, I start to lose my sympathy for the SNP when I recall that, when in opposition, it promised in its manifesto to deliver class size reductions. As we know, those reductions are taking place, but at a glacial rate; according to the latest figures, the SNP will deliver on its class sizes promise in 2095. In opposition, Fiona Hyslop was keen to criticise the previous Executive over the difficulties that newly qualified teachers found in finding permanent employment. Now that the situation has worsened, she has nowhere to turn. That said, I want to be constructive, and our amendment suggests two positive steps to help the situation. First, we reject the notion that scarce resources should be spent on free school meals for the children of well-off parents. Even if such a policy were justifiable in times of plenty, there can be no justification for it when we are facing spending cuts. That is simply a waste of resources that could be spent on employing more teachers. Secondly, we believe that headteachers should have much more power over teacher employment. At the moment, a headteacher can fill a vacancy in one of three ways. It can be advertised in the local newspapers, a surplus teacher can be transferred from another school, or a commitment can be made to take on a probationer once they are fully qualified. However, the decision remains under the control of the local authority, not with the headteacher. Headteachers' freedom of operation is limited and often they end up having to take teachers whom they might not have wished to take because the local authority has required it. We believe that giving headteachers more power would improve the teacher employment situation. We are seeing a huge waste of talent as those who have, at a great expense to the taxpayer, been trained in teaching find themselves unable to find an outlet for their skills. Indeed, many are being lost to the profession, possibly permanently. The SNP made a rod for its own back on this issue with all the promises that it made in opposition. This week, the policy to cut class sizes has been ditched, and we can only hope that the  commitment to maintain teacher numbers will not go the same way. The cabinet secretary has a duty to start delivering on education; if she does not do so, we will have many more Thursday mornings like this one. I have pleasure in moving amendment S3M-4910.1, to insert at end: "; considers that the universal provision of free school meals in P1 to P3 will impact on the ability of councils to recruit and retain teachers, and believes that head teachers should have much greater say in the recruitment of teachers and other staff in their schools."

I congratulate Dave Thompson on his motion and on securing this evening's debate. As he said, the Scottish Bible Society, which is very important in Scottish life, has an important and admirable aim: to provide the word of God to people worldwide in a language that they understand, in an appropriate format for their use and at a price that they can afford. It goes without saying that, for Christians, the Bible is the most important book in the world. It is a history, a narrative of the life of Jesus Christ, the inspired word of God and a practical guide to everyday life. However, it is not just Christians who should recognise the Bible's importance. It has been hugely significant in the development of Scotland as a nation. One of the objectives of the reformation in Scotland was to ensure that the people had access to and could read the word of God in their own language: no more would it be the preserve of clerics. That ambition that drove reformers such as John Knox to promote universal education, with the consequence that, by the end of the 16 th century, Scotland was probably the most literate nation in the world. One does not have to be a  Protestant to recognise the historical significance of the reformation, and it remains to me a source of regret that the Scottish Government has no plans to commemorate its 450 th anniversary next year. However, I say gently to the Minister for Community Safety, who is present, that there is still time for even those sinners to repent and change their stance. The Scottish Bible Society does a great deal of excellent international work, to which Dave Thompson referred in his excellent introduction to the debate. However, the challenge faced today here at home by the Scottish Bible Society is how to bring the word of God into the 21 st century. At a conference on education that the Scottish Conservatives ran two weeks ago, I was struck by the contribution by Professor Lindsay Paterson of Moray House school of education. He said that when he started his career in lecturing teaching students more than 20 years ago he could make biblical references in his lectures, confident that they would be understood by his students without explanation. However, he said that that is not possible today, because familiarity with the Bible is no longer the norm among the young people who come to study. Incidentally, he also said that the same applies to Shakespeare, so there are clearly wider issues at play. The Scottish Bible Society is aware of that disconnect and is trying to address the issue by working hard to find new and exciting ways of bringing scripture to congregations across Scotland and to a wider audience. For example, this year, four performances were backed by the SBS at the Edinburgh fringe, including a comedy about the book of Genesis called "In the Beginning". We know that congregation levels have been in steady decline over past decades. According to data compiled by the group Christian Research, by 2010 the number of Scots who attend a Sunday service will fall below 10 per cent of the population. Nevertheless, the Scottish Bible Society works hard to provide materials for congregations across Scotland, and it is constantly looking for new ways of engaging people with Christianity. One of the best ways in which it does that is through the Bibleworld exhibition in Edinburgh, which is a resource for schools and church youth groups. A visit to Bibleworld helps children understand how the gospel came to Scotland and continues to be spread throughout the world today. Children can dress up in biblical costume as a Roman soldier or a fisherman and take part in interactive quizzes about the life of Jesus. It is a very valuable project and well supported, and it shows what innovative ways can be devised to draw a new generation to the Bible.  My thanks go to the Scottish Bible Society and its volunteers and fundraisers. Because of their efforts, the Bible is a source of inspiration, strength and comfort, not only here in Scotland but in countries worldwide. Their work is to be praised and our heartfelt thanks are given to them. I congratulate the Scottish Bible Society on its 200 th anniversary—long may its good works continue.

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with the National Trust for Scotland regarding the future of the Bannockburn heritage centre. (S3O-7800)

I am grateful to the minister for his response, which has largely pre-empted my supplementary question. I had been going to ask him whether he accepted that the Bannockburn centre requires upgrading, particularly when it is compared with the excellent centre that has been  created at Culloden. Given that it will be the 700 th anniversary of the battle in five years' time, now would be an appropriate time to consider launching a public appeal for funds. I am also grateful to the minister for his commitment. Will the Scottish Government work with the NTS to establish whether an upgrade of the Bannockburn centre can be brought about so that we can all celebrate and commemorate the 700 th anniversary appropriately, without, of course, straying into the field of narrow nationalism?

I have some sympathy with the view expressed by Professor Harvie about encouraging volunteering. In light of that, will the Scottish Government reconsider its decision to cut funding for Project Scotland, a very valuable programme that encouraged lots of young people to engage in exactly the sort of activities to which Professor Harvie referred?

The First Minister will surely know that, just as there is no such thing as a free lunch, there is no such thing as free education. Somebody has to pay and, in the case of universities, it is the taxpayer. Scottish universities are concerned that they will fall behind better-funded counterparts down south. Surely the way in which to address those concerns is to set up an independently chaired review of higher education funding, as we have called for. What is the First Minister afraid of?

I thank the Labour Party for giving us the opportunity to debate issues arising from last week's publication of the report of the Calman commission, which is, of course, the report that the SNP told us would never appear. The SNP told us that the commission would never be established, that it would simply be a talking shop and that it would propose nothing of merit. In every criticism of the commission, the SNP has been proved utterly wrong. Despite his party having got it colossally wrong, Mr Russell, who is never a man to be easily embarrassed, surpassed even himself in bare-faced cheek when he pleaded with the three unionist parties to back his amendment. The SNP played no part in the Calman process, voted against it when the proposal was put to the Parliament 18 months ago and has consistently  sniped from the sidelines. Now it wants to take charge. It does not have a chance, but if Mr Russell wants to try to persuade me, I will listen with interest.

There we have a sinner repenting and accepting that maybe there is, after all, some merit in the Calman proposals. It gladdens my heart to hear Mr Russell now committing the SNP Government to the idea that Calman was a good thing after all. I just hope that his SNP colleagues will agree with him. I take the opportunity that is afforded by the debate to thank every member of the Calman commission for the extensive work that they carried out on behalf of this Parliament and the UK Government. From the Tory side, I specifically thank the two Conservative members of the commission, Lord Selkirk and Lord Lindsay, for their contribution. Surely even critics of the process would accept that the Calman report is an extensive and well-researched piece of work. The commission carefully considered a range of issues, collected a great deal of evidence, engaged various people who are experts in their field and produced a thorough and comprehensive report. In her speech, Wendy Alexander made excellent points about the quality of work and the breadth of opinion encompassed in the commission's outcomes. The Calman commission was established pursuant to a motion that was agreed by the Parliament by a large majority on 6 December 2007, so it has always had a popular mandate to pursue its work. As Annabel Goldie said earlier, the report's conclusions do not represent the last word on the next stage of devolution, but they represent a very important contribution to that debate. The steering group that has been established will now take forward the discussion. The open process that the Calman commission pursued in reaching its conclusions contrasts sharply with the narrow approach taken by the SNP Government in its so-called national conversation. Of course, it was never intended to be a conversation at all. The First Minister is far too fond of the sound of his own voice to allow other opinions to be heard. Indeed, less generous souls than me might claim that that malady also afflicts the Minister for Culture, External Affairs and the Constitution—at least, occasionally. The key test for the national conversation is this: if the public response to it is against  independence, will the SNP agree not to pursue that policy? Everyone in the chamber and throughout Scotland knows the answer to that question: not a chance. The national conversation is a fraud, because it has a predetermined outcome. Worse still, the national conversation is a fraud that we, the taxpayers, are paying for. Unlike the Calman commission, it has no parliamentary mandate to operate. It is a vanity exercise for the First Minister and the SNP and it provides no useful function. Surely it is now time that it was gently laid to rest. As Nicol Stephen said, the Calman commission's report has attracted praise from across Scotland. For example, David Lonsdale, deputy director of the Confederation of British Industry Scotland, said: "The commission's report is undoubtedly a very good and thorough piece of work".

David Lonsdale's view was echoed by Grahame Smith, general secretary of the Scottish Trades Union Congress—I do not think that he is a Tory councillor. Michael Clancy, of the Law Society of Scotland, said: "The Commission's work represents a detailed and worthwhile examination of the devolution arrangement." Eileen Maclean, of the Association of Business Recovery Professionals, said that she was delighted with the report's recommendations. In contrast, all we have had on the national conversation from civic Scotland is silence. There has not been a word of praise for an exercise that has delivered no more than a forum for insomniac cybernats. At least we heard an attempt earlier in the debate by some SNP members, such as Linda Fabiani, to engage seriously with some of the issues. That exposes the dilemma at the heart of the SNP. There are some slightly more sensible members on the SNP seats who are interested in the Calman process and want to engage and have a debate about whether it is right that more powers should come to the Parliament. However, other SNP members are obsessed by the idea that Calman is simply a unionist plot. As ever, Kenny Gibson and Bob Doris did not disappoint when it came to making that accusation. My colleague David McLetchie made the key point. He was right to say that the Calman commission is a unionist report that is about moving Scotland forward in the context of the United Kingdom, which is why we support it. Today is an important day for the Scottish Parliament and for Scotland. In welcoming the Calman commission report, we are now moving on to consider the next stage of devolution. We are doing so in a positive and inclusive manner, with  the support of the Parliament. What a contrast that offers to the negative and insular view of the SNP. When the Parliament votes tonight to support the motion, it will be speaking for Scotland and sidelining the irrelevant argument for separation. I will have pleasure in supporting the motion.

I congratulate Jim Tolson on bringing his motion to the chamber. I agree with everything that he said when he outlined the United Kingdom's historic and important bond with the Gurkhas over many years. The Commons victory over the Government earlier this year, to which he referred, was a hard-won victory for the Gurkhas and for basic decency. As Jim Tolson said, it is right that all pre-1997 Gurkhas with more than four years service and their dependents should have the right to settle in this country. Conservatives believe that former Gurkhas—and indeed other veterans who are not UK nationals—have contributed to our society and have therefore earned the presumption that they should be allowed to settle here. It was never justifiable to deny a group of people who have long lived in the nation's affections, and who have risked—and whose members often gave—their lives for its protection the right to live in the UK. As Jim Tolson said, it is a shame that the UK Government had to be dragged kicking and screaming through the courts and then through the crowds of Gurkhas outside Parliament before it finally did the right thing. It is a shame that not a single Labour member is prepared to contribute to the debate—perhaps they are too embarrassed. I agree with what Jim Tolson said when he referred to Joanna Lumley, who, in redoubtable fashion, led the campaign to win rights for Gurkhas, with support from across the political spectrum. The campaign was based on decency, common sense and fairness, which is why it won the day. I think that we all enjoyed the sight on television of Joanna Lumley publicly embarrassing Phil Woolas and other Labour ministers, while eloquently and gently reminding us all of the role that the Gurkhas have played in defending this country over the centuries. The Gurkhas have an important role in the British Army and are renowned for their loyalty, discipline and courage in battle. Linda Fabiani reminded us of the fiercely contested recruitment battle in Nepal. In 2008, the British Army recruited 230 Gurkhas but received more than 28,000 applications from young men. It shows how important the opportunity to serve in the Gurkhas is to young men in Nepal. It is hard to believe the attitude adopted by the Labour Government at Westminster when we consider that about 200,000 Gurkhas fought for Britain in the first and second world wars, and that more than 45,000 Gurkhas have died in British uniform. The Gurkhas have given total  commitment to Britain and the British Army, and it is welcome news that they can now settle here. When a Conservative Government is elected at the next general election, we will honour that agreement and ensure that Gurkhas who want to come here are treated as honoured veterans of our armed forces. In the few moments I have left, I want to mention the Black Watch, which is currently serving in Afghanistan. Like the Gurkhas, it is a proud regiment. The Black Watch is based in the area of Fife and Tayside that Jim Tolson and I represent. Sadly, two Black Watch soldiers died recently in Afghanistan. Everyone in the regiment will feel that loss deeply. Whether they are from the Black Watch or the Gurkhas, all those who contribute to the British Army should be valued. It is hugely significant that a victory has been won to allow Gurkhas who have served this country to come and settle here. I congratulate all those who brought about that victory.

Will the minister ensure that, in any engagement with Cuba, human rights are at the top of the agenda, in particular the suppression of free speech in Cuba and the oppression of those who express political views that are contrary to those of the current authoritarian regime?

I thank the cabinet secretary for the advance copy of her statement. It is welcome news that, two years into the SNP Government, we at long last have a plan for new schools. I have to ask: why did it take so long? The cabinet secretary has told us that the first phase of the new works will be funded through direct capital investment. There is absolutely nothing new in that funding method—there is nothing that could not have been announced two years ago. Will the cabinet secretary now apologise to the pupils, parents and teachers of Scotland for two wasted years of inactivity, during which the construction industry has been crying out for work to offset the effects of Labour's recession? Can the cabinet secretary tell us what the point has been of all the time, effort, expense and hype that has gone into the Scottish Futures Trust? The SFT is contributing not a penny to the first phase of funding the schools. We were promised that the SFT would save the taxpayer a fortune in costs. When will the SFT live up to all the Government's hype and promises?

There is genuine confusion about some of the details. We need to get more information from the cabinet secretary today, if possible, about what it all means. I seek clarification on one point that I may have misunderstood. It appears that the national 4 qualification, which is intended to be a replacement for standard grade, will be neither  graded nor externally tested. Does that mean that somebody will be able to leave school at 16 with a qualification that has not been graded or externally tested? If that is the case, how will employers be able to have confidence in such a qualification?

There are a number of welcome improvement works to the A9, such as the upgrade of Bankfoot junction, although they were all inherited from the previous Administration. When will this Government bring forward new initiatives to improve the A9, in addition to those that are simply a hangover from the Labour/Liberal Democrat Executive?

When?

Yesterday at Westminster we saw a valid attempt by the Scottish National Party and Plaid Cymru to force dissolution of the House of Commons. Their call was supported by the Conservatives and Liberal Democrats. I am sorry that that bid failed, not least because—as we have heard throughout this debate—it brought back memories of the famous vote of no confidence in the Callaghan Government 30 years ago, which was supported by the SNP at the time and which famously ushered in the 18 years of Conservative  Government of glorious memory. I am sorry that we did not see history repeat itself yesterday, but I am confident that it is only a matter of time before the glory days come again.

Not at the moment. Today the Scottish Parliament has an opportunity to do what Westminster did not do yesterday—to resolve firmly that the United Kingdom needs a general election now. Let us send a clear message from this place to the Labour Government that its time is up and that the Scottish Parliament believes that this country needs a fresh start. There are three clear reasons why we believe that an election is required now. First, the whole political system has been rocked by the scandal of MPs' expenses that has been revealed by The Daily Telegraph over the past five weeks. We have all been shocked by revelations not just about moats and duck houses, but about MPs claiming for phantom mortgages that have already been paid off, for flat-screen televisions, for digital radios and for Toblerones. The First Minister has claimed for generous amounts of food for periods when he may not even have been at Westminster. Public confidence in the whole system has been seriously undermined, and some MPs have behaved disgracefully.

What an arrogant attitude is on display from the Labour Party. Labour members say that it should be up to the political parties to sort out the matter. No—it should not. The people, not the political parties, should decide whether MPs are re-elected, which is why we need an election. Let the public have their say on their members of Parliament; let them decide whether members are fit to be re-elected to the House of Commons. That is how we will restore confidence in our democracy, not through some stitch-up by political parties. The second reason why we need a general election is that the Labour Government in London has run its course. It is out of ideas, has lost its way and no longer has anything to offer the country. The Government has presided over the worst economic recession since the second world  war at least. It has mismanaged the public finances to the extent—as Derek Brownlee reminded us—that every child who is born in Britain today is saddled with £22,000 worth of debts. Believe me, Presiding Officer—the welfare of newborn babies is of great interest to Conservative members at present. All the debts will have to be repaid. What a cheek it was for Iain Gray to lecture us on lost generations when he is saddling future generations with such a debt burden. Throughout the debate, we have heard from Labour members the repeated mantra about Tory cuts. Have they forgotten already this week's Finance Committee report, which refers to evidence from the Centre for Public Policy for Regions that, under Labour's spending plans, this Parliament's budget will be cut by 13 per cent in real terms—£4 billion in real terms—by 2014? That committee's report was agreed to unanimously, including by the three Labour members: Jackie Baillie, James Kelly and David Whitton. Each of them signed up to that report, which undermines the attack that has been made by their front-bench spokespersons. Therefore, let us hear no more about Tory cuts. Labour cuts are coming down the line and we will all suffer their consequences.

I will give way to the guilty man.

I am surprised that David Whitton is so quickly trying to distance himself from a report that he signed up to. The facts are clear: cuts are coming—Labour cuts—that are far worse than any cuts the Tory party would impose. I accept that some people, perhaps even some members of this Parliament, will believe that the Labour Government deserves to be re-elected. I think that they are wrong and that they represent a dwindling section of the population, but I would ask even them why they do not put that belief to the test. In a democracy, the people should decide whether a Government continues in office. That is why it is time we had a general election to allow the people their say. I agree with Mike Russell that we have seen an appalling attitude from Labour members today. They have argued that we cannot have an election because it would be too confusing and too distracting, or that the people might reach the  wrong decision. Like Mike Russell, I remember Bertolt Brecht's satire on the East German communist Government—there are so many parallels with that today—in which he wrote that the people had lost the Government's confidence and would have to work very hard to regain it.

I can assure Mr McMahon that I do not agree with Michael Russell on that point. The third reason why we need a general election is that we have in Gordon Brown a Prime Minister who has lost all authority. As Chancellor of the Exchequer for 10 years, he promised us that he had delivered an economic miracle. He promised that there would be no return to boom and bust, yet he delivered both. As Prime Minister, he now has the worst personal ratings of any Prime Minister in history. Do not just take my word for it—many of the Prime Minister's senior colleagues in the Labour Party are now saying the same thing. Stephen Byers and James Purnell, and even The Guardian newspaper in its editorial, are all saying that Gordon Brown's time is up. Gordon Brown still has some friends in the Labour Party—some of them have been in evidence this morning—but they are hanging on to him only because they know that, if they change leader now, they will need to have a general election, which is the thing they fear most. Labour members know that, if a general election was held now, they would be utterly crushed. In the European elections results on Sunday, the party of Government scored only 16 per cent across the United Kingdom, which was behind the Conservative party, which is ready to take office, and even behind the United Kingdom Independence Party. In Scotland, the Labour Party came top of the poll in just three local authority areas, whereas the Conservative party came top in four. Following the local elections down south, the Labour Party now controls not a single county council. Perhaps worst of all, the collapse of the Labour vote has allowed the election of two members of the extremist socialist British National Party as members of the European Parliament. It is truly painful to watch the slow death of the once mighty Labour Party in Scotland. It would be the kindest thing in the world to seek to end that torture by putting the party out of its misery with a swift and painless execution. I appeal to all members—even those on the Labour benches—to  have a heart. Now is the time to put Gordon Brown and the Labour Government out of its pain. Now is the time to give the country a fresh start under David Cameron and a Conservative Government. Now is the time to have a general election and allow the people to decide. I have pleasure in supporting the motion.

That was a devastating riposte.

Will Mr Gray give way?

Will Iain Gray give way?

Does the Government accept that it is much better for students to be able to borrow money under the student loans scheme, which charges a very low rate of interest and where the loans are not repayable until a graduate is earning £15,000 or more, than to have to borrow from commercial lenders or, worst still, on credit cards? Surely it is about time that the Government dropped its ideological blinkers, dropped the opposition to student loans and recognised that the student loans scheme helps alleviate student hardship.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Do you share my concern that there has not been a single member of the Liberal Democrat party in the chamber for the past 20 minutes? As it is hard to believe that not a single Liberal Democrat is uninterested in the topics of Europe, external affairs or culture, perhaps you can investigate whether they have been struck down by a pandemic of a mysterious illness.

The minister will be aware that one of the principles underlying the Bologna process is the promotion of academic freedom. How does he  square that with concerns that have been raised by the University and College Union and others that the outcome of the Government's joint future thinking task force threatens academic freedom, as it ties additional resources to the alignment of institutions' objectives with those of the Government?

I am pleased to speak in support of Claire Baker's motion, which represents the joint position of Scottish Labour, the Scottish Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats. I congratulate the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning on her stylish new look—she looks sultry sitting on the front  benches. Unfortunately, the look might be new but the SNP Government has the same old policies. Its record on student hardship has been utterly woeful. Lest anyone needs reminded, let us recall that, during the most recent election campaign, the SNP was to be found on campuses throughout Scotland promising to dump the debt. Many students—and, for that matter, many parents of students—took it at its word and voted SNP as a result. As they now know, they were victims of a cruel delusion. The SNP pledged to replace loans with grants and wipe out student debt, which it has singularly failed to do. It has not even brought properly costed proposals for implementing that manifesto pledge to the Parliament for members to scrutinise. Perhaps students have no one but themselves to blame for that sorry state of affairs. I well remember being on a hustings panel at the University of Stirling last year with Claire Baker, Margaret Smith and Christopher Harvie. It is sad that Professor Harvie is not in the chamber this morning because, when he was challenged at that meeting on the issue, he said on behalf of the SNP that students should not have been so naive as to believe that a political party should be expected to deliver in government something that it had said in its manifesto. So there we have it: the official SNP response is that we cannot believe a line in its manifesto. Student debt is a serious issue but, right here, right now, student hardship is a greater one. That view is supported by the student representatives in the NUS and universities throughout Scotland. Many students who previously supplemented their incomes with part-time employment find that, due to the economic downturn, they are unable to get jobs or, as Margaret Smith pointed out, the income from their jobs has fallen.

No, it does not contradict it at all. Over their lifetime, students will earn more money, so we should allow them the opportunity to borrow more money from the Student Loans Company—especially if they get interest rates of less than 0 per cent, which would be a very attractive prospect—rather than having to borrow money, if they can get it, at high interest rates from commercial lenders or, even worse, on credit cards. That is what they do at the moment, and it causes real hardship. The SNP Government's response to the matter in its consultation paper "Supporting a Smarter Scotland" is, unfortunately, inadequate. The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong  Learning would rather use the available money to switch loans to grants for a small minority of students. In fact, what students need now is greater access to student loans—a secure and inexpensive way of borrowing—to protect themselves from hardship. In our response to the consultation, the Scottish Conservatives adopted the approach that the £30 million that has been allocated should be used to reach a £7,000 minimum income for the poorest students; to increase by £200 the amount that is available to all students by means of the loan; and to invest an extra £2 million in discretionary funds to alleviate pressure on hardship and child care funds. That targeted approach would provide help to all students but focus on the poorest. It has the support of the three Opposition parties in the Parliament and of student representatives, so I hope that the Government will pay serious attention to it.

I welcome that clarity from the cabinet secretary because, as she knows, I have received a great deal of correspondence on the issue. The Government amendment strikes a more conciliatory tone than we have heard previously, which I hope demonstrates good progress. The SNP has broken its promises to Scottish students, but it now has the chance to adopt a new approach, one that is shared by the Opposition parties and student leaders throughout Scotland. I hope that it will see sense in the debate and realise that it has an opportunity to start redeeming its reputation in the eyes of Scotland's students. I urge it to accept the motion in the name of Claire Baker.

Lower?

I am sorry, but can the cabinet secretary explain how there can be an interest rate lower than 0 per cent? Are we going to start paying money back to students?

As my colleague Elizabeth Smith said, the Scottish Conservatives support the principles of the bill and look forward to its being passed at decision time. We recognise that the 2004 act, although important, contains several failings that the Parliament had to address. We must ensure that every child who is in need receives appropriate help. A concern arose about loopholes in the legislation that meant that that was not happening at all times. I hope that the amended legislation will lead to substantial improvements for some of our most vulnerable young people. I raised several concerns when I spoke in the stage 1 debate on 4 March, so I am pleased that they have largely been addressed during the bill's parliamentary progress. I raised the issue of the adversarial nature of the tribunal process and mentioned that many local authorities employ solicitors and advocates to represent them at tribunals, which puts them at a major advantage over parents, who simply cannot afford that level of representation. I am pleased that amendments have been agreed to that will help to deal with that problem and to level the playing field by ensuring that parents receive more help with advocacy. The provision of information is another issue on which the bill has been amended. Local authorities will be required to provide parents and young people with the information that they must publish  under the 2004 act. The authorities will also have to ensure that a summary of that information is available from schools in the school handbook and on the school or local authority website. Local authorities will be obliged to publish information on dispute resolution procedures. We have had representation on that from local authorities and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, which are extremely concerned about the cost of implementing some of those plans. I must say that they are overstating the case. Costs might well be attached to making that information available more widely, but it is hard to believe that they will be substantial. The point of making the information available is that it should reduce costs down the line by avoiding a more adversarial approach, which must make sense. I hope that, on reflection, local authorities will come to understand that. Several other changes have been made to the bill, in relation to how tribunals will deal with placing requests, the definition of additional support and the right for parents to request an assessment at any time from local authorities. Those are all important issues and ones on which the bill has been improved. I am not a member of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, but I am aware of the difficulties that the bill had during its passage through the committee, and I listened with interest to what the committee convener had to say. I hope that the Government will learn a lesson from the experience when it deals with future bills. I hope that the new legislation goes a long way towards making life better for young people with additional support needs, who are a group in society for whom we should all have a concern. We will be pleased to support the bill at decision time.

To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government is taking in response to research by the Centre for Public Policy for Regions, which predicts that in real terms the Scottish Government's departmental expenditure limit will be between £2.1 billion and £3.8 billion lower in 2013-14 than in 2009-10. (S3F-1685)

I am sure that the First Minister agrees that the blame for this sorry state of affairs rests firmly and solely at the door of Gordon Brown and Alistair Darling for their mismanagement of the British finances. However, given that we know that the cuts are coming, can the First Minister commit to trying his hardest to preserve front-line services and cut out extraneous expenditure in the Scottish Government's budget? Will he commit to scrapping free prescription charges for people who, like him, can well afford to pay for them? Will he agree to mutualise Scottish Water and free up millions of pounds that could be spent elsewhere? Will he cut back on the army of Government spin doctors and special advisers, who are unnecessary? Will he commit to scrapping the Scottish National Party's futile and unwanted referendum?

This has been a useful debate, which Elizabeth Smith ably kicked off. Members will probably agree that the most memorable speech was from Dr Ian McKee. In an entertaining but utterly irrelevant speech, he demonstrated a decidedly unhealthy interest in the details of corporal punishment. I am surely not the only member who is concerned that Dr McKee spends his evenings surfing the web checking the prices of various instruments of punishment. For the benefit of Dr McKee, I should say that most Conservative members of the Scottish Parliament went, as I did, to comprehensive schools. We have no old Fettesians on the Conservative seats. Some might say that it is a sad reflection on the modern Conservative party that we are down to our last old Etonian. Maureen Watt displayed the sunny disposition that was the hallmark of her tenure as Minister for Schools and Skills. She seems to think that all in the garden is rosy, citing the 11 per cent fall in exclusions last year as a sign of good progress. However, that is not the full picture. Indeed, as Elizabeth Smith said at the start of the debate, when that statistic was published, it generated a robust response from the teaching unions, including the SSTA. Jim Docherty, acting general secretary of the SSTA, said that the released figures bore no relation to the real situation in Scotland's schools. Other statistics are equally concerning. The number of exclusions for physical assault with a weapon went up from 286 in 2006-07 to 366 in 2007-08, and the number of exclusions due to drinking alcohol increased from 332 to 383 in the same period.

Unlike the cabinet secretary, I believe what those at the coalface—the teachers and parents of the pupils—tell us. They are the ones who express real concern. On statistics, it is a remarkable conversion for the cabinet secretary to take a completely different stance today from her stance in opposition. In January 2005, during First Minister's questions, Fiona Hyslop asked the then First Minister, Jack McConnell why the Executive had moved from producing an annual survey of discipline to producing one every three or four years. Mrs Hyslop, with righteous indignation, raged at the First Minister, asking what he had to hide by not publishing the statistics annually. Well—the transition from Opposition to Government has changed Mrs Hyslop's mind on that issue, as it has on so many others. I do not know whether the civil servants have got to her.

I will give way in a second. The fact is that Mrs Hyslop is not prepared now to publish the statistical information annually. I was interested to hear what Mrs Hyslop said about the survey that is being done because we—of course—want accurate information. However, why did she not know that three years ago when she was in opposition? Surely an Opposition spokesman worth his or her salt would have known the facts before attacking the other party.

Mr Cameron does many things excellently, of course. All we are calling for in this instance is consistency between what parties do in opposition and what they do in government. On that note, I say to Mrs Brankin that the Labour Party has gone in the opposite direction and is doing exactly the same trick. As I pointed out to Mr Macintosh in an earlier intervention, the Labour amendment refers to "the removal of restrictions on headteachers", and conveniently forgets to mention that the Labour Party introduced those restrictions, although Mr Macintosh had the good grace to acknowledge that when I intervened. Let me reiterate a point that Elizabeth Smith made in her opening remarks. The great majority of pupils in Scottish schools behave well and only a small minority cause problems, but they cause disproportionate concern. The reality is that pupils like discipline. They want to have boundaries and to go to school in an environment in which they can get on and learn, and in which the classroom is not disrupted by fellow pupils acting in irresponsible and possibly dangerous ways. Moreover, our teachers want to be able to get on and teach in classrooms in which they are not threatened by verbal abuse or, which is worse, by physical abuse or, which is worse still, by physical abuse with a weapon. Those problems are happening, but we simply do not do enough to tackle them. We have in our motion one suggestion as to how we should set about dealing with that problem. We do not believe that it is right that a headteacher's decision to exclude a pupil should be second-guessed by the education authority. Indiscipline is dealt with far more effectively if the  final decision is left to the headteacher. It should be the headteacher, in consultation with staff, parents and pupils, who is responsible for drawing up discipline polices and ensuring that they are enforced. If we are to trust headteachers to do that and to take a lead, we must be prepared to trust them to take the final decisions. That means that a headteacher's excluding a pupil should be the end of the matter. We should not see the headteacher undermined by education authority officials seeking to overturn that ruling. We concur with the Liberal Democrat amendment; members made fair points about the voluntary sector and its good work. I have seen the work that Fairbridge does in helping youngsters who are excluded from school, and such work is very welcome. In that regard, I thought that Karen Whitefield made excellent remarks about nurture groups—I have seen a nurture group in operation—which fulfil a vital role. We require a menu of options and a range of solutions in this area, not just one. However, we must do more than we currently do. Fundamentally, it is at school level that we will deal with the indiscipline problem, not with more top-down policies from the Scottish Government or, indeed, local authorities. If we set our headteachers free to run their schools, we will soon see a safer environment for the benefit of all our pupils and teachers. I am pleased to support the motion in Elizabeth Smith's name.

Will the member give way?

On the subject of ancient history and rewriting the past, I was interested to read in Mr Macintosh's amendment a reference to "the significant steps made by the previous administration" to do several things, including  "the removal of restrictions on head teachers to exclude pupils if necessary". Will Mr Macintosh remind us who introduced those restrictions in the first place?

I am grateful to Mr Brown for the information that he has provided on the collection of information. However, when in opposition, his colleague Fiona Hyslop was clear on the issue. There was no doubt about her stance. She said: "The production of statistics every three years is not good enough."— [ Official Report , 17 March 2005; c 15444.]  Why has the SNP changed its mind on that issue?

I can tell the First Minister that the Scottish Conservatives' response to the consultation will be submitted this afternoon. [ Laughter. ]

Earlier this week, 25 student leaders combined to raise serious concerns about Government policy and broken SNP promises on higher education. Does the First Minister really think that it is satisfactory that the sole response of the cabinet secretary to that serious criticism should be to tell the students to grow up and stop complaining?

This morning, the Liberal Democrats have given us yet another opportunity to discuss the SNP's broken promises on education. As members will know, it is a recurring theme in the chamber, in that it does not seem many weeks since we debated the self-same topic. Much to the dismay of members on the SNP benches, no doubt, this is a well that never runs dry when Opposition parties look for a subject to debate. Although the subject of this morning's debate is education, it is disappointing that the Liberal Democrat motion does not refer to higher education or student funding. This week, an unprecedented coalition of student leaders in Scotland and Opposition education spokesmen have queued up to point the finger at the SNP Government for breaking its manifesto pledges. We well remember that just two years ago, SNP candidates on campuses up and down the land were wooing students with promises to wipe out student debt. How quickly that relationship with the student body has turned sour. Earlier this week, the cabinet secretary told student leaders to grow up and stop complaining. Perhaps she needs lessons in how to win friends and influence people, if that is the way that she approaches an important body of the electorate. There is much in the Liberal Democrat motion with which we can agree. The Liberal Democrats are right to draw attention to many of the problems in education, such as the drop of 1,000 in teacher numbers in Scotland's schools and the microscopic progress on class size reductions. However, I say to the Liberal Democrats that they seem to have a selective memory when it comes to some of the longer-term problems in Scottish education. We know—and this point is fairly made in the Government amendment—that achievement and attainment standards have stayed steady in Scotland while those of our international competitors have improved considerably. Although Scotland once did well in comparison with the rest of the world, we have been slipping down the table in recent years. For their part in government during the previous eight years, the Liberal Democrats must bear at least some of the responsibility. We cannot agree with the proposal in the Liberal Democrat motion for a detailed workforce plan for  teaching. That is the top-down centralist approach that is exactly the opposite of what we require if we are to improve Scottish education.

The member refers to a policy that is being introduced south of the border. Of course we will study the detail of it with great interest. I am glad that Mr Purvis intervened, because he is the Liberal Democrat finance spokesman. I am interested to know how the Liberal Democrats have costed the proposal in their motion—I listened in vain for Margaret Smith to spell that out. As the Liberal Democrats will know, the Parliament's Finance Committee heard earlier this week that the Scottish budget is likely to fall in real terms by between £2 billion and £4 billion, a figure that puts in the shade not just the current concerns about cuts of £500 million but, even more significant, the proposed Liberal Democrat cuts of £800 million that we heard so much about during the budget discussions.

I am sorry; I do not think that I have time. We all know that the blame lies entirely at the door of Gordon Brown and Alistair Darling for their economic mismanagement and ruination of the public finances of this country. Notwithstanding that fact, we in this Parliament cannot ignore the impact that those cuts will have on public funding. That means that every time we make a proposal in this Parliament, it is incumbent on us to say how much it will cost and where the money will come from. Once again on that score, the Liberal Democrats have been found wanting.

The cabinet secretary will be aware that one of the consequences of Labour's recession and rising unemployment is that more graduates will look to stay on to do postgraduate degrees and there will be a rise in the number of applications for postgraduate places. Will she look at university funding to ensure that institutions are being resourced properly to deal with that rise in applications?

I welcome the opportunity to speak about the success of the Scottish regional treatment centre at Stracathro from a local perspective. Many of my constituents from Mid Scotland and Fife, particularly those from the Tayside and Fife areas, have benefited from the facility, which operates within the independent health care sector.  Stracathro hospital has always been valued by the community in north Angus and the Mearns. Like many local hospitals throughout the country, it developed into a general hospital providing a range of treatments. Situated on a large well-laid-out site at the foot of the Angus glens, it provides an attractive environment for patients and is easily accessible because of its proximity to the A90 dual carriageway. The hospital has also been an important part of the economy in north Angus, providing employment to doctors, nurses and ancillary workers—employment that was often well paid and secure in an area where the main employers were in the fields of tourism and agriculture, where jobs are often low paid. Like others, I can remember around 10 years ago when there were serious doubts about the future of the hospital at Stracathro. At the time, Tayside NHS Board seemed intent on running down the hospital or even closing it altogether. That would have meant people from north Angus having to travel to Ninewells in Dundee for treatment. Closure would have been a serious loss to the area. As we have heard, a long and energetic campaign was fought by local activists against the downgrading of Stracathro. In due course, NHS Tayside started to change its mind. An important milestone in the process was the establishment of the regional treatment centre in 2007. As we have heard, that was a decision of the previous Scottish Executive. It is a decision for which I must commend in particular the former Minister for Health and Community Care, Andy Kerr—a man of intelligence and vision. How disappointing it is that the Labour Party amendment seeks to delete our recognition of his success. Perhaps Iain Gray is nervous of praise for his erstwhile leadership challenger. Understandably, there were some local reservations about a private company coming into Stracathro to provide services, but the creation of the SRTC was nevertheless widely welcomed as representing a substantial new investment in a popular local hospital. As we have already heard from Mary Scanlon, according to PricewaterhouseCoopers there will be a projected saving of £2 million in cash terms to the NHS over the lifetime of the contract. There has also been a positive impact on waiting lists and times; and there has not been a single case of a hospital-acquired infection at the SRTC. Patient satisfaction is very high, with an overall 84 per cent rating.

When the contract goes out to tender, I dare say that we will find out whether the excellent deal secured by NHS Tayside for the pilot can be repeated. I hope that the SNP Government will not rule out, for ideological reasons, the opportunity to save the taxpayer millions of pounds that could be spent elsewhere in the NHS. The figures speak for themselves and they reflect the high quality of care and the excellent work of the staff at Stracathro. Opponents of the independent health care sector will often argue that independent facilities will poach NHS staff. That point is covered in Ross Finnie's amendment. The technical term here is "additionality"—in other words, the principle that staff employed in the independent sector should bring additional capacity to the local health care system and should not be recruited at the expense of NHS staffing levels. In its report, PWC found that additionality had not been a significant problem at Stracathro. Part of the reason for that is that the hours operated in the SRTC tend to be outwith normal NHS working hours. As a result, staff are often happy to add to their existing part-time work by also working part-time in the Netcare project. There is therefore no negative impact on the work that people do for the NHS. People are able to enhance their earnings, which puts more money into the local economy. It is a win-win situation all round. We should not threaten, for ideological reasons, the future of this very welcome project. It has secured the future of Stracathro hospital, and it should continue.

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

This has been an extremely good debate. We have had several excellent speeches on the subject of science from members of different parties. As we have heard throughout the debate, not least from Linda Fabiani, we have a rich and proud history of science innovation and invention. I was somewhat disappointed that more speakers did not give us a long list of historic achievements by Scots in the field of science—I thought that MSPs' researchers would have sought to pad out their members' speeches for six minutes with long lists of historic achievements, but perhaps I am far too cynical. Like Jeremy Purvis, I enjoyed Ian McKee's reference to "dense SNP". At least on this occasion he did not refer to the Conservative amendment as malicious and evil, although I dare say that he was tempted to. Science is important for its contribution to learning and the betterment of mankind. In addition, it is a key component of economic growth and wealth creation. Although we support the Government's science strategy, we have a number of concerns on the issue. I will concentrate on two specific points that have come out of the debate. The first was raised by Elizabeth Smith in her amendment, and it relates to the availability of highers and advanced highers. We will never develop science in our society and our economy unless youngsters in our schools have the opportunity to take science courses and achieve qualifications that might lead them to study science in further and higher education. It must be a real concern that, despite the cabinet secretary's protestations, there are indications that, in some schools, the availability of science as a subject is in decline. Elizabeth Smith quoted a number of examples of schools in which we are aware that courses in chemistry and/or physics are being cut. That must be of concern to the Scottish Government. A proper mapping exercise must be carried out on the availability of science in our schools, and more must be done to encourage the availability of science subjects. In the briefing paper that the Royal Society of Edinburgh prepared for the debate, the point is made that schools play a key role in developing people who have an interest in science. That means that we must have enough science teachers and that we must provide them with access to high-quality CPD. The RSE's paper also  refers to the science baccalaureate, which must be properly resourced if it is to be a success. The second area of concern is in connection with scientific research in our universities. The Royal Society of Edinburgh and the campaign for science and engineering in the UK have highlighted their concerns about the funding of Scottish universities. As we have heard during the debate, there is a concern that Scottish universities are becoming less competitive relative to universities elsewhere in the UK because of the current funding settlement. I and my colleagues, and members of other parties, have raised the issue in the chamber and elsewhere on many occasions in the past year. Some of our concerns were highlighted by Dr Brian Lang, the recently retired principal of the University of St Andrews—he has been well quoted in the debate already—when he spoke at the inaugural meeting of the proposed cross-party group on Scottish universities last week. The cabinet secretary will know that there is real concern in the university sector that universities in England, with their ability to charge top-up tuition fees, are becoming better funded than universities in Scotland. That means that English universities are better placed to attract talented individuals and corporate investment, and can compete more effectively for research funding. As Wendy Alexander said, even this week, a debate has been initiated by universities down south for the current cap on tuition fees to be lifted. While we cannot say for certain whether that will happen, it is clear that it is a real and present threat to Scottish universities. In its briefing paper, the RSE says: "At the moment it is not clear how Scotland might match the increasing resources coming to English universities through top-up fees. It is vital that this issue is addressed in a forthright and rigorous manner." At the proposed cross-party group's meeting last week, Brian Lang called again for an independent review of universities in Scotland to consider what universities are for, how they are funded and who should control them. I am pleased to endorse that call. It is a stance that is winning increasing support throughout the university sector. The Scottish Government cannot continue to sit on its hands and pretend that there is no problem to be addressed. That leads me to a related issue that Rhona Brankin addressed in her amendment: access to research funding. Such funding is currently derived from United Kingdom research councils and, at present, Scottish universities punch above their weight and attract a greater share of research funding at the UK level than we would be entitled to simply on a population basis. The logic of the  Government's position is that that research funding would be devolved, because the Government wants everything to be devolved. However, that would have the consequence of cutting research funding to Scottish universities. It is not surprising that the Government's approach is vigorously opposed by everyone in the higher education and science sectors.

I would have thought that a party that argues for independence would not hesitate to argue for the devolution of research funding. Presumably, if we were independent we would not still be participating in the UK research set-up, but perhaps the cabinet secretary, in her winding-up speech, can clarify SNP policy on that area. A move to devolve that funding, or indeed a move towards becoming independent, would be directly contrary to Scottish universities' interests and should be vigorously resisted. There are many more points that I could touch on, but time does not allow. I believe that we will get our science strategy right only if we get science education right, which means having the science teachers in place and making science courses in schools available to all interested pupils. For that reason, I am pleased to support the amendment in the name of Elizabeth Smith.

I thank the minister for his reply, albeit that it was rather disappointing. I remind him that the Lübeck letter was previously loaned to Scotland, apparently without any damage being done to it. Does he agree that the letter is an important historical document, given that it is the only surviving document offered by William Wallace and Andrew Murray? Does he agree that a return of the letter on a long-term loan, possibly to the Wallace monument in Stirling, would provide a real boost to tourism in the area?

Talking of spending commitments, I remind the First Minister that, at the most recent Scottish election, he and his acolytes went round the campuses of Scottish universities promising students that an SNP Government would dump the debt. Will he now apologise for that broken promise?

I am genuinely confused by the Liberal Democrat position. Is it that the Government should spend more money on student support? If so, how much and where will that money come from? Can we please have a straight answer?

Will the member give way?

I draw members' attention to my entry in the register of members' interests and, specifically, to my membership of the board of Dundee University Students Association. I am sure that all of us can remember the energetic dump the debt campaign that the Scottish National Party ran on campuses across Scotland before the last election. Students were told that an SNP Government would write off their student debts and replace loans with grants. I know of many students and, for that matter, parents who voted SNP as a result. What a cruel delusion that pledge turned out to be. Like so many SNP promises, it has been broken. It is not the debt that has been dumped, but the SNP's manifesto pledge. We are dealing with a serious situation for Scottish students. As we have heard, many students are reporting real hardship. Across Scotland, universities are reporting that their hardship funds are running out of money. As Claire Baker said, the University of Abertay Dundee's hardship fund has run out of money twice in the current academic year, with the result that support has had to be rationed to better-performing students. Although student debt is a real issue, student hardship is a greater one. Many students are having to borrow over and above their student loans, from banks and other commercial lenders. Worse still, some are having to borrow on credit cards. We believe that we should be looking to expand the current student loan scheme, which at least provides a way of borrowing money that is secure and has a low interest rate, rather than leaving students to pay punitive rates of interest for bank overdrafts and credit card debt.

Like Mr Gibson, I went to university at the time of a Conservative Government, which provided grants. We must accept that given the massive expansion in the number of young people who go to university, it is  right that students make a contribution to their upkeep during their time there. I make no apology for the introduction of student loans. What most students today want is greater access to student loans, which is far better than having to borrow money on a commercial basis. The Liberal Democrat motion refers to the minimum income guarantee of £7,000 per student. I am aware of the campaign by student representatives for a guaranteed minimum income of that amount, made up of a mixture of grants, loans and parental contributions, and it is difficult to fault the logic of that. However, we must deal with the significant issue of the affordability of any proposal in the current spending review period. I note that the Liberal Democrats have provided us with no information about how much their policy will cost, despite the cabinet secretary's intervention on Margaret Smith, or how it might be afforded. For the past few months, we have heard from the Liberal Democrats only about their new policy priority of a 2p income tax cut, which could be afforded only by finding £800 million-worth of savings from the Scottish budget. We read in yesterday's papers that that policy has now been ditched. Overnight, the Liberal Democrats have reverted to type. What a relief it must be for all Liberal Democrat members finally to shrug off the unaccustomed financial rigour that their now abandoned tax-cutting policy imposed on them. They can now return to their traditional and much more comfortable position of throwing around spending commitments like confetti. The Conservatives have compiled a dossier of spending commitments that the Liberal Democrats have made in opposition. By the time of the budget, they had made a grand total of £8.5 billion-worth of commitments. In the few weeks since then, the figure has grown to £10.5 billion—at least, that was the figure as of 9 o'clock this morning. Even as I speak, I am sure that my colleague Derek Brownlee is sitting down with his calculator to add to that total the sums that the Liberal Democrats have pledged in this morning's two debates. We cannot agree to an uncosted pledge from the Liberal Democrats when they have given us no indication of where the money will come from. We think that the Scottish Government has got its approach on student support entirely wrong. It has failed to acknowledge that student loans have a vital part to play and that they are infinitely preferable to students having to borrow at commercial rates from the banks and on credit cards.

I have already said that I recognise that student hardship is a genuine issue, but I have to say to Margaret Smith and her colleagues in the Liberal Democrats that if they are to ask for other parties' support for a motion that includes a specific policy commitment, it is incumbent on them to tells us how much the policy will cost and from where in the Scottish budget, which is a finite sum, they will find the cash in question. It is not good enough for the Liberal Democrats to ask us to sign a blank cheque, which, in effect, is what they are asking us to do in the motion. The Conservatives feel that the Labour amendment strikes the right balance, and we will support it. Scotland's students have been badly let down by the SNP Government, and they will not forget it when next they have the chance to vote.

rose—

The First Minister is fond of trumpeting his support for the Scotch whisky industry. However, on Monday, Gavin Hewitt, the chief executive of the Scotch Whisky Association, said of the Government's minimum-pricing proposals: "It is hard to believe any Scottish Government would bring forward proposals that are likely to be both illegal in international trade law and risk damaging the whisky industry. Regrettably, minimum pricing achieves both and undermines our success in breaking down illegal discrimination against Scotch Whisky around the world." Why is the First Minister determined to press ahead with those unworkable proposals when they will so damage the industry that he claims to support?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. That addresses my point of order.

rose—

Does Mr Gibson accept that, in 1997, when the Conservative Government of glorious memory left office, Scottish manufacturing exports were at an all-time high and that, since then, they have been in decline?

I thank the Labour Party for giving us the opportunity to debate the SNP Government's record in office, but I was a little disappointed with Johann Lamont. She clearly did not have her porridge for breakfast, because we were spared the now familiar lesson from the Labour front benches on how to make confetti out of the SNP manifesto. She should have given us that lesson, because the SNP manifesto of 2007 will go down in history as one of the greatest frauds perpetrated on the electorate in recent years. Forget the surgeon's photograph of the Loch Ness monster,  the Roswell alien autopsy video, and the Hitler diaries—they have nothing on the SNP manifesto when it comes to deluding the public. The SNP promised a £2,000 per head housing grant for first-time buyers, and there has been no sign of it. The SNP promised a one-in-one-out policy for new business regulations—a policy subsequently dismissed by the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth as "too simplistic" and then ditched. The SNP promised that student debts would be wiped out and loans replaced with grants, and there is no sign of that. It promised class sizes of no more than 18 in primaries 1 to 3—a policy that we found out last week would take another 87 years to implement, by which time most of the original intended beneficiaries would be pushing up the daisies. The SNP also promised a local income tax, which thankfully has now been ditched along with all the rest of the promises. What will the SNP do with its manifesto at the next election? What a challenge: will it simply rerun all its old promises and ask for another shottie, or will it tear up the manifesto and start again? In the latter case we would be entitled to ask why we should believe a word of the new manifesto when the previous one turned out to be such a fantasy. When did it all start to go wrong for the First Minister? I think that we can trace much of his present plight back to the humungous loss of credibility that occurred at the time of the bail-out by the UK Government of HBOS and the Royal Bank of Scotland. Back in September, the First Minister was forever telling us that those were two well-run Scottish institutions: they were soundly based and laid low only by the infamous actions of the so-called "spivs and speculators". What a difference six months makes. Only last Thursday at First Minister's questions, a loyal SNP back bencher—yes, incredibly, there are still a few in existence—Shirley-Anne Somerville slated the Royal Bank of Scotland for "the poor judgment of senior management". She went on to rail against "the folly of previous RBS senior management".— [ Official Report , 26 February 2009; c 15274.]  How times have changed. Let us never forget that it was the First Minister's bosom buddy Sir George Mathewson, the man he hand-picked to chair his Council of Economic Advisers, who personally hired Sir Fred Goodwin as RBS's chief executive. Where does the Government go from here? Well, one bright idea is still left to it, although it is an old and tired idea—an independence referendum. The Government is now devoting all  its energies to the legislation on that and has even appointed Mr Russell as a minister dedicated to the task. With the pledges on smaller class sizes, student debt, housing grants and local income tax all gone, how long can the pledge of an independence referendum survive? I do not believe that there is any majority in the Parliament for a referendum. I hope that that will become clear tonight, but who knows when we are dealing with the Liberal Democrats? Their amendment represents the Lib Dem position at 9.40 this morning, but how many times will it have changed by 5 o'clock this afternoon? And where, as has already been asked, is the elusive John Farquhar Munro? He is a man who, uniquely in his party, has a fixed and principled position on a referendum, albeit one with which I disagree. Is it true that, by a remarkable coincidence, he has an unbreakable constituency engagement today? Or has Mike Rumbles locked him in a cupboard, a tactic last used during the passing of planning legislation when poor Jim Mather was held captive by the SNP whips to prevent him from voting for third party right of appeal?

I know that Mr Purvis sometimes has ideas above his station, but we are not in the House of Lords now. This is the Scottish Parliament and, to a man and woman, my party's members will vote in favour of his party's amendment this evening—despite all the temptations to do otherwise that he puts in our way. What a pity that the Liberal Democrats are not showing the same discipline in their party that we Conservatives are showing in ours. People in Scotland want the Government to concentrate on the real concerns that affect them and not on an obsession with constitutional upheaval. It is time for the SNP to drop its referendum plan and get on with delivering real help for the people of Scotland. Notwithstanding my criticisms, the Government has done some things right: it has removed the tolls on the Forth and Tay bridges; it has cut business rates for small businesses; it is introducing a new drugs policy for Scotland; and it has brought in a £60 million town-centre regeneration scheme. What do all those things have in common? It is, of course, that they are all Conservative policies. My advice to the SNP Government is therefore this: if it wants to get back on track, it should read this perfect guide—the Conservative manifesto from 2007. It is far too  sturdy a document for anyone even to attempt tearing it in two. Some of the good ideas in it have already been implemented, but there is much more that could be done. As my colleague David McLetchie has said before, the next best thing to a Conservative Government is a Government that does Conservative things.

I can see that Mr Kerr agrees with me. It is not too late for even this Government to see sense and find its way again.

The debate has been largely consensual. I welcome the contributions from all members, and I particularly welcome the excellent maiden speech that we heard from Anne McLaughlin. She set a very high standard for her future contributions, which we will look forward to in the weeks ahead. The debate gives us an opportunity to assess developments in the delivery of additional support for many children, young people, parents and carers. The original bill, which many of us remember, brought about welcome progress, but confusion still surrounds a number of issues. Five years on, it is surely right to try to redress the situation. As other members have said, there has been a spirit of co-operation among the parties on this bill. That spirit has been based on the overarching principle that the needs of the child are paramount—a principle that informed the ethos of the original Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Act 2004. We must ensure that the new bill meets the needs of children and parents, and addresses some of the discrepancies that have emerged since the 2004 act. Some of those issues were highlighted in the very fine speech from Mary Scanlon. I will use the time available to focus on certain issues that a number of members raised. Specific concerns have been raised in relation to tribunals, mediation and advocacy. We have to be sure that the legislation on those areas is sufficient. Currently, the tribunal process is often seen as adversarial, and parents are at a disadvantage when it comes to advocacy services. Organisations such as ISEA that are experienced in additional support needs but do not have legal experience can often be at a disadvantage when complex legal points are being argued by the parties. That often gives local authorities an unfair advantage. In evidence given to the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, Lorraine Dilworth of ISEA Scotland stated that more and more local authorities are employing advocates to represent them at tribunals, along with their in-house solicitors and senior officials. Earlier, Rhona Brankin mentioned that the City of Edinburgh Council employed QCs. Now, I have nothing against lawyers. I am a lawyer myself and—who knows?—I might have to work as a lawyer again at some point in the future. However, it seems completely unfair to have, on the one side, parents and their advocates who are not legally qualified, and, on the other side, a highly paid legal team, put together at considerable cost to the council tax payer, fighting a case on a strict legal interpretation. That cannot be right. The issue has to be addressed.  The tribunal process must be made more user friendly. We must end a situation in which some councils are being heavy handed because they have the power, the money and the resources to do so. What can we do to address those problems? As Cameron Munro from Glasgow City Council stated in evidence to the committee, serious consideration needs to be given to tribunals having procedures, instead of simply having a set of rules. The tribunal may well be a formal place, but it should be framed and run in a way that is clear, with each process being clearly defined and explained to parents along the way. As Elizabeth Smith said, the cost of running tribunals is high. We therefore need to ensure that our mediation services are strengthened so that more disputed cases are resolved before they reach the tribunal stage. That leads me to my second point, which relates to advocacy and mediation. Often, children are not well represented because their parents do not have access to the right information or financial resources. That ultimately means that they will not have access to good advocacy. Children in Scotland stated as much in its evidence, referring to the lack of a guarantee on the right to advocacy for parents and children. Children in Scotland therefore described the right as nothing more than a "fairly hollow right" for parents and carers who cannot afford to pay for lawyers themselves. That leads to a further deepening of inequalities for parents and carers. Afasic Scotland acknowledged in evidence that the mediation structure may have been well intentioned initially, but felt that it now leaves many parents and children in an unequal position. Many children and young people who have speech and language impairments are among those who are least able to advocate on their own behalf. As such, they are most in need of provision. We must therefore support the proposal in the bill that will ensure that young people and parents are given the right to advocacy and are provided with accurate and clear information on how to use those services. On this side of the chamber, we welcome the appointment of Muriel Gray as patron of ASN mediation, which is a positive step towards ensuring that that happens. We must remember that we can improve legislation as much as we like but, in the end, success will depend on strengthening the code of practice so that we provide much better support within local authorities. I hope that such an approach would reduce the scope for children to fall through the net. We support the Scottish Government in its intentions. I hope that this afternoon's debate will go some way towards reducing the complexity in  the legislation, simplifying the tribunal process and improving mediation and advocacy services. I reiterate the importance of the bill that is before us. We have an opportunity to ensure that the underlying principles, which seek to protect the best interests of the child through providing appropriate and specialist services in an efficient and holistic manner, are paramount.

I thank the cabinet secretary for her statement, and for the advance copy of it, and I welcome Keith Brown to his new position. I am sure that his military experience will be invaluable as he defends the Government from attack from all sides. I need not remind the cabinet secretary that the Government's skills strategy was rejected by Parliament back in September 2007. At that time, we felt that it was too vacuous and that it was lacking in detail. In May 2008, Parliament passed a motion calling on the Government to bring forward a revised strategy immediately after the summer recess. What we have today is more than six months late. I am, nevertheless, glad that we have something at last. All Scotland is suffering from the impact of Labour's recession, so we must address skills gaps if we are to help turn around the economic downturn. My concern with today's announcement is that it is long on the creation of yet more committees—we have a strategic forum for the national performance framework, a skills utilisation leadership group, the Scottish Council of  Economic Advisers and a national economic forum, and the Scottish funding council has a skills committee. We could do with fewer talking shops and more delivery. I have two specific questions for the cabinet secretary. First, she will be aware of concerns in the university sector about the horizon fund to which she referred. Will she give us a guarantee that the general fund for all universities will increase at least at inflationary levels in future years, given that we will otherwise simply be robbing Peter to pay Paul? Secondly, how will the Government develop vocational education for school pupils who are above the age of 14, in order to help expand our skills base?

I rise to oppose the appointment of Alex Neil as minister with responsibility for communities. In doing so, I make it clear that I have no personal issue with Mr Neil. He and I have enjoyed many lively exchanges in the past, when he was convener of the Enterprise and Culture Committee. That was back in the days when he was a man of independent mind. Now, of course, the one-time fundamentalist has sold his soul to the gradualists. The firebrand of the Scottish National Party back benches has had his flames well and truly doused by the lure of an office in the ministerial tower and a seat in the back of a ministerial Mondeo. He is the man who famously once said that hell would freeze over before he was appointed as a minister. I know that it has been snowing today, but I did not realise that it was quite as cold as that. We genuinely wish him well in his new role.  Of course, Mr Neil's promotion has created a new vacancy for minister for "Newsnight". No calamity for the Government over the past two years has been too great for Alex Neil not to be trotted out late at night to defend the indefensible and develop a brass neck to match his ruddy complexion. The minister for "Newsnight" is a vital role. It is, sadly, unremunerated and usually filled by an ultra-loyal and obsequious back bencher with an eye on the future. Observers who are less generous than I might comment that Mr Neil initially seemed to be poorly qualified and an unlikely choice for that essential position, but he nevertheless performed adeptly and ditched principles and pride faster than the Government could ditch manifesto commitments.

The question on members' lips is who will fulfil the vital role of minister for "Newsnight" now that Mr Neil has gone. Could it go to a rising star from the new intake with a "Newsnight" track record—Christina McKelvie, say, or another member? We wait with bated breath. Of course, it is not just Alex Neil who has been promoted in the reshuffle; in addition to Keith Brown, Michael Russell will move up, and Roseanna Cunningham will come into the Government. There will be three former challengers for the SNP leadership in the Government. Back in 2004 they were all at one another's throats. We have to ask how much bad blood there will be in the Government with all those big egos battling for attention. The Government now contains all previous SNP leadership candidates in the Parliament with the sole exception of poor Bill Wilson, who still languishes on the back benches. He should not be despondent. Surely it is only a matter of time before his distinct skills and expertise are required on the front bench. Sooner or later, we are bound to be faced with a national infestation of mouse droppings and Alex Salmond will be on the phone to Bill Wilson in an instant, inviting him to join the Government. Let us spare a thought for the other big beasts of the SNP who have been left out in the cold. Just imagine poor Christine Grahame sitting by the phone all day on Tuesday waiting for it to ring, but not a call came from Bute house. Never mind, her time may well come, because the striking thing about the reshuffle is how limited it is. The First Minister had the chance to freshen up his Cabinet and cut out the dead wood, but he has fluffed it. He has a Cabinet Secretary for Justice who prefers Burns suppers in Canada to knife crime summits in Edinburgh; a Cabinet Secretary for  Rural Affairs and the Environment who seems to have forgotten the meaning of collective cabinet responsibility when it comes to the Elgin bypass; and a Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning who is undoubtedly the weakest link, having lost seven parliamentary votes in the past year. The Government is running out of steam as fast as it is running out of ideas and it is desperately in need of new blood, instead of which the First Minister has filled it with bad blood. So I say to Christine Grahame, Bill Wilson, Alasdair Allan, Christina McKelvie and all the other wannabe ministers on the SNP back benches that they should not despair for their time will surely come. Keep sucking up, no matter how humiliating it is—it worked for Alex Neil. If they keep accepting the invitations to appear on "Newsnight", one day that ministerial car can be theirs. As I have made my points, and in view of the high personal regard that I have for Mr Neil, I will not move the amendment in my name.

This has been a largely consensual debate, apart from a rather tedious disagreement between the SNP and Labour over some opaque statistics. Apart from that, we can all agree on the importance of early intervention and can largely support the Government's strategy. The Conservatives make no apologies for concentrating on parenting skills, not least because we believe that, if we are to have early intervention, it should come at the earliest possible point, which is before the child is born or as early as possible in that child's life. An excellent report came out at the end of last year. It was called "Getting in Early: Primary Schools and Early Intervention", and was jointly written by Iain Duncan Smith, the former Conservative leader, and Graham Allen, who is a Labour member of Parliament. It said: "Poor parenting is strongly linked to a multitude of problems for children: delinquency, drug use, school failure, family violence, abuse of children, poor mental and physical health, and continuing social disadvantage for children as they grow up. Good parenting is linked to school success and healthy, positive adjustment." It is good to see that that message about parenting is accepted across the political spectrum. That issue is central to the debate about how we can give youngsters the best start in life. I want to put this debate in the wider context of education. Some 30 or 40 years ago, when most of us went to school—I apologise immediately to those members who feel excluded by that statement—there was a sense that schools were about providing basic educational skills, such as reading, writing and arithmetic, and broader social education was regarded as being the parents' responsibility. However, society has changed over a generation, and now, in addition to those basic educational skills, schools are expected to teach youngsters about, for example, healthy eating and living healthily, and to implement initiatives on obesity, social skills, bullying, sectarianism,  financial education, international education and so on. Hardly a week goes by without calls being made in this chamber and elsewhere for schools to do more. There is nothing wrong with any of those initiatives. The problem, which quickly becomes obvious, is that the school day is no longer these days than it was a generation ago. Most youngsters are in school for five hours a day, which is no longer than youngsters were in school 30 years ago. That means that the schools are being asked to do more and more in the same amount of time. It is now expected that the state, through the education system, will have to deliver the skills that we would once have assumed would have been passed on by parents. Often, that suits parents. They are busy people, and are often happy to let the education system take up the slack. The shame is that the teaching profession has to step in and fill the role that parents would have filled previously. I do not think that that is good for society, and it is not helping education. As an aside, it is wrong to characterise poor parents as always coming from deprived backgrounds. Often, middle-class parents are just as bad, with both parents rushing out to do busy, responsible jobs and lacking the time to look after their children properly. Many of those issues were highlighted in the Children's Society report that my colleague Elizabeth Smith mentioned, "The Good Childhood Inquiry", which was published earlier this week. The report's conclusions are challenging and in some cases controversial. Some will take issue with the claim that children are damaged by having mothers who work full time. However, the basic messages are stark: having children is a serious responsibility, parents have to make sacrifices and put their own interests second to those of their children, and parents must give more priority to their relationship with their children. Those important messages must underline the debate. Parents must think about their role and take it more seriously. Whatever our view on those conclusions, I say in passing that they represent a much more valuable contribution to the debate on parenting than the utterances of Jonathon Porritt, the self-proclaimed guru of the environmental movement, who told us earlier this week that it is irresponsible for people to have more than two children and that the state should enhance contraception and abortion in order to try to enforce that. I do not have a personal interest in those matters, although I know that some other members do. I see Mr Macintosh blushing slightly on the Labour benches opposite.  Not only do Mr Porritt's views ignore the fact that our birth rate in the UK is already lower than our replacement level, they also represent an assault on a basic human right. They are worryingly typical of the sort of Green fascist view that is all about giving the state greater control over people's lives. We should be unequivocal in saying that that sort of swivel-eyed, extremist nonsense should be denounced.

I am terribly sorry, but the Presiding Officer is indicating that I do not have time. I say to Robin Harper that I exclude him from the definition of a swivel-eyed, Green fascist. We all agree that parenting skills are important, and we acknowledge that many parents across the social spectrum need assistance. Excellent work is done in the voluntary sector by the Aberlour Child Care Trust, Barnardo's, Care for the Family and many others. The state should not reinvent the wheel. Instead, we should have better support and co-ordination of what is on offer in the voluntary sector. We have reservations about the Labour amendment because of the spat over statistics, but we support the Liberal Democrat amendment and hope that others will support ours.

The cabinet secretary might be aware that our friends in the Liberal Democrats are claiming to have secured extra money for school buildings as part of this week's budget settlement. How much extra money have they secured, when will it be available, and how many new schools will be built?

I thank the members who have stayed behind for this debate and the members from all parties who signed my motion. I also acknowledge the interest that other members have in the subject. They include Gil Paterson, who led a members' business debate on the issue in March last year, and Christina McKelvie, who has a current motion on it. Indeed, Christina McKelvie and my colleague Margaret Mitchell attended a Commonwealth Parliamentary Association conference on the topic earlier this week. Earlier today, I hosted an event that the International Justice Mission UK organised, which had contributions from Terry Tennens, the director of IJM UK, and Alasdair Henderson, a young Scottish lawyer who went out to Rwanda with the IJM to help stop human rights abuses in the field. I am pleased to say that Alasdair Henderson has joined us in the public gallery. Those people can describe far better than I the evils and sad consequences of human trafficking, as well as the action that needs to be taken to stop it. We are debating one of the evil, cruel and immoral practices of which mankind is capable: trafficking other human beings as if they were a commodity and subjecting them to forced labour, the sex trade and domestic servitude. It is 21 st century slavery and we must do everything possible to stop human trafficking into Scotland and to help combat it on the international stage. It is hard to express in words or even imagine the  fear and torment that girls, boys, women and, indeed, men must feel who are subject to human trafficking and forced into another country as labour or into the sex trade. I will try to outline the scale of the issue with some stark statistics. The International Labour Organization estimates that at least 2.4 million people across the world are in forced labour because of trafficking. The United States Department of State estimates that at least 600,000 to 800,000 people are trafficked across international borders every year for the sex trade alone. The total market value of illicit human trafficking is in excess of $32 billion annually, making human trafficking the world's third largest criminal enterprise, after drugs and weapons. Unfortunately, there are few statistics on trafficking into Scotland. A United Nations Children's Fund report in 2006 suggested that there were, at any one time, 5,000 child sex workers in the United Kingdom, most of whom were trafficked here. In 2003, the UK Government estimated that there were 4,000 victims of trafficking for prostitution in the UK at any one time. The latest upper estimates of the number of woman and children trafficked into forced prostitution in the UK has now risen from 4,000 to 18,000. The Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland estimates that 13.5 per cent of human trafficking activity in the UK is carried on in Scotland, which means that we have a disproportionate share of the illegal activity. What we do know is that at this very moment—here in Edinburgh and in Glasgow, Dundee and elsewhere in Scotland—there are terrified and isolated individuals who have been illegally trafficked into the country and who are being forced into the sex trade and into servitude. Worryingly, as of 2008 there had not been a single prosecution in Scotland for human trafficking offences. As my motion sets out, we need to take more action to combat human trafficking. I understand that it is an international and extremely complex issue and that there are no easy answers. I also understand that, due to the nature of human trafficking, it is incumbent on us to work closely with the UK Government, as well as with other Governments in the European Union and internationally. That is why I welcome partnerships such as that between the Scottish Government and the Home Office on the "UK Action Plan on Tackling Human Trafficking". Only yesterday, a debate was led in the House of Commons by my Conservative colleague Anthony Steen MP, who has done an enormous amount of work on the issue and is chairman of the Westminster all-party parliamentary group on trafficking of women and  children. A lot of work is being done to raise awareness of the issue in Westminster and I hope that this members' business debate will go some way to help that process here in Scotland. Just before Christmas last year, the UK Government finally ratified the Council of Europe Convention on Action Against Trafficking in Human Beings. That is an extremely important step. The UK's ratification of the convention will mean that, for the first time, victims of trafficking have rights and will be entitled to a recovery period, specialist care, accommodation and other services. We must use the ratification of this important convention as a catalyst to work harder, because we need greater protection for victims of human trafficking. The Scottish Government must consider and discuss with the Home Office issues such as guaranteed residency permits for victims and protection against prosecution for victims who were forced into unlawful activities such as prostitution.

I entirely agree with Margo MacDonald's point; perhaps the minister could address it in his response. It makes perfect sense to stop people from coming into the country, and, for that matter, to reduce demand in this country for the services of these unfortunate people. We also need specialist police in Scotland who are trained and able to understand human trafficking so that they can work with victims respectfully. We must ensure that Scottish charities and non-governmental organisations are fully involved in identifying and supporting the victims of trafficking. We also need to pursue fully the criminal traffickers. That is why the work of charities such as the IJM is so important. The IJM sends law enforcement professionals to developing countries to conduct criminal investigations, collect evidence, help to rescue victims and bring perpetrators to justice. It has secured freedom from oppression for thousands of people using the courts and the laws of other countries through better law enforcement. That is exactly the sort of charity that we should encourage and support. A great deal of work is already being done in Scotland by Scottish groups and charities, such as the Cupar justice and peace group from my area of Mid-Scotland and Fife, some of whose  members join us in the gallery this evening. What we now need is greater political involvement and to assist where we can. We can all agree that this is a global issue and one of the most immoral and evil practices of the modern world. Human trafficking is an international and complex crime, but progress against it is being made. The work that is being carried out by charities such as Amnesty International and the IJM is making a difference, and that must inspire us to do more. We must send a clear message: Scotland does not want human trafficking; we will hunt down the criminals behind it and we will help its unfortunate victims.

Can the minister explain why we are spending money on two-plus-one lanes at Moy and Carrbridge that will have to be superseded, dug up and tarmacked over again when they become dual carriageways? Surely, if the Government is serious about having dual carriageways on those sections and is not just going through the motions, it will admit that those two-plus-one lanes are an extravagance and that the money should be used for dualling those sections now.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps are being taken to reduce levels of sickness absence in the public sector. (S3O-5658)

I am sure that the cabinet secretary will agree that many workers in the public sector will be feeling pretty sick this morning at the prospect of losing their jobs due to the antics of the Labour and Liberal Democrat parties in the chamber yesterday. Audit Scotland has disclosed that the average sickness absence level in local authorities is now double that in equivalent private sector companies. Given that workers in the public sector also enjoy higher salaries on average, better holidays and better pensions than those in the private sector, what is the Government doing to redress the balance?

I suppose that it is inevitable in a debate such as this that much time is taken up by members from different parts of the country raising issues of concern in their areas. Let me not disappoint anyone by departing from that trend. Tayside, most of which falls within my Mid Scotland and Fife region, is one of the areas in Scotland that has been hard hit by flooding in recent years. The River Tay and its tributaries cover a massive area, and flooding in recent years has caused disruption to Highland Perthshire communities such as Kenmore, Dunkeld, Aberfeldy and Dalguise. Virtually every year in recent memory we have seen flooding in summer and winter, or indeed in both. Property has been damaged and roads have been closed—including the A9, which is the major arterial route to the north—as has the Perth to Inverness railway. When we have periods of sustained rainfall, people in huge swathes of rural Perthshire and Angus are in near-constant fear of flooding due to heavy rains swelling the river system. We need flood prevention schemes and improvements in places such as Birnam, Bankfoot, Coupar Angus, Dalguise and Scone. Communities and towns in Angus also face the threat of flooding. Last year, Kirriemuir was badly hit, and I understand that Angus Council has proposed a flood prevention scheme in Brechin, which is absolutely essential if the town is to be given greater protection. I will address three specific points in the bill. The first is the question of responsibility for risk management, which is covered by recommendation 7 in the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee's stage 1 report. It is evident that a clearer line of responsibility is needed in flood risk management. The Scottish Government, local authorities and SEPA must all have clearer and better defined roles. Two years ago, the new flood prevention scheme at Milnathort in Kinross-shire failed, which resulted in flooding and damage to properties in the area. At the time, the then Scottish Executive and Perth and Kinross Council blamed each other  for the failure. The disruption and distress that the flooding ordeal caused residents were made no better as politicians argued about who was to blame and who was to sort out the damage. Parliamentarians can well understand such frustration, but it shows why it is so important that the bill tries to resolve such issues. I was pleased to hear what the cabinet secretary said about that subject when he opened the debate. The second issue that I will address is the cost of works that are required to prevent flooding, and the cost of flooding repairs. That issue is dealt with in paragraphs 178 to 185 in the stage 1 report, and it is also covered in recommendation 26, which mentions giving power to local authorities to recover expenses from landowners. Part of the problem is that the use of the word "landowner" conjures up an image of a wealthy individual who lives in a large house or castle and has very deep pockets. In reality, that image is far from the reality in modern Scotland. The great majority of landowners are farmers, and, given the current situation with farming, very few of them have large amounts of spare money to spend. A good example is a recent flood that occurred along the River Tay. The river flood banks were swept away, and farmland and property were flooded. The farmer who owns the land was legally responsible for repairing the flood banks and obtained an estimate for the work, which ran into six figures. That is a massive cost for anyone to meet, and he ended up in a situation in which the repair bill exceeded the market value of the land. It was clearly uneconomic for the farmer, in those circumstances, to pay the cost of repairing the embankments entirely by himself. Even if he had repaired them, there was a danger that flooding would have occurred again in another two or three years, with the farmer having to pay an identical repair bill. We have to consider those issues carefully and think about how we support and assist individuals in those circumstances, rather than simply taking the approach—which, it appears from the committee report, the bill is in danger of adopting—of saying that we should fine people who are not meeting their responsibilities. We need to accept that there is an economic issue that needs to be addressed. My final point is on an issue that I have raised in the past: the extraction of gravel and silt from river beds. It is time that the situation was reviewed. As I have seen for myself in many locations, the River Tay bursts its banks regularly, partly because the practice of dredging river beds has been brought to an end and water levels have risen as a result. Historically, gravel has been extracted from river beds, but it is now much harder to do that because of the restrictions that SEPA has imposed. As a  result, every time a river floods, river banks are swept into the river bed, the silt and gravel are not extracted, and the water levels rise. That exacerbates the problem the next time that a flood takes place. I appreciate that environmental issues need to be considered and that the salmon fishing industry has a major interest in the Tay that needs to be preserved. However, I have no doubt that by not extracting silt and gravel from river beds we are making the situation worse. Flood banks are being swept into the river bed and have to be replaced with material from elsewhere, instead of that material being removed from the river bed, as happened previously. We need to look again at that situation. The legislation is welcome, but it needs to be improved if we are to protect parts of Scotland from the danger of flooding.

rose—

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Perhaps we could return to the subject of the debate. I want to put to the minister an important point that has not yet been addressed by a minister during the debate. Why was there such a delay in ministers' seeking Treasury approval? Why was approval sought only 14 days before the announcement that was made in December? Was that due to incompetence or was there another, more sinister reason for it?

I do not wish to fall out with Alison McInnes, but how does the current transport minister's approach to a priority list differ from that of Mr Scott when he was transport minister?

I never thought that I would live to see the day when George Foulkes made constructive suggestions to the SNP Government, but it is welcome nonetheless. The future of the new Forth crossing is vital for my constituents in Fife, Perthshire and Angus and for everyone in the east of Scotland. It is essential to the economy of the whole country that we secure a new crossing. As we have heard, the real danger is that the existing bridge, unable as it is to cope with the weight of traffic, might have to close to heavy goods vehicles and thereafter to vehicles altogether, with devastating consequences. It is, therefore, good news that the new Forth crossing is moving forward. I remind the Labour and Liberal members who have spoken in the debate that the SNP Government—whatever its faults—is at least taking forward plans for the new crossing, when all we had from the previous Administration was dither and delay.

No. If Margaret Smith will forgive me, I want to make progress, but she will be pleased to hear that I am now turning my fire elsewhere. None of that excuses the SNP Government for the extraordinary situation in which it has managed to get itself in relation to the funding of the new bridge. A wholly avoidable state of confusion has been created over how the new crossing will be paid for. When the transport minister, Mr Stevenson, announced the Government's plans for the new crossing in the chamber on 10 December 2008, he said that the bridge would be paid for from the Government's capital budget, and that an approach had been made to the Treasury to secure budgetary cover. He did not, however, say that the Government had not written to the Treasury until 27 November, which was less than two weeks before. How have we ended up in a situation in which Scotland's most important capital project of this  generation faces such uncertainty over its funding? There are three possible explanations.

If Mr Swinney will forgive me, I will develop my points, then he can tell me which of my possible explanations is correct. The first explanation is that the situation is simply an example of incompetence. The Government did not get around to speaking to the Treasury until it was too late, but it thought that it could carry on regardless and announce the new crossing without getting clearance. Even I have to question the credibility of that explanation. However we characterise the behaviour of the Government and the cabinet secretary, it would take a harsh critic to accuse him of such gross incompetence. The second explanation is that, like Baldrick, the cabinet secretary had a cunning plan, although this Baldrick is somewhat larger and better fed than the original. The cunning plan was to announce that the new Forth crossing would go ahead before the Treasury had approved the proposed funding method, in the hope that doing so would bounce the Treasury into saying yes. However, that explanation requires a degree of naivety on the part of the cabinet secretary and his Government colleagues that has not been characteristic of their actions so far. That leads me to the third explanation, which is that the Government approached the matter with the expectation and, indeed, the hope that the Treasury would say no, which is exactly what it did. That would have two great benefits as far as the Scottish Government was concerned. First, we know that the Government loves nothing more than to stir up a constitutional fight with Westminster. Like a junkie desperate for its next fix, it cannot resist the sweet, sweet drug of conflict with London. The prospect that the Treasury would say no and SNP ministers would then be able to go in and, as they would put it, fight for Scotland was simply too enticing to miss. Secondly, that approach would have the beneficial side effect of finding a scapegoat for the delays in every other capital project that the Government has proposed—that scapegoat being the perfect one as far as the SNP is concerned, namely the Labour Government in London. When the conclusions of the strategic transport projects review were announced on 10 December, it was noticeable that, among the 29 important projects, including ones that are dear to my heart such as the dualling of the A9, not a single date was mentioned. There were no start dates, no completion dates and no prioritised list. No doubt SNP ministers hoped that the Treasury in London  would say no to their proposal for Forth bridge funding so that, as a result, the failure to progress all or any of those vital projects could be placed firmly at Labour's door. There would be no dualling of the A9, no upgrades to the A82 or A96, no electrification of the rail network and so on, and Labour would get the blame. Mr Swinney will tell us what really happened.

Mr Swinney has given us no certainty at all about what will happen to every other project in the strategic transport projects review. I do not know which of the three explanations comes closest to the truth. Perhaps the actual explanation is a combination of two of them, or perhaps all three. Wherever the truth lies, however, this is no way to run a Government. Nor should Labour be absolved of all blame in the matter. The future of the Forth crossing is too serious for parties to play political games with it. We need both parties to sit down and work together to try to find a solution. It was Winston Churchill who famously said: "To jaw-jaw is always better than to war-war." Both parties in the dispute need to learn that lesson quickly, or they will not be forgiven.

Can the cabinet secretary tell us how many councils in Scotland will provide class sizes of no more than 18 in primary 1 to primary 3 by 2011?

I am surprised that the minister is being so equivocal on the question of the completion date. On 11 December, that fine paper The Press and Journal reported that "a source close to First Minister Alex Salmond", no less, revealed that the dualling of the A9 "will be completed by 2020"— no ifs, no buts, no qualifications and no suggestions that that is dependent on what the Treasury may or may not say about Forth bridge funding. Will the minister indicate clearly whether the road will be dualled by 2020—yes or no—and if not, why not?

This debate is important and timely. The manner in which it was introduced by the cabinet secretary reflects the constructive and consensual approach with which she has addressed what is a very important issue. We can all agree that we need reform of a cluttered qualifications structure, but across and outwith the chamber, different opinions on the way forward are legitimately and genuinely held. The Scottish Conservatives generally support the Government's approach, although Elizabeth Smith and David McLetchie have outlined some of the qualifications that are placed on that support, some of which I will elaborate on. I will start by addressing the very important issue of literacy and numeracy, which features in our amendment and to which Elizabeth Smith referred in her speech. There are widespread concerns about the matter. The issue was also raised by Rhona Brankin, and it features in the Labour amendment, which says  "that it is unacceptable that fewer than half of primary 7 pupils are well established in reading". The statistics for writing and numeracy are little better. I gently remind Rhona Brankin—Alex Neil did so in his usual fashion, somewhat less gently than me—that the problem did not appear overnight in May 2007; it predates then, and we must all be conscious of our responsibility for it. We can agree that there is a concern that needs to be addressed. We agree that the statistics are poor and need to be improved. Employers have informed us that they are often not satisfied with the standard of school leavers who come to them. Youngsters' basic reading, writing and numeracy skills simply do not equip them for the workplace—or, for that matter, for going on to further or higher education. We can agree about all of that, although there is still some disagreement about when we should test for those basic skills. The cabinet secretary takes the position that it should be done at the end of S3, but, like other members, I believe that that is simply too late. Towards the end of S3, many youngsters are within a year of leaving the school system altogether, and possibly education as a whole. It is far too late in the course of their school career to test them on the vital skills of literacy and numeracy. A number of members have explained why such testing needs to be done much earlier. In our amendment, we say that such testing should be done in primary 7. It is essential to identify before the transition from primary to secondary whether youngsters have those vital skills. If primary school is about anything, it is about ensuring that, before children go on to the next stage, they have the basic skills that they will need. When the wide range of subjects that are available at secondary school becomes open to them, they should have the basic knowledge and qualifications that they require. The tests must be undertaken at primary 7, so that we can identify the problem areas and so that secondary schools know the level of ability of youngsters coming into S1. I will not get hung up on the question whether there should be a national test or whether it should be carried out externally. The important thing is to test against national criteria in primary 7. I hope that the cabinet secretary agrees with that point.

I see her nodding. I will move on to standard grades. I am old enough, unfortunately, to predate standard grades as far my school career is concerned. I sat O grades, which were straightforward: a pupil who got A, B or C passed; if they got a D or E they failed; if they were particularly poor in a subject they might even get a no award. Those exams were simple, straightforward and easy to  understand, and they had external credibility. I regret that the standard grade, which—albeit with very good intentions—was introduced to replace the O grade, is now discredited as a qualification. It is not taken seriously by employers. I have heard anecdotal reports from many employers that when youngsters turn up with a clutch of standard grades at foundation, general or credit level, the employers simply do not understand what the qualifications mean.

I agree that all qualifications have worth, but among people who are not directly involved in the education system there is huge confusion about what the various levels of the standard grade qualification mean. If the test was to produce a qualification that satisfied the desire to give everyone a prize, the standard grade passed the test—other than that, I am sorry to say that it is not fit for purpose. I am pleased that the standard grade will go and I hope that whatever replaces it will be much more simple, straightforward and understandable, so that it can enjoy the external credibility that the standard grade lacks. If the standard grade is discredited, the opposite is true of the higher. Although concerns about grade inflation will always be expressed from time to time, highers remain the gold standard of Scottish education, as David McLetchie said, and we should be reluctant to tamper with their structure. There are issues to do with the proposal to allow pupils to study for highers over two years, which I think should be a matter of local choice. Schools should have the flexibility to decide whether pupils will study for highers over one year, 18 months or two years. I understand the issue to do with university admissions, which needs careful consideration. We must try to preserve the higher as best we can, because it is one of the successes of Scottish education and has stood the test of time. The advanced higher is also a great success story. It has grown in stature since its introduction and is highly regarded, not least by university admissions officers. We should strengthen the advanced higher. There are concerns about its availability throughout Scotland and there are issues to do with funding and restriction of pupil choice. More flexibility is needed. Schools should  be prepared to work together, not just in the state sector. Where there is a strong independent sector, for example in Edinburgh, state school pupils should be able to attend independent schools to study for advanced highers and independent school pupils should be able to attend state schools to do the same. Such an approach would very much benefit our youngsters. We mention vocational courses in our amendment. We must not lose sight of the need for good vocational as well as good academic qualifications. We should not regard vocational qualifications as second best and somehow not as good as the academic route; we must ensure that they are an integral part of the structure. We will support the Government motion, and we hope that the Government will support the amendment in Elizabeth Smith's name. The general direction of travel is welcome. If we can sort out problems to do with literacy and numeracy testing and qualifications for young people who choose a vocational route, we will be on the right track.

The minister will be aware of serious concerns that parents groups have expressed about the nature of some consultations by local councils in advance of proposed closures. It has been said that consultations are often slanted, unbalanced and full of leading questions. In the proposed legislation, will the minister address the need to improve the quality of such consultations?

I congratulate Margaret Smith on an excellent speech. I will start, as she did, with the basic point on which we agree—the importance of kinship carers. Rhona Brankin made that point well in her opening speech. Sadly, we live in a society in which family breakdown is a serious issue, and its consequences are most damaging for the children. The sad fact of life today is that families break  down and children need care. We also have parents who, for reasons of ill health, mental illness or drug and alcohol addiction, are unable to bring up their children. We all owe a huge debt to the army of grandads, grannies, uncles and aunts who are prepared to step in to look after children in such situations. That is good news for the children, because it is so much better for them to be cared for by their blood relatives than to be taken into care. It is also good news for the tax payer, because in the end it saves the tax payer a huge amount of money when children are looked after in a kinship care setting and not a formal looked-after setting. It is all good news, and we can all agree that we want to support kinship carers. We have to move on to look at the detail of the debate. As my colleague Elizabeth Smith said, the Labour position and the criticism that Rhona Brankin set out effectively this morning go to the heart of the contradiction and confusion at the core of the SNP's approach to local government. We see that in relation to kinship care, free school meals and smaller class sizes in primary 1 to 3. The SNP Government says that it wants to deliver those things to the Scottish people, but that it is up to local councils to decide how and in what manner those policies should be delivered. The increasingly tattered historic concordat is the delivery mechanism, and as we have heard today, delivery is patchy. It cannot be denied that we do not have uniform delivery across Scotland, which is a consequence of allowing local decision making. Let me be clear: the Conservatives support the removal of ring fencing and the empowering and trusting of local authorities, but the lesson for SNP ministers is that they should not make promises that they cannot keep, because they have given up their power to implement policies. In the case of kinship carers, the SNP Government made a promise, so it is not surprising that people feel let down. This morning, I listened to Radio Scotland's phone-in, which other members will have heard, too. Carers from across Scotland said that when the SNP came to power, it led them to believe that it was going to give them kinship carer payments, but those payments have not been delivered and there is no sign of them being delivered. It is not surprising that people feel let down: they are entirely justified in feeling so. The COSLA briefing that we received in advance of this debate provides little comfort. In response to the question "Have Councils been funded to deliver kinship care payments?" it says:  "Local Government budgets are currently under pressure due to a range of factors - some of which stem from the economic downturn. Full implementation will need to be discussed in this changed context." There is little comfort that councils believe that they have the money to fully deliver the policy. I will talk briefly about the Westminster angle. I have some sympathy for the minister's position. There have been difficulties with the implementation of the kinship care policy that are not of the Government's making. There are difficulties around the interaction between what the Government is trying to do, which we agree with, and the benefits situation in Westminster, particularly with regard to child benefit. I know that the minister has been working proactively and constructively with the Westminster Government to deal with those problems, and I welcome the SNP amendment's wording on that point. It is therefore a pity that all the minister's good efforts were so undermined by the contributions from the SNP back benches. Bob Doris's rant and the lesser one from Christina McKelvie let the cat out of the bag: despite the fine words in the SNP amendment and Mr Ingram's constructive approach, we see the real SNP approach, which is to blame it all on Westminster. That is deeply depressing. The minister has been very constructive and I welcome his contribution. We all support the kinship carer policy, but it is not being properly delivered. Let us work together constructively so that Scotland's kinship carers are not left out in the cold.

I welcome not just the debate but the terms of the motion in the name of Adam Ingram, which are quite clear. The motion states: "That the Parliament agrees that it is unacceptable that outcomes for looked-after children and young people and care leavers across a range of indicators fall so far behind those of their peers". Adam Ingram went further than that in his opening remarks when he said that the treatment of looked-after children was "a disgrace". We have heard that that view is shared throughout the chamber by members in all parties. The Conservatives are happy to support the motion. I will deal briefly with the amendments. We have no difficulty with the Liberal Democrat amendment, which amends the Labour amendment and refers to the need for keeping under continuous review child protection practices, which is relevant at present.  There is an awful lot in the Labour amendment with which we would agree. It is right to refer, as Karen Whitefield and others did, to the worrying HMIE report into Aberdeen City Council and some of the questions that that raises. There are serious concerns about effective action not being taken until the crisis point is reached. That is not acceptable and the Parliament is right to be concerned about it. Such is the seriousness of the matter that we are happy to support calls for a statement to be made to the Parliament about it, because ministers have to take a serious interest in it. We are happy to look again at the question of a children's services bill, which, as Karen Whitefield, said, was consulted on in the previous parliamentary session. We are happy to engage with that. My concern about the Labour amendment is the wording about funding. I appreciate that there is an issue about funding; I will talk more about that later if I have time. However, I am not clear what the Labour amendment means when it talks about ensuring that "local authority funding for the care and safety of children more generally is properly protected". That sounds like a proposal to reintroduce ring fencing. Perhaps Rhona Brankin will clarify that in her closing remarks. If that part of the amendment is not intended to mean that ring fencing should be reintroduced, I am not clear what it is intended to mean. It would be helpful if that could be clarified. If the intention is to reintroduce ring fencing, that is not something that we could support. I move on to the wider issues. Elizabeth Smith talked about the cost of family breakdown, which is at the core of many of the problems that we have discussed. The Centre for Social Justice estimates that family breakdown costs the UK £22 billion per year. All levels of government must consider policies to support families. One issue is helping to develop parenting skills. We all acknowledge the problem of parents—some are the second or third generation—who do not have the basic skills to bring up youngsters. We do not want a huge new initiative of Government programmes to deal with that. Tremendous voluntary groups throughout Scotland—Barnardo's springs immediately to mind—are already helping to deliver parenting programmes. The Government should support those groups in their work to ensure that they reach into the areas in which parents have difficulty, to support parents and deal with the cyclical problem of generation after generation bringing up youngsters without the skills that they need to get on in later life.  We must acknowledge that families break down. No matter what Governments do, that will always happen. We will end up with looked-after children in institutional care or foster care and we need better help for those youngsters. Adam Ingram was right to say that corporate families are the substitute of last resort for natural families. Corporate families must perform better, whether on education or on access to friends, sports and other extra-curricular activities. Corporate families could and should do much more to become more like natural families and improve the outcomes for looked-after youngsters. Foster care was discussed, but one issue that was not mentioned—except by Richard Simpson in passing—is whether smokers should be allowed to foster children. Some local councils are debating that controversial subject. I am not a smoker, but I think that it is difficult to argue for artificially restricting the number of people who can foster children. I would find it difficult to say to well-qualified people who otherwise had the necessary skills, "No, you cannot foster, simply because you smoke," provided that they did not smoke where the children were in the home. We must consider that carefully. Hugh Henry made excellent points about the pressure on council budgets. The last thing that we want at this time is cuts in children's services. As in Aberdeen and down south, when local authorities face pressure and look for cuts to make, the danger is that they will decide to cut the children's services budget. That can have serious consequences. I have no wish to bring a discordant note into the debate, which has been largely consensual, so I say as gently as I can to Christina McKelvie that spending £30 million of the education budget on free school meals for children of parents such as me, who can well afford to pay for those meals, is not a priority when budgets for children's services are under pressure. If I had the choice between funding free school meals and funding social work, I know which I would choose. We must rethink those priorities. Angela Constance and many others referred to the Baby P case. No one in the country could not have been shocked by the details of that horrific case. Margaret Smith was absolutely right when she said that the blame for what happened to Baby P must rest with the evil people who tortured and murdered him and not with the authorities. However, that does not absolve of responsibility the social work authorities in Haringey, which had a duty of care towards the small child and which failed him. I agree with Ian McKee and many others that social workers are hugely undervalued professionals. They do a vital and difficult job—I  would never want to or be qualified to do it—that is pressured, stressful and sometimes dangerous. They face tortuous decisions daily, in which they try to balance the rights of parents with the protection of children. At what point is the decision made to take children away from their parents and put them in a looked-after situation? The judgment of Solomon is required week by week and day by day. That judgment is immensely difficult to make. However, that does not mean that we should not recognise that very serious failures occurred in the Baby P case. The authorities must be accountable for what went wrong. We must move away from the closed-ranks mentality that is all too prevalent in the public sector. Resignations should have occurred as a result of the Haringey case. That is not because of rage or revenge, but because, unless we have accountability and a resignation, we will not properly learn the lessons of that dreadful case.

I entirely endorse Mr Swinney's comments about the impact on small businesses of some of the new lending practices that have been adopted by the banks. Will he strongly reinforce to bankers their responsibility to the wider business sector? Will he take up with his colleagues at Westminster, in particular the Chancellor of the Exchequer, that they must impress on bankers the need to act responsibly in that regard—especially considering the chancellor's large stake in Britain's banks?  Otherwise, economic recession will turn out much worse.

Does the minister agree that, if the results of the survey are correct, there is no need to change the existing law?

Cynical members of the Parliament—I know that there are one or two such creatures—might have thought that the debate was scheduled simply as a time filler to occupy those members who, as Lord Foulkes would have it, are too elderly or infirm to have made the trip to Glenrothes this afternoon. However, it has been a useful debate that has allowed a full discussion of the issues, and there have been worthwhile speeches from all sides of the chamber. I will start by picking up on the philosophical approach that Liz Smith set out at the start of the debate. We would all accept the principles in the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child, but that does not mean that that we would all accept the conclusions in the report of the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, as it will interpret those rights in a particular way. I raised an important matter of principle in my earlier intervention on the cabinet secretary, namely, that in relation to matters of policy the final decision should be taken in democratically elected fora such as the Parliament and other similar fora, not by unelected and unaccountable officials in committees, no matter how eminent they might be. A good example of that appears in one of the committee's recommendations that has nothing whatever to do with Scotland—so I cannot be accused of making a partisan point—but relates to  Northern Ireland. The committee recommends that the 11-plus exam in Northern Ireland should be scrapped. I have no view on the 11-plus exam in Northern Ireland, nor would it be appropriate for me to take a view on it. It is appropriate for the matter to be determined only by the people of Northern Ireland, through their democratically elected politicians. When we read what the UN committee has to say, we must conclude that the correct determination of such issues should be made by democratically elected politicians, not by the members of the committee. Notwithstanding that, the report is well meaning and it is right for us to be informed in our decision making by the opinions that it expresses. In some cases those opinions are unrealistic and in other cases they are, frankly, misguided. Nevertheless, they are valid. Nicol Stephen, Christina McKelvie and other members have raised the issue of the incorporation of the convention into Scots law. However, I add a word of caution. We all remember the consequences of the incorporation into Scots law of the European convention on human rights—again, something that was done with the best intentions. I do not think that anybody who supported that campaign would have envisaged the situation in which the ECHR was used by those who were incarcerated in prison to claim compensation from the taxpayer for their having to slop out due to a lack of investment in the prison estate. Before we go down the road of incorporating the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child into Scots law, we must be careful to think about the possible consequences of that for wider public policy and the cost to the taxpayer. The issue of smacking features in the committee's report and features extensively in much of the briefing material that members received in advance of the debate. It is interesting and instructive that almost the only member who has raised the issue during the debate is Marlyn Glen, whose views I know and respect, notwithstanding the fact that I might disagree fundamentally with them. The fact that few other members—if any—have raised the issue of smacking suggests that there is little appetite for our revisiting that debate. It is a nonsense to equate discipline by loving parents with violence against children, which is what the report seeks to do. The two things are a world apart and it is very unhelpful of the report to make that comparison. Members will recall that, in the previous Parliament, we discussed ad nauseum the question of reforming the law on smacking, which led to legislative changes being made. Nevertheless, there was no appetite at that stage for a complete abolition of the right of parents to smack their children. At that time, it was felt that  the current law should continue to apply, which would allow reasonable chastisement.

I will give way in a second. That law has applied and there have been prosecutions under it—rightly so. The law is settled and I believe that, despite the best endeavours of campaign organisations, the public does not wish to see the debate revisited, although I am sure that Marlyn Glen will disagree.

I assure Marlyn Glen that I have carefully read all the briefings that were received. Although she is right to say that the research appears to show that there has been a change of public attitudes, in that fewer parents are admitting to smacking their children, that evidence does not show a desire on the part of the public for the law to be changed. That is an important distinction. A number of members referred to the age of criminal responsibility. I accept that it is proper that we have a debate on that issue, and that we should not prejudge the outcome of that debate. Public policy seems to be confused about this issue at the moment. In some areas, there is a view that the age at which people become adults is too high, which is why some people, not least those on the Government benches, suggest that the voting age should be reduced from 18 to 16. That might reflect a broad view in society that young people are maturing at an earlier age, which has an impact on the argument that we should raise the age of criminal responsibility. On the other hand, there is a move on the part of the Government to increase from 18 to 21 the age at which young people can purchase alcohol from off-sales premises. In addressing such issues, we need to decide the direction that we are heading in, rather than adopt a piecemeal approach that causes confusion. I will close by dealing with an important point that we can all agree on but which no member has yet mentioned: the call in the committee's report for the implementation of an anti-trafficking action plan. The trafficking of children for sexual purposes is an appalling crime. What is more, it is a crime that appears to be on the increase internationally. The existence of such trafficking stands as a reproach to us all. I hope that one  thing that we can agree on is that we should do all that we can, working with our colleagues at Westminster and internationally, to stamp out those awful practices.

Does the minister agree that, as a matter of principle, we should stress that decisions about policy matters that affect children should be taken by democratic institutions, such as this Parliament and other elected bodies, rather than by appointed officials and committees, no matter how worthy they might be?

I must declare an interest in that I am married to a newly qualified teacher who, unlike many of her contemporaries, has been fortunate enough to find employment, even if only on a temporary basis. How might the expectations that entrants to teacher training colleges have of their future employment prospects be handled better, in order to avoid the current distressing situation in which many talented people—encouraged by promises made to them—made sacrifices and gave up careers elsewhere to enter teaching and now find themselves out of work and with substantial debts?

To ask the Scottish Executive what criteria are applied by Scottish Screen when awarding grant assistance to feature film projects. (S3O-4588)

Was the minister able, during the recess, to catch the Scottish film "Stone of Destiny", which benefited from £300,000 of taxpayers' money? The film was derided by the critics, one of whom called it a national affront and said that it was "A feeble caper full of toe-curling national stereotypes, tourist-board visuals and bluntly scripted platitudes." Surely in times of economic recession and the squeeze on budgets, we should ensure that any public money that is spent on feature films is used for quality projects and not this sort of drivel.

The minister will be aware of the evidence that was given to the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee yesterday by local authorities, 14 out of 24 of which said that they would have difficulty with the implementation of the policy. The Government says that the policy is fully funded, so who is wrong? Is it the Government or the local authorities?

The cabinet secretary will be aware that student organisations oppose his plans to raise the age at which alcohol can be purchased from off-licences from 18 to 21, as does this Parliament. When he cannot even persuade chief police officers in Scotland and 48 per cent of delegates at the Scottish National Party conference that the policy is a good idea, surely it is time that he showed some humility as a minister and agreed to withdraw the policy.

I congratulate Jim Tolson on securing the debate, which is on a matter of great interest to his and my constituents. It is worth remarking as an aside that in recent weeks we seem to have had something of a flurry of members' business debates that relate to issues in Fife. I cannot imagine for the life of me why that should be; perhaps we can speculate on it later in the debate. Today, we are talking about extending an important rail service from Alloa and Stirling to  Edinburgh, via Fife. Like all other members who have spoken, I welcome the prospect of extending the passenger service from Alloa and Stirling to Dunfermline and Edinburgh. Jim Tolson spoke about the success of Alloa station. I understand that, since the new station was opened in May this year, the popularity of the service has surpassed expectations, as 35,000 passengers use it each week. That is excellent news and it underlines the importance of the line. It is right that there should be a review of the train service to see what can be done to improve it. It seems possible to extend the line towards Dunfermline. I offer one note of caution. Fife rail services to Edinburgh have been a major part of my mailbag for many years; I am sure that Mr Tolson, as the constituency member for Dunfermline West, has had the same experience. The Fife lines and the Forth rail bridge are already under severe pressure from the volume of train services that use them. Over the years, I have raised the issue in meetings with First ScotRail, and I am pleased to say that progress has been made. First ScotRail has made it clear that one of its priorities is to improve the service to Fife, as trains are often overcrowded and do not meet passenger need. If we are to encourage people out of their cars and on to the train, we must have a service that is reliable and has enough capacity for all the commuters who want to use it. I understand that in the past the problem was a lack of capacity at Waverley—First ScotRail could not put on more trains because there was insufficient platform space at Waverley to accommodate them. I know that work is being done to alleviate that problem, but capacity at Waverley remains an issue.

I thank Margaret Smith for that lengthy intervention, which was addressed to the minister rather than to me, but I will forgive her on this occasion. The other issue that Mr Tolson raised is the possibility of using the line for additional freight services, especially to connect with the port of Rosyth. He spoke about the developments at Rosyth waterfront, with which members will be familiar. If new businesses are to develop there, it makes sense for them to have the opportunity to use the rail service to transport freight. If  businesses have access only to the road network, as is the case at present, they will put pressure on the existing Forth crossing and the new crossing that is to be built. I have pursued getting more freight off the roads and on to rail vigorously in another part of Mid Scotland and Fife—the A9 corridor. Although that is outwith the scope of this debate, it is clear that the two issues are interrelated. Rail travel works and is attractive only if trains are running. At First Minister's question time, there was an exchange about strikes on the railways. I would be interested to learn what action the minister is taking to avoid strikes. There is no point in our trying to get passengers on to the railways if they lose confidence when trains do not run and they go back to using their cars. I welcome the debate and will listen with interest to the minister's response.

How old were they?

I see that Mr Matheson is in no better humour than he was when he was on the radio with me at a quarter past seven this morning. First, why did he not listen to my speech, in which I made positive proposals? Secondly, to how many Government consultations did the SNP respond when it was the Opposition? The answer is not many.

Who would have thought that we would see the day when the SNP said that a solution that was proposed for London should automatically be imported to Scotland? Does the cabinet secretary apply all the criticisms that he has just made of me to the Federation of Student Nationalists?

Scotland needs a mature and reasoned debate on our relationship with alcohol. The statistics are frightening. The United Kingdom is in the world's top 10 for alcohol consumption per head of population and, as we heard last week, Scotland's record is worse than that of the rest of the UK. One in three men and one in four women in Scotland exceed the recommended daily limits for alcohol intake, and alcohol misuse costs Scotland around £2.25 billion every year. Against that backdrop, the Scottish National Party Government was right to bring forward an alcohol strategy, and the Scottish Conservatives are happy to engage in discussions with it on many of the sensible proposals in that strategy. I am sure that the same goes for the other parties that are represented in the Parliament. However, it is a pity that our shared ambition to tackle Scotland's problems with alcohol has been overshadowed by one Government proposal in particular—the ludicrous plan to raise the age at which alcohol can be purchased from off-licences from 18 to 21. What a pity that that proposal has stolen the headlines and dominated the debate when we should be addressing issues on which there can be some degree of consensus.

The cabinet secretary—the minister, I should say; I am terribly sorry about the promotion—should listen carefully to my speech. I will talk about some of our alternative proposals which, I am sure, will satisfy her concerns. Since the Government published its proposals in June to increase the minimum age at which alcohol can be purchased from off-licences, there has been a huge backlash against them. In particular, I pay tribute to the coalition against raising the drinking age in Scotland campaign group for its sterling work in marshalling public opinion against the proposals, with its petition with 10,000 signatures. There has also been opposition from the Federation of Small Businesses, the Wine and Spirit Trade Association, the Scottish Grocers Federation, the Scottish Youth  Parliament, the National Union of Students Scotland and a whole host of other bodies. We believe that it is wrong in principle to raise the age at which alcohol can be bought from 18 to 21. There are problem drinkers of every age in society. Targeting 18 to 21-year-olds suggests that that group alone has a specific problem that other sectors of society do not have. The proposal is discriminatory, and there is simply no evidence to back it up.

I would have thought that a qualified lawyer such as Christine Grahame would understand the difference between the law and voluntary schemes. I am disappointed that she does not understand that difference. The SNP wants to create a ludicrous situation. Students would not be able to buy a bottle of wine or a few cans of beer to enjoy in their hall of residence or flat. It wants to create the even more ludicrous situation in which a 20-year-old soldier who has returned from a tour of duty in Iraq or Afghanistan would be unable to buy a bottle of champagne from an off-licence to celebrate his safe return with his wife. Someone who bought a bottle of champagne for him would be guilty of a criminal offence. In either case, the people involved would still be able to purchase alcohol in a pub. The proposal is inconsistent and unfair. In defending its proposals, the SNP has put great emphasis on the pilot schemes that were carried out in Larbert, Stenhousemuir, Armadale and Cupar. It has claimed that the temporary restrictions on alcohol sales to those under the age of 21 substantially reduced crime in those areas, but we cannot extrapolate lessons about creating a national, permanent ban from those short, time-limited experiments in small geographic areas, where there was undoubtedly heightened awareness of the rules relating to alcohol off-sales. I can do no better than refer to what was said by the vice-president of the Royal Statistical Society, Professor Sheila Bird. She said that the Scottish Government was either spinning the figures or simply being naive. She said that a proper study was required and that the pilots did not constitute such a study. If the only argument that the SNP can marshal in support of its proposals is the evidence of the pilot schemes, it is on incredibly weak ground.  I say to Shona Robison that, instead of the SNP's proposals, we need a targeted approach that addresses problem drinkers, who belong to all age groups in society. I have no problem with talking about the pricing of alcohol, although I suspect that it would make sense to deal with that through the tax system rather than through some system of minimum unit pricing. Above all, before we consider further legislation, we must ensure above all that the current laws are being properly enforced. The statistics show that, in 2005-06, only seven people under 18 were proceeded against in Scottish courts for buying alcohol or consuming alcohol in a bar, but we all know that under-18s seem to have no difficulty in purchasing alcohol. There should be a proper clampdown on those who break the current law before we consider changing it. The SNP must be congratulated on its remarkable success in building a broad-ranging coalition against its proposals. It has succeeded in developing a true consensus in Scottish politics. The Conservative party, the Labour Party, the Liberal Democrats, the Greens and Margo MacDonald are all agreed. Of course, the consensus does not stop there. We know that SNP back benchers, councillors and grass-roots activists disagree with the proposals. We know that even the SNP's usually ultra-loyalist youth wing, the Federation of Student Nationalists, has come out against the plans. If the SNP cannot even persuade its party activists that the idea is good, why on earth should we support it? The SNP Government believes that young people are responsible enough at the age of 16 to have the vote. In The Herald earlier this week, Bruce Crawford, the Minister for Parliamentary Business, said: "The Scottish Government agrees that the lack of consistency with other legal rights on entering adulthood such as paying taxes, getting married or serving in the armed forces, leads young people to believe that their views are not valid or important". I could not agree more. The SNP says that young people are responsible enough at 16 to vote but, in the next breath, it says that those self-same young people should not be able to buy a drink in a supermarket or an off-licence for another five years. I am delighted to welcome Bruce Crawford as the latest convert to our consensus. I hope that Parliament will join us in voting down these ludicrous plans. I move, That the Parliament rejects the Scottish Government's proposals to raise the age limit for purchasing alcohol from off-licences and supermarkets from 18 to 21.

Oh!

I take it that Mr Swinney has factored into his local income tax calculations the revenue lost to the Government through not making students pay.

I thank the many members who signed my motion and those who have stayed behind for this evening's debate. At the outset, I put on record my thanks to all the conservation groups, organisations, landowners and individuals who have been working to protect the red squirrel in Scotland. Although much of their work and commitment goes unnoticed, it is vital for the survival of one of Scotland's most iconic mammals. We are debating a serious subject, which I first raised in the Scottish Parliament in June 2006. Amazingly, and to my great disappointment, some people still react with amusement when I mention the issue, but we are talking about protecting the red squirrel from extinction in the United Kingdom. As Scotland is the last stronghold for red squirrels in the UK, we must play a leading role in saving them, and the longer we leave it, the harder it will be to reverse the decline in their numbers. Why is the red squirrel under threat? As I set out in my motion, the threat comes from its cousin the grey squirrel. I will give some facts and figures. It is estimated that there are 160,000 red squirrels in the UK, 120,000 of which are in Scotland. In comparison, the UK's grey squirrel population is estimated to be between 3.5 million and 5 million. Grey squirrels and red squirrels do not fight each other, but they cannot co-exist, and red  squirrels eventually disappear from areas that have both reds and greys, because grey squirrels outcompete the reds for food and shelter. Since grey squirrels were first introduced in the UK from America in 1876, they have continuously encroached on red squirrel territory. To make matters worse, grey squirrels now carry the squirrel pox virus, which is harmless to greys but fatal to reds. The first confirmation, in summer 2007, that a red squirrel in Scotland had died from squirrel pox showed that the disease had entered the country. The red squirrel is under serious threat and may eventually become extinct in the wild if no action is taken. There are groups and individuals who believe that we should leave nature to take its course and allow red squirrels to become extinct. I reject such a pseudo-Thatcherite view. I do not want the red squirrel to become extinct. I believe that we need Government intervention to help the conservation groups that have been set up to protect the red squirrel. To the credit of the Scottish Government, with the Minister for Environment, Mike Russell, taking the lead, it has acted to help the red squirrel. I have a great deal of admiration for anyone who can coin the slogan, "Tough on seagulls, tough on the causes of seagulls," as the minister did in a different context. To paraphrase him, it is time to be tough on grey squirrels and tough on the causes of grey squirrels. The Minister for Environment recently launched a new project in south Scotland. The red squirrels in south Scotland project has brought together a number of organisations and landowners, including Buccleuch Estates, to stop the spread of squirrel pox into Scotland by controlling the invasive grey species in the region. The project covers Dumfries and Galloway, the Borders, East Ayrshire, South Ayrshire and South Lanarkshire. The plan is to create a border, as such, to stop the spread of squirrel pox into Scotland, the idea being that anything north of that border will be free of squirrel pox. What should be done next? At the moment, the red squirrels in south Scotland project needs to take precedence. It is right that we are concentrating on stopping the immediate threat of squirrel pox infiltrating the squirrel population in Scotland, but grey squirrels will continue to displace red squirrels, and action needs to be taken in other parts of the country, such as Angus and Perthshire.

I am grateful to the minister for clarifying that point, and I am entirely happy to endorse his comments. At the moment, the red squirrel faces one of two futures. The first is that grey squirrels will eventually populate the whole of the United Kingdom and the reds will be gone. The second is that we will continue on our current path, which involves having a dozen or so control officers in Scotland and continuing to reduce the number of greys, but allowing them to repopulate areas again and again. The first outcome is not wanted and the second is not sustainable, which is why we need a long-term strategy. No doubt some members will believe that a mass cull of greys is the long-term plan that is needed. However, there have been large culls in the past. In the 1950s, 1.5 million grey squirrels were culled but, with millions of greys in the UK today, it is clear that that has had little long-term impact on the grey squirrel population. As set out in my motion, I want the Scottish Government to consider other strategies, such as research into the possibility of immunocontraception for grey squirrels to stop them breeding. Essentially, that would involve putting something in the feedstuffs of grey squirrels to stop them breeding. It would be a form of chemical sterilisation. Although it would be difficult to ensure that other species did not eat the feedstuffs in question, it needs to be investigated. We should also consider plans that would help to improve the red squirrel habitat throughout Scotland by, for example, planting trees that are red squirrel friendly, such as a mix of broad-leaved and coniferous trees. I hope that this debate acts as a catalyst for ideas and strategies to help protect the red squirrel—ideas and strategies that the Scottish Government can use and build on. I thank the minister for the work that he has personally put in to protect the red squirrel. The positive and proactive role that he has taken is exactly what is needed if we are to be successful. I have a number of questions for the minister. First, will the Scottish Government consider immunocontraception for the grey squirrel population? What other long-term approaches will the Government consider? Clearly, it is a cross-border issue, so will the minister take it up with his counterparts at Westminster? Does he agree that we need joined-up thinking and a collaborative approach, as has already been demonstrated in the south of Scotland?  Today's debate is about protecting our red squirrels. We must find a long-term strategy to save the red squirrel from extinction in Scotland. I hope that members will join together to try to achieve that worthwhile objective.

Does the First Minister agree that, although the Government's joint future thinking task force was, in some ways, a useful exercise, its work has not alleviated concerns about the funding of universities? If so, does he agree that it is now time for an independently chaired review of higher education, so that all voices in the sector can be heard, including those of students, lecturers and the business community, rather than only those of university principals and the Government?

I commend Keith Brown for the motion and congratulate him on securing this important members' business debate. As he said, as a veteran of the Falklands conflict he has a personal interest in the matter. Not having served in the armed forces, I have a great deal of admiration for those who have. I commend Veterans Scotland for its work promoting issues regarding Scotland's veterans. It acts as a co-ordinating voice for the benefit of the ex-service community in Scotland, and it has been instrumental in making the Scottish Government listen and learn about the fate of our veterans. I, too, put on record my thanks to all the local and voluntary organisations that provide daily support to veterans who need or ask for assistance. As Keith Brown said, there are about 500,000 veterans in Scotland. They are courageous and dignified individuals who have served our country with pride. They either fought for our country or were ready to give their life to protect the United Kingdom. When they talk about veterans, many people have an image of elderly men and women who fought in the great war or world war two. The reality, of course, is that many young men and women who served in Iraq and in other recent conflicts are also now veterans. That fact was brought home to me recently when I spent a day quad biking in Strathbraan in Perthshire with veterans who were holidaying at the British Limbless Ex-Service Men's Association home in Crieff. The sad fact is that most of them were younger than me—and, despite their disabilities, far better quad bikers.  We have already heard about the need to provide our veterans with appropriate health care, housing and pensions. The Conservatives strongly support those calls, and we believe that veterans who require assistance should receive it. The sad fact is that for decades, if not centuries, veterans have not been well enough treated by this country. There is nothing new in that. A couple of years ago, while visiting South Africa, I visited Rorke's Drift in Natal—the scene of that famous battle which was part of the Zulu wars in 1879. Rorke's Drift has entered history not just because of the famous Michael Caine film but, more significantly, because on that day 11 Victoria crosses were won by defenders of the mission station—the highest number won in any single engagement in the history of the medal. The untold story of Rorke's Drift is what happened to the survivors of the battle. As we learned when we visited, despite their being feted as heroes, there was little practical support for them when they returned home. Undoubtedly and unsurprisingly, many suffered from what would now be recognised as post-traumatic stress disorder: a number ended up committing suicide, others died in poverty or in mental institutions. It is a sorry tale that sits at odds with the popular perception of war heroes. There are many issues that can be explored. I fear that the time given for a members' business debate will not allow us to cover them all, but I will refer to one aspect that is mentioned in Keith Brown's motion: the houses for heroes campaign run by the Scottish Veterans Garden City Association. My former colleague James Douglas Hamilton plays a role in that association, which provides affordable housing for ex-members of Her Majesty's forces, the merchant navy, the police and the fire service who have suffered some form of disability or chronic illness during their service or since leaving. Its houses for heroes campaign is one of the most worthwhile campaigns that is being undertaken in Scotland, and I hope that its appeal for 60 more houses will be successful. I would be interested to hear from the minister the latest the Scottish Government has to say on the campaign and how it intends to support it. All Scotland's ex-servicemen and women should be given the level of care that reflects their great service and commitment in protecting our country. Those courageous men and women stood up and protected us; it is now our duty to stand up and help them.

A former constituent?

I join other members in congratulating the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee on its excellent report into our tourism industry. As we have heard from many members, tourism is Scotland's biggest industry, and that is certainly the case in the Mid Scotland and Fife region, which I represent. In parts of rural Angus, Perthshire and Stirlingshire, and in parts of Fife, tourism is by far the largest employer. If we are to have a strong economy in those areas, we must ensure growth in tourism. The committee examined the previous Scottish Executive's target of growing tourism revenues by 50 per cent by 2015. The committee accepts that the target "should not be an immense challenge", but points out that progress towards meeting it has been slow and that there was a decrease in revenue in 2006 compared to the baseline year of 2005. Although there is evidence of an increase in 2007—we await the details of that—the anecdotal evidence that I have had this summer from tourism operatives in my area is far from encouraging. The combination of the credit crunch and poor weather has meant that many in the tourism industry in Perthshire, Angus, Fife and Stirlingshire have had a difficult year thus far and are not optimistic about the coming autumn season. It is all very well for Governments to set targets, but when the results are subject to so many external factors, one sometimes wonders whether there is much point. Nevertheless, targets can be useful in focusing minds in Government and its agencies. It is interesting that the committee's report refers to criticism from all sorts of external organisations such as Scottish Chambers of Commerce, the Confederation of British Industry Scotland and various private sector operators about the lack, at Government and agency level, of a joined-up approach to the promotion of tourism throughout Scotland. We all know that VisitScotland has been through several changes in structure in recent years. The Conservatives were a lone voice in the Parliament in opposing the scrapping of the area tourist boards and the formation of the new centralised structure for VisitScotland. I well  remember arguing in the Parliament and in committee that the moves were going in the wrong direction. I remember the evidence that the then Enterprise and Culture Committee took from the sector, which was negative about the proposed changes. Nevertheless—I gently remind Liam McArthur of this, although he was not in the Parliament at the time—the then Labour-Liberal Scottish Executive, supported by the then SNP Opposition, went ahead with the changes. I believe that the evidence that we have today shows that the effect has not been positive. I hate to have to say, "I told you so," but I told you so, and the facts have proved us right.

The rot set in when Mr Purvis and his colleagues voted to scrap the area tourist boards. That is when we had proper local accountability. There is no point in Mr Purvis trying to pass the buck to anyone else. In the past couple of weeks the Royal Society of Edinburgh has published its report on the future of Scotland's hills and islands. It was produced by a committee of inquiry chaired by the highly respected Professor Gavin McCrone. One of the most significant sections of the report deals with tourism and it is highly critical of the centralised structure of VisitScotland. The RSE argues for the introduction of regional tourism boards that would essentially replicate the previous structure. I recognise the RSE's concerns, which reflect many of the comments that I have received on the ground, but it is not yet time for another structural reform of VisitScotland, with all the pain, upheaval and expense that that would involve. Government has to learn that moving towards a centralised structure and having constant change in an organisation such as VisitScotland is simply not beneficial. The Conservative party believes strongly in local accountability and that the recent moves in VisitScotland have been in the wrong direction. The best illustration of the difficulties that have been created comes when we consider the future of tourist information centres. Having local TICs is essential to the success of the tourism industry. They are the shopfront for VisitScotland and for the tourism industry more generally, and, even in this internet age, they are still well used by visitors. Often, the TIC is the first port of call for people coming to stay in an area or simply visiting on a day trip. Sadly, we know that—certainly in the  recent past—VisitScotland has not valued TICs highly and there is on-going concern about rationalisation programmes for the TICs. The TICs that I visited in Perthshire—in places such as Blairgowrie, Dunkeld, Aberfeldy and Pitlochry—have knowledgeable, well-trained, local staff who can provide advice, guidance and information to visitors that simply would not be available from a call centre or from the internet. That is why it is essential that we fight to retain those TICs. I am pleased that that is reflected in the committee's report. If we are to have a successful and growing tourism sector, we need to ensure that the physical infrastructure is in place. The committee report refers to evidence that it received, calling for improvements to be made to various key trunk roads, notably the A82 and the A9. I have long campaigned for an upgrading of the A9 to dual carriageway status from Perth to Inverness. Improving connectivity between the Highlands and Islands and Perthshire and the rest of the UK would enhance the tourism industry and it is encouraging that the committee referred to that in its report. It is an excellent report. There is much to learn, and I hope that the Government pays heed to its conclusions.

At First Minister's questions, I referred to Friday's Court of Session judgment, which rides a coach and horses through the Scottish National Party's class size policy. Does the cabinet secretary accept that, without legislation being put in place to protect them, councils could face legal challenge from parents even if they wanted to implement the policy and had the money to do so? Does she accept that, if she is serious about the policy, the Government must legislate?

To ask the First Minister whether, in light of recent court rulings, the Scottish Government will introduce legislation to enforce a class size limit of 18 in primaries 1 to 3. (S3F-1011)

I have difficulty in understanding the First Minister's reticence on the matter. The SNP manifesto was clear where it said: "We will reduce class sizes in Primary 1, 2 and 3 to eighteen pupils or less". The decision of the Court of Session on Friday makes it clear that without a change in the law, the policy will always be open to legal challenge. If the First Minister will not give a commitment to legislate, we must ask whether he is really serious about delivering the policy or whether it is another broken promise.

To ask the Scottish Executive how many students will be liable to pay local income tax. (S3O-4124)

I guarantee that, however many it is, it will be more than are currently paying council tax. The Government broke its promise to write off student debt, it wants to turn students into criminals for buying a bottle of wine or a few cans of beer to drink in their hall of residence, and now it intends to clobber them with the unfair, unworkable and discredited local income tax. Why does the Government hate students so much?

This has been a good debate. We have had fine and well-informed contributions from throughout the chamber. I particularly appreciated the well-informed speeches from Robert Brown and Duncan McNeil, who both spoke with great authority about the issue. The debate has been generally consensual. However, there were two points of division with which I should deal at the outset. First, I reiterate the point that Elizabeth Smith made, which a number of other members backed up: when we have a debate such as this, it really is not helpful to have publications that would inform the debate arrive at our desks so late in the day. I appreciate the explanation that Mr Ingram gave, but I hope that ministers will reflect on the matter for future debates. If we are to have a properly informed debate, Opposition spokesmen and back-bench members throughout the chamber need time to consider documents properly. I hope that ministers will take that on board for the future. The second point of division was the Labour amendment. I have a lot of sympathy with the amendment and with many of the points that Rhona Brankin made in her speech. The cabinet secretary might think that everything in the garden is rosy, but that is patently not the case. There are problems throughout Scotland. Rhona Brankin pointed out a number of examples of cuts in provision locally. Rhona Brankin made a good point about the huge cost burden on councils in providing for children with complex special needs and severe learning difficulties. I can certainly think of a number of constituency cases that I have pursued. I am sure that that is the case for all members in the chamber. Margaret Smith made that point in her speech. I can think of a number of cases in which parents have come to me to seek help when they are involved in an energy and morale-sapping fight with local authorities to try to get adequate services and support for their children. In some ways, we can sympathise with the local authority officials and directors of social work who have a budget within which they have to try to operate. There is no extra cash available, so the director of social work has to try to manage his resources. We often end up in the unfortunate situation in which the appearance is given that the council simply does not care about the needs of the children concerned. Parents in such a situation can get extremely depressed and frustrated and, of course, it is the youngsters who end up losing out. There is no easy answer to that. It is all a question of resources.

I thank the cabinet secretary for that intervention and welcome her reassurance. Of course, the worst thing that can happen in the situations to which I referred is that the parents have to resort to court action, which becomes an added pressure and an added drain on resources. Anything that can be done to avoid their having to go to court is extremely welcome. The question of resources is fundamental and it cannot be ignored. It will be expensive to get it right for every child—there is no point in pretending otherwise. That is a real challenge when money is tight. The cabinet secretary's colleague Mr Swinney is always telling us that he operates within a tight financial settlement. We understand that. The situation is not likely to improve, given the current economic circumstances. Tax receipts coming into the Treasury, such as from corporation tax and stamp duty, have already fallen dramatically. It is likely that in the next five years there will not be substantial uplifts in the amount of cash coming to the Scottish Government. Therefore, the current situation is not likely to improve. The minister has to be careful not to overpromise in relation to what the Government can deliver in this area. I turn to a couple of points of consensus. A number of members mentioned the Highland pathfinder scheme, which is all about sharing information at an early stage. I do not think that there is any doubt that that has been a great success. Of the 250 children who came to the attention of the police in the past nine weeks, only 53 required to be referred to the reporter. That saves resources in the long run and it makes perfect sense. Practitioners report that they have saved a significant amount of time; they have freed up time that was previously spent writing reports. If we manage things properly, we can save resources and ensure that they are targeted more effectively. Elizabeth Smith raised a point about parenting skills. We all know that there are parents who are not well equipped to bring up children. Having become a parent not that long ago, I am probably not best equipped to talk about such issues. In some cases, there are second or third generation children who simply do not have parents with the skills to be able to parent properly. We need  Government action in that area. However, we do not need the Government to come in with big boots on and create a whole set of new programmes. Excellent work is already being done by the voluntary sector. Off the top of my head, I can think of two organisations—Care for the Family and Barnardo's—that run excellent parenting classes. We should consider supporting the voluntary sector in providing information, recognising that the lack of parenting skills lies at the root of many of the problems that young people face. I commend to the cabinet secretary the nurture group project at Hill primary school in Blairgowrie, which I visited recently. The nurture group was established for youngsters with difficulty at home—not youngsters with educational difficulties, but those with social difficulties due to their home environment. Some of them might be from homes where their parents are suffering from addiction to alcohol or drugs, where there is worklessness, or possibly where there has been family breakdown. The nurture group seeks to replicate in the school a caring home environment, whereby meals are provided, homework support is given and out-of-school activities are offered. It is about providing youngsters with social skills and building their confidence if they are not getting the necessary support at home. The intention is to take children into the unit for a short time—a maximum of one or two years—so that they can then go back into the school main stream. So far, the nurture group is showing tremendous success. When I visited the school, I was extremely impressed with the commitment of the staff who were involved in the project. I am sure that they would welcome a ministerial visit, if the cabinet secretary or her colleagues have time. It is an excellent example of making a real difference, which is exactly what the debate is about.

What a summer it has been for spectator sports. I refer not to the confusion, bitterness and infighting at the heart of Gordon Brown's Government nor to the on-going leadership election within the Labour Party in Scotland. I wish all three contenders in that election well. We have already heard from two of them this morning and the third will no doubt set out his stall later in the course of the debate. I dare say that there will not be a hungry caterpillar among them. I refer not even to the leadership election among the Scottish Liberal Democrats, although I will take this opportunity to offer my personal congratulations to Tavish Scott—unfortunately, he has left the chamber—on attaining the leadership of Scotland's fourth political party. I also extend my commiserations to the two losing candidates and assure Mr Rumbles that it will be some consolation that, despite his decline in popularity among the Lib Dem membership, he will now be able to bring his consensual style of politics to the Parliamentary Bureau. The whole Parliament will look forward to that. Presiding Officer, I am of course referring to the spectacular success of the Beijing Olympics, particularly the outstanding performance of Team GB. Did it not make us all proud to be British to see our boys and girls doing so well, with the union flag being hoisted to the top of the flagpole on so many occasions, and our national anthem being so proudly played? Did it not make our hearts glad to see proud Scots such as Chris Hoy wearing the colours of Team GB and waving the union flag? Indeed, there was much to celebrate and enjoy over the summer. Well, here we all are back again, having enjoyed the August sunshine, to discuss the Government's programme for the coming term. As in the past, the Scottish Conservatives will work constructively with the minority Government on issues on which we share ambition. We look forward to engaging  with the Government on the bill on the membership of health boards. We look forward to hearing the detail of the proposed legislation for the protection of rural schools, an issue that is dear to my heart. We look forward, in particular, to my colleague Jamie McGrigor's member's bill to establish a Scottish register of tartans completing its passage through Parliament in the next few months and becoming law. We will work with the Government in other areas too. We support the plans to decouple the Scottish Parliament and local government elections to reduce voter confusion. We have our own proposals for improving the provision of outdoor education for every Scottish school pupil. We look forward to working with the Government to bring those proposals to fruition. We will hold the Government to the pledges that it has made thus far. When we supported the SNP Government's first budget, we made it clear that it required to be amended to provide funding for an extra 1,000 police officers in Scotland. I make it clear that we intend to hold the Government to that pledge absolutely. If the Government wants our support on any other issues, it will need to ensure that it keeps its promises and that there is no backsliding on its part. There are other areas in which we feel that the Government has got it wrong, and we will vigorously oppose it. In this parliamentary term, we will see the end to the Government's consultation on its alcohol strategy and the possibility of new legislation. Although we recognise that Scotland has a problem with alcohol, many of the Government's proposals are draconian and likely to be ineffective. The way to tackle the problem is to enforce the current legislation and tackle areas of abuse rather than adopt a blanket approach that tars everyone with the same brush. Let us have more prosecutions of those who sell alcohol to underage drinkers and less talk about raising the age for buying alcohol from off-sales to 21, thus demonising a whole generation of young people. Let us have more police on the streets to deal with those who are abusing alcohol instead of raising the price of a bottle of wine that a pensioner couple might enjoy with their Sunday lunch.

I am an apologist for many things, but not for our licensing boards. I sympathise entirely with Margo MacDonald's  point. Before we bring in new laws, we should properly enforce our current laws. The Government needs to learn that lesson. It is perhaps in the area of local taxation that the Government gets it most wrong. It continues to pursue its proposal to introduce an unfair, unworkable and discredited local income tax despite all the opposition that came out of its consultation. Organisation after organisation queued up to say that the plans were not properly thought through and would not work in practice: the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountability, the CBI, the FSB, the trade unions, the Law Society of Scotland, the Scottish Chambers of Commerce, the SCDI, the National Union of Students Scotland, and many more. How the Government thinks that it will have any credibility left, particularly with the business community, if it pushes ahead with its half-baked plans is beyond me. I make the Conservative position clear. We do not defend the status quo on local taxation, and we do not defend the council tax as it stands. For years now, we have been proposing a reformed council tax that targets assistance at those who suffer the most from rising bills, namely retired householders. That is why we propose that there should be an automatic 50 per cent discount in the council tax for all pensioner households.

Yes, I will give way to the new chief whip for the Liberal Democrats.

The support for my deputy leadership was unanimous. On the point about the council tax, our priority is to ensure that pensioner households have their bills reduced. If anyone wants to bring us other proposals, we will listen to them with interest, but that is our current priority. The reform to the council tax that we are proposing would be easy to implement, straightforward and simple to understand and it would face none of the legal difficulties that are plaguing the proposed local income tax. It would have widespread support from across Scotland. We will work with any other party to bring that necessary change into being. I note that, during the summer, the various contenders for the Labour leadership said separately that the council tax had to be reformed or possibly abolished altogether. They were rather  less clear about what they would do to replace it. Today we extend an invitation to the Labour Party to join us in pressing for this important reform of the council tax. However, we need to be clear about how it can be paid for. We have said that we would pay for such a reform by mutualising Scottish Water. If Labour wants to join us but wants to find the money in a different way, it needs to tell us where it will find that money. If the Government is serious about helping people who are struggling to pay their council tax bills and about helping Scotland's pensioners, it should ditch its plans for an unfair, unworkable and discredited local income tax, and join us in seeking to reform the council tax. There were some curious omissions from the First Minister's statement today. Where were the plans for legislation to abolish student debt as promised in the SNP manifesto? After all, the Government's assault on Scotland's students thus far—proposing to introduce a local income tax that they would have to pay, and raising the age for purchasing off-sales alcohol to 21—could hardly have put it in a good light with the student population. However, we did not hear one word about fulfilling that manifesto commitment. Nor was there anything in the First Minister's statement about the reduction in class sizes in primary 1 to 3. As my colleague David McLetchie pointed out, in the single outcome agreements that have been signed, few councils have signed up to that pledge. That is yet another SNP manifesto commitment that is unravelling day by day as local councils are unable to find the money to implement it. Where, too, is the much-heralded first-time buyers grant that formed part of the SNP manifesto? Sixteen months on from taking office, the Government has realised that it overpromised in its manifesto and is trying quietly to ditch some of its key pledges. We will continue to remind people in Scotland exactly what the SNP promised and where it is failing to deliver. All of us who enjoyed the spectator sports during the summer know that it is now time for the Government to start delivering. Where it is fulfilling its manifesto pledges and where we have common ground, we will happily support it. Where it is failing to meet its promises, we will expose it. Where it is manifestly taking the wrong course, we will work with any other party to defeat it. That is how the Scottish Conservatives will fulfil our role of a constructive Opposition. We hope that all in the Parliament can engage constructively through the year ahead.

Will the minister take an intervention?

I want to ask about the age at which people can purchase alcohol in an off-sales. The minister will know that the Government's policy is to reduce the voting age in Scotland to 16, and I therefore presume that she supports the proposition that, at 16, children become responsible adults. Does she not see the illogicality of increasing to 21 the age at which young people can buy alcohol? It would be five  years before those supposedly responsible adults would be able to purchase alcohol in an off-sales.

To ask the Scottish Executive what the cost of providing student loans to the 2,457 postgraduate students who received demands for immediate payment of the graduate endowment will be, following the enactment of the legislation to abolish the endowment. (S3O-3790)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the unnecessary and entirely avoidable concern that has been caused to Scottish graduates who face demands for immediate repayment of the graduate endowment and are without any resources to do that. I welcome the fact that she has responded to pressure to resolve the situation, but it should never have arisen in the first place. Who was to blame? Was it the cabinet secretary or her officials?

What is the difference between a debt and a civil debt?

I welcome the opportunity provided by the Labour Party to discuss education cuts. Despite what we have heard from Fiona Hyslop, undoubtedly we are seeing cuts in educational provision across Scotland. I accept that some responsibility for that rests with local authorities, but some of it comes back directly to Government policy. We have heard from all over Scotland about people having problems with accessing advanced higher courses. We have seen the axing of the schools of ambition programme that delivers many benefits to schools across Scotland, particularly to schools in deprived areas. On the Government's flagship policy of reducing class sizes, at least one council—SNP-controlled Renfrewshire Council—has increased class sizes in S1 and S2 English and maths. There is no doubt that there is widespread concern across Scotland about where education is headed. All that we have heard from the Government—and we can see it in the SNP amendment and we heard it from the minister—is the same old response: "It wisnae me. It's nothing to do with us. It is all up to the local authorities. Under the concordat, they deliver educational services, and therefore all the blame attaches to them, not us." I have no difficulty with the general proposition that we should have greater devolution of power to local authorities. The problem is that the SNP does not apply that approach even-handedly. Many of the problems faced by education today are a direct result of the Government's misguided policy on reducing class sizes in primary 1 to 3, and making that a priority above all others in education, despite the lack of hard and convincing evidence that it should be the top priority for education. We feel that extra resources should be concentrated in many other areas of education,  but the SNP is hamstrung by its manifesto commitment, which it is struggling to fulfil. It is all right for the SNP Government to claim credit for the things that it thinks are going its way in education, such as the class size reductions, but when it comes to all the bad things that are happening, such as cuts, it seeks to pass the buck to local authorities. It simply will not wash. I turn to the Conservative amendment. I recognise that there are widespread concerns about the current situation in education and I agree with much of the Labour motion. However, that does not excuse the EIS's irresponsible decision, taken at its conference last week, to ballot its members on industrial action. I well remember—as I was a school pupil at the time—the damage that was done to Scottish education as a result of the last teachers' strike. The teaching profession has done well since then, with the McCrone settlement delivering enhanced status for the profession and substantially enhanced terms and conditions. Whatever concerns the EIS might have, strike action is simply not the answer and is unacceptable Those who suffer from any strike are those who cannot defend themselves—namely, Scotland's school pupils. The damage that might be done to the education and career prospects of our young people, particularly those who are at a critical point, facing standard grade or higher exams, could be irreparable. Parliament must condemn the EIS's decision to ballot for strike action and I urge the EIS to show restraint. It does not have public sympathy on the issue, and any residual sympathy it might have will be lost if it calls its members out on strike. Yesterday, a leading academic, James Stanfield of Newcastle University, made direct criticism of Scottish education. According to him, we have fallen behind our counterparts in England and are still living on our historical reputation. The SNP Government's approach to education is failing, and it refuses to take any responsibility for what is happening in Scotland's classrooms. We cannot afford to see our education system made worse by the first teachers' strike in a generation and the harm that would be done to the life chances of today's youngsters. I move amendment S3M-2120.1, to insert at end: "but condemns the decision of the Educational Institute of Scotland at its recent conference to ballot its members on industrial action, and believes that any strike action by teachers will be immensely damaging to educational provision in Scotland and to Scotland's school pupils."

The First Minister will be aware of the tragic accident that happened yesterday on the A9 at Pitlochry, which involved a head-on collision between two cars on a single-carriageway stretch of the road. The accident left two dead; others had serious injuries. I am sure that the First Minister will want to join me in sending condolences to the families of those who were involved. I recently obtained answers to parliamentary questions that showed that the accident rate on the single-carriageway sections of the A9 is four times that on the dual-carriageway sections. Does the First Minister accept that there is an unanswerable case for upgrading the remaining single-carriageway sections of the A9 between Perth and Inverness to dual-carriageway status? Can he say how and when his Government will progress that work?

I welcome the debate and hope that it will help to bring positive changes and improved health services to remote and rural communities in Scotland. As my colleague Mary Scanlon said, the Scottish Conservatives support the recommendations in "Delivering for Remote and Rural Healthcare". It is essential that a specific model of health care is put in place that is appropriate for remote and rural communities. We need a health service that works for those communities and does not ignore them. I welcome the remarks that the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing made at the beginning of the debate, when she set out her personal commitment to ensuring that those in rural areas are not disadvantaged. I will take the opportunity to raise a constituency matter, if members will allow me to do so. Highland Perthshire certainly falls within the definition of remote and rural areas, and that applies particularly to the Rannoch area. For all that Rannoch is at the heart of Scotland, it has all the characteristics of a mainland peninsula or even an island community, such is its remoteness from centres of population and the lack of good transport links. People in the Rannoch area, some of whom have come along to this morning's debate and are in the public gallery, are concerned about what they perceive to be reductions in the health services that they receive in their remote area. I know that the constituency member, who is the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth, will have raised those concerns directly with his Cabinet colleague, but I have been asked to raise them in the chamber today. I put on the record my thanks to members of the local community in Kinloch Rannoch who have been campaigning tirelessly to get improved health services for the area. There is widespread concern in Rannoch about changes to the out-of-hours service following the opting out of the local GP practice. NHS Tayside  allowed the Kinloch Rannoch medical practice to opt out of out-of-hours service in May 2006. When the serving GP retired earlier this year, the contract for GP cover was awarded to the nearby Aberfeldy practice, but there was no requirement to reinstate out-of-hours cover. People in the Rannoch area are concerned that lives might be put at risk due to the changed arrangements. The case is made far more eloquently than I could make it in correspondence that I have received from constituents. I will quote briefly from two letters. The first is from a constituent in Dall in Rannoch, whose statement relates to recent call-outs for medical help by the wife of an ill husband, both of whom are in their late 80s: "I think the present system is totally inadequate, I know there are a lot of elderly people in this area. I would want the local medical practice to take back responsibility for out-of-hours cover, as in the past. I believe that the Aberfeldy Practice should cover out-of-hours in the Rannoch Area and put doctors in for that purpose, for medical reasons above all. The present system has been shown to be unsafe." The second quotation comes from another constituent from the same area and refers to a specific incident that occurred recently: "My mother, 89 years old, had breathing difficulties on February 16 th 2008—a Saturday. I called the Doctor through NHS 24 and he said he'd arrive within four hours. He arrived in about three hours. The doctor was concerned with my mother's rapid heart beat and pulse rate and issued a prescription for these symptoms. My husband drove to Pitlochry and back to access a Pharmacy. This meant a 54 mile round trip and at 4.30pm my mother was able to start medication. This delay could have been saved if the NHS 24 doctor had access to the dispensary service in the Kinloch Rannoch Medical Practice." The fear locally is that only a tragedy in the area will result in an improved health service for Rannoch.

I am aware that NHS Tayside has said that, but the local community believes that it is not getting a service that meets its needs. It believes that NHS Tayside is not fully aware either of the strength of feeling in the local community or, perhaps more seriously, of some of the risks attached to the current situation. The situation has been made worse by recent changes to ambulance cover. Previously, two full-time ambulances were stationed in Pitlochry, but that has been downgraded to one. The cabinet secretary knows my concerns about that, as I have written to her; despite her response my  concerns remain. Worse still, the rapid response unit that was based in Aberfeldy has recently been moved to Pitlochry, which is further away from Kinloch Rannoch. I understand that in large rural areas we cannot expect the ambulance response times that we see in cities. However, it is a matter of serious concern, particularly where we no longer have out-of-hours cover, to see a reduction in ambulance cover that is continuing. In her statement yesterday, the cabinet secretary announced an independent evaluation of the front-loaded model of ambulance delivery. That model has led to the deployment of the rapid response units. I ask her, as part of the review, to look specifically at the question of ambulance cover in Highland Perthshire. In addition, I invite the cabinet secretary to visit Kinloch Rannoch and meet local residents to discuss their genuine fears about the future of the health care service in the area. I would be happy to facilitate such a meeting. I hope that she or the Minister for Public Health will respond specifically to my comments, either at the close of the debate or, if she prefers, in writing. The community is concerned that lives are at risk. We must ensure that our rural and remote communities are not disadvantaged.

Will the minister give way?

rose—

I am interested in Ross Finnie's plans for a minimum income guarantee for students. Will he tell us at what level that minimum income would be set, how much it would cost and where the money would come from?

I enjoyed Malcolm Chisholm's speech, but I would advise him and other Labour speakers to stay off the subject of referendums for the rest of the afternoon. It is ironic that this debate on moving Scotland forward comes from a Government whose members this morning will have woken up to some of the worst headlines that it has had since it took office just over a year ago. Yesterday truly was wobbly Wednesday for the Government, as it hit a new low in its forward plans. The proposals for the so-called local income tax were savaged at the Local Government and Communities Committee. The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, Fiona Hyslop, was left flapping in the wind over class size reductions—she was followed in that flapping by the First Minister and, just now, by the Deputy First Minister, who was unable to answer the simple question of how much the policy will cost. Moreover, yesterday, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth gave a pitiful performance in his statement on the Scottish futures trust, which as every day goes by looks more and more like the public-private partnership/private finance initiative model that it was supposed to replace. One by one, the Government's flagship policies are falling apart, and the scheduling of the debate could not have been more helpful in allowing us to expose its failings. Far from moving forward, Scotland is going backwards in far too many areas. Occasionally, the SNP has talked a good game but, when it comes to the crunch, it all too often reverts to type and goes back to its tired old left-wing roots. For a start, it abhors any attempt to involve the private sector in public services, even if such a move will deliver to taxpayers savings in health, education or justice. For reasons of pure ideology, the SNP is vehemently opposed to our proposals—now adopted even by the Liberal Democrats—to mutualise Scottish Water, which would free up £200 million of taxpayers' money every year. With regard to justice, the SNP is intent on creating a soft-touch Scotland. By letting more and more prisoners out of jail rather than building the prison capacity that we need, it is making a  mockery of the Scottish justice system. It is little wonder, then, that sheriffs are criticising it. However, instead of responding to those criticisms, SNP ministers simply carry on down the same road with more enthusiasm than ever before. When it comes to education, it is now clear that the class size reduction policy is simply not affordable or deliverable. Even when legislation has been passed, problems remain. The graduate endowment may have been abolished, but postgraduate students now face a demand for immediate payment of the graduate endowment as a consequence. The Government is not lifting a finger to help them. Even a broken clock is right twice a day. I accept that there have been good things from the Government, albeit that, in the main, they were borrowed from our manifesto. Tolls on the Forth and Tay bridges have been abolished, which we welcome, and the previous Labour and Liberal Democrat Executive's decision to close the accident and emergency units at Ayr and Monklands hospitals has been reversed, which we welcome, too. We particularly welcome the new drugs policy for Scotland, which the Government announced today, the extra 1,000 police officers, and the accelerated cuts in business rates for 150,000 small businesses. All that was delivered by the SNP Government as a result of Conservative pressure as part of the budget process.

The Labour Party is not in any position to lecture anyone on police numbers. We will hold the SNP to its promises and ensure that we get the extra 1,000 police officers. We will play the role of a constructive Opposition. Robert Brown is fond of penning letters to the newspapers in which he accuses the Conservatives of sucking up to the SNP. [ Interruption. ] In response to the mutterings that I hear from members on the Liberal Democrat benches to my left, I remind them that it was their votes that pushed through the abolition of the graduate endowment. Liberal Democrats did that without any thought for the impact of abolition on the higher education budget. They also supported the SNP in its blinkered opposition to the building of new nuclear power stations in Scotland. No doubt, the Liberal Democrats will support plans for a local income tax. Truly, the difference between the Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats is not that we support the SNP on occasion and that  they do not; it is simply that when we support the SNP we ensure that we get something in return, whereas they are happy to offer something for nothing. If Dr Faustus had been a Liberal Democrat, the devil would have got a very cheap deal. Looking ahead, there are areas where we will continue to work with the SNP Government. I am interested in its proposal to safeguard rural schools. I am also interested in working with the Government on promoting and giving every young person the right to access outdoor education. I am further interested in its transport proposals and in delivering improved connectivity for our nation. In our amendment, we urge the SNP Government to work closely and constructively with our country's other Government in Westminster. All too often, the SNP has taken a confrontational approach in seeking to stir up conflicts with Westminster. That is not in the wider interests of our nation. The SNP is putting its narrow pursuit of separation ahead of what is good for Scotland's people. It is time for the Parliament to tell the Government to start putting Scotland's interests first. The Government has to accept that the great majority of Scots believe in the United Kingdom and its benefits. If anything epitomises the emptiness at the heart of the SNP agenda, it is surely the so-called national conversation. It is a complete waste of taxpayers' money, given that the result has been only 130 letters, at a cost to the taxpayer of £150,000—or more than £1,000 per reply. It is time for the SNP Government to ditch the ludicrous national conversation and get on with the real job of moving Scotland forward. I hope the Parliament sends a clear message to the SNP Government at decision time tonight that it is time to stop picking unnecessary fights with Westminster and time to start delivering. I have pleasure in moving amendment S3M-2001.2.1, to insert at end: "and further calls on the Scottish Government to work constructively with Her Majesty's Government on these and other issues for the benefit of the Scottish people, thus demonstrating the benefits of our historic union with England, Wales and Northern Ireland, a union which continues to attract overwhelming public support."

Can the Deputy First Minister tell us—the First Minister could not—how much the policy of class size reduction will cost?

Will Maureen Watt agree to meet my colleague Elizabeth Smith and me to discuss Conservative proposals for outdoor education that would give every child aged between 11 and 15 a guaranteed right to at least one week's outdoor education as part of the school curriculum?

When I saw in the Business Bulletin last week that the Labour Party had chosen for debate today the subject of skills, I thought that there had been a typing error. For the past three weeks, Labour has spoken of nothing but the need for a referendum on Scottish independence. I imagined that the Labour Party was waiting desperately for its first debating-time slot so that it could have an opportunity to set out in detail to Parliament its thinking on the important issue of our constitutional future. Imagine my surprise when I saw that today's debates were not to be about the constitution but about skills and the Scottish Ambulance Service. Those are important subjects, but it is remarkable that the Labour Party wants to say nothing at all about the major subject of political debate of the past three weeks. Perhaps its reticence is because it was unable to come up with a motion, given that it has held so many different positions over the past three weeks that it does not even know what its position is on the subject.

There is a certain irony in a party choosing for debate the subject of skills when its front bench is so lacking in skills. I am pleased to see so many Labour members here this morning; I thought that they would all be down in Crewe and Nantwich campaigning for a Labour victory in that important by-election. However, it is clear that they have already given it up as a lost cause. This is an important debate and I welcome the Labour motion, which highlights some important points. In September last year, we debated the Government's skills strategy, which did not gain parliamentary support. I do not believe that the situation has improved much since then. The new skills agency, Skills Development Scotland, has been established, but there is still a great deal of uncertainty about who is to be on its board and how it is to work. A chair is now in place, but the organisation still has only an interim chief executive and interim board members, and there is no detail on how the organisation is to work.

I am pleased to hear that progress is being made because I constantly meet skills providers and people in industry who are  frustrated by the lack of progress on Skills Development Scotland. The sooner that we get that body in place and know what it does, the better. The Labour motion refers to the Government's decision to move away from adult modern apprenticeships in vital sectors such as tourism, information technology and retail. I do not know whether the Government has made the right decision because, frankly, there has been no information to support that decision, and no consultation with people in those sectors. The Scottish Training Federation wrote to me and others on 14 May, expressing its concern about the sudden change in emphasis—without any consultation—in the adult modern apprenticeship programme, thus denying training providers any scope to forward plan. The result has been redundancies and restructuring. That is not the mark of competent government and I therefore support Labour's call for the Government to come forward with the evidence to support that move. There is concern in other sectors, such as the food and drink industry—which is supposedly a priority industry for the Government—that there will be no further funding of apprenticeships for those over 20. Given that the vast majority of people working in that sector are over 20, that will have a serious effect on the ability of the industry to train staff. Our amendment refers to the important issue of vocational education. We in the Conservative party have always supported the idea that school pupils aged 14 and upwards should have the right to choose education by a vocational route. Vocational education should be seen not as second best to academic learning, but as an alternative for those who wish to take it up. Vocational education should be high quality and available to all. The skills strategy should set out in detail the SNP Government's plans for expanding access to vocational education, and that is why we need a revised skills strategy to be brought to Parliament for debate and approval. The SNP Government's approach to skills is seriously lacking. The minister's coat might well be on a shoogly peg following her blunders last week on PE provision in schools, but that is no excuse for the Government's inability to address such serious issues properly. I move amendment S3M-1951.1, to insert at end: "and details of how access will be provided to high quality vocational education for all school pupils aged 14 or above."

There were two points of interest in the First Minister's speech. First he talked about the importance of this Parliament, then he said that his Government would press ahead with its so-called national conversation. When will the First Minister bring his national conversation to this parliamentary chamber, or is he feart?

It is my great pleasure to close this debate on behalf of the Conservatives. I am sure that all of us on the Conservative benches would want to send our congratulations and best wishes to the cabinet secretary on his new arrival. I have to say that, even in the era of SNP-Tory co-operation, we did not expect him to go so far as to give his son the excellent Christian name of Fraser, but that is nonetheless welcome. On that note, I say to David Stewart that, having recently had the benefit of two weeks of paternity leave, I am not sure that I would necessarily rush to extend that period. This has been an excellent and well-informed debate on all sides. It was largely consensual, with the usual exception of Mr Rumbles, who never disappoints with his ability to get the tone of the debate completely wrong. Having upset the whole chamber, he disappeared for almost the entire duration of the debate, no doubt to issue a press release about how he was entirely right and everybody else was wrong. Throughout the debate, we heard pretty grim statistics on food from members of all parties. World grain stocks are at a 35-year low. We have only 52 days' supply of grain in the world. The price of food has been rising for the past two years, which reverses a 30-year downward trend. The UN Food and Agriculture Organization predicts a 55 per cent growth in demand for food between 1998 and 2030. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development has warned that food prices could increase by between 20 and 50 per cent during the next decade. Here in Scotland, it is estimated that food inflation will push up the average family's food bill by £750 this year alone. The UK's self-sufficiency  has dropped from 72 per cent in 1996 to 60 per cent. I am sure that all members agree that those statistics make grim reading. Behind the statistics, some of the poorest people in the world are unable to pay for food, real lives are being lost, and there is the possibility of new famines in developing countries. As the debate showed, the causes of rising food prices are varied and complex. As John Scott and others said, countries such as India and China are changing to western-style diets, which is creating a massive increase in demand for meat products. I suspect that even the First Minister's frequent visits to curry houses cannot balance out the changing diets of the people of India. Further factors that are driving price rises in food include the loss of land due to climate change and the growth in demand for biofuels, as well as rising oil prices and rapid increases in the global population. Our motion mentions solutions. What can be done? We are, of course, a devolved Parliament, but it is possible for us to lead the debate and underline to the UK Government and the EU the urgency of the matter. Here in Scotland, we can take action and set an example to other countries on what can be done to try to stop the emerging food shortage. For a long time, it was Government policy to reduce food production at home, but today's new circumstances need a new approach. The Conservatives believe that the Government must respond to the issue by encouraging our farmers to increase production once again to meet growing local and worldwide demand.

I will not. If Mr Rumbles had bothered to stay for the debate, I might have been more sympathetic and taken an intervention. The Government must be on the side of the farmers. It must stop forcing red tape on them and start cutting it instead. I have had many conversations with farmers in Angus and Perthshire, and many of them tell me about the pressures that are placed on them and their struggle to keep their businesses viable and worth while under the burden of bureaucracy. On that point, I welcome the news that, just the other day, the Competition Commission recommended that the supermarkets should have an independent ombudsman to oversee relationships between retailers and suppliers. Scottish farmers have been understandably reluctant to produce more food while they are not getting a fair price. They will produce more food if they receive a fair price for it. Our supermarkets have been using their excessive power in the  marketplace for too long, and that has dissuaded our farmers from increasing production. I hope that the new ombudsman will police the supermarkets and ensure that there is fairer trade between supermarkets and farmers. I call for the ombudsman to be set up as soon as possible. We must encourage more Scottish consumers to buy local produce. I am wearing a badge for the Conservatives' buy local, eat local campaign, which I encourage members to support. I opened a newspaper this morning and saw the headline "Grow your own vegetables, says MSP". It refers, of course, to my colleague John Scott. However, we need to be a little bit careful in encouraging self-help. I recall that a previous Conservative politician, Edwina Currie, got into trouble for urging pensioners to wear woolly hats and socks in bed in order to cut down their heating bills. I know that the mental image that is conjured up when I use the words "Edwina Currie" and "bed" in the same sentence will upset the stomachs of many members, but there is a serious point to be made. As Nanette Milne said, we need to grow more of our own food, and I hope that members will lead by example. I hope that the debate will kick-start a wider debate in Scotland and encourage the Government to take action. I hope that, at decision time, notwithstanding the best efforts of the Liberal Democrats, the Parliament will unite to support the motion and amendments. The issue must be taken seriously.

Mr Kerr is right to highlight the confusion about the Scottish futures trust. I apologise to Christina McKelvie, who diplomatically is absent from the chamber, but her contribution to "Newsnight Scotland" last night did not assist the situation. When will we have clarity on the funding mechanism for new schools? Until we have that, the hiatus in the school building programme will continue.

Will the First Minister confirm that current legislation, which a Conservative Government introduced, says that students are exempt from the council tax?

To ask the Scottish Executive how it is encouraging the development of hydro power schemes. (S3O-2969)

Is the minister aware that developers of small-scale hydro schemes are experiencing extreme delays in obtaining consent from the Scottish Environment Protection Agency for licences under the Water Environment (Controlled Activities) (Scotland) Regulations 2005—or CAR—regime? Will he undertake to investigate that matter and encourage SEPA to speed up the process, which is undoubtedly hindering the development of hydro power throughout Scotland and therefore holding us back in meeting our targets for renewable energy?

During the debate, we have been from Ecuador to the Gambia and from Malawi to India, but I am surprised that Poland has not been mentioned more, except in the context of Auschwitz. On Friday, I visited St Columba's high school in Perth, which is a Roman Catholic secondary school that has a large complement of Polish students as a result of the major influx of people from eastern Europe to Scotland. That has enriched the school and presented challenges. If we are considering international education and countries with which we can develop links, surely Poland should be high on the agenda, given the large Polish population not only in Perth, but in other parts of Scotland. I have a great deal of sympathy with Ken Macintosh's comments and with the wording of his amendment. I think that we all agree on the importance of Holocaust education. I have not visited Poland or Auschwitz, but friends who were there recently came away deeply moved by the experience. I have no doubt that young people's educational experience would be enriched by going there, so I have no difficulty with the first part of Mr Macintosh's amendment, but I am slightly concerned about the implications of the suggestion in the second part that just because the UK Government comes up with an initiative in a devolved area and commits funding, that procedure should be followed automatically in Scotland. I am concerned that a precedent might be set.

I shall reflect on Mr Macintosh's point, but I say to him as gently as I can that his party was in office in Scotland for 10 years and, while it was in power in the devolved Parliament, held the education brief, so it had time to introduce such a measure if it thought that it was important, but it did not.

Come on, then.

The argument is getting rather tortuous. My point is that the substantial education budget in previous years could have been used to fund such trips if it was so important to Mr Macintosh and his colleagues. However, on the general point, I endorse much of what Mr Macintosh said. On the Liberal Democrat amendment, I have sympathy with Hugh O'Donnell's points and his arguments on the need to improve the teaching of second languages in secondary and primary schools. However, the Conservatives have a difficulty with talk of a national strategy. As I am sure Mr O'Donnell will know, we prefer local decision making and we do not like top-down national strategies. In that respect, I welcome the minister's comments on the amendment. On the motion, we all accept that, as the curriculum for excellence says, pupils should have an understanding of the world and that international education is important for that reason. There is nothing particularly new in that. I remember being at school many years ago when we were all encouraged to have pen-pals in exotic locations such as France and the Netherlands. Pupils today have much wider horizons than we had. A group of pupils from Blairgowrie high school in my constituency recently went on a trip to Malawi, as many other pupils from throughout Scotland have done. Clearly, the world has got a lot smaller in the past 30 or so years. There are huge advantages in promoting such trips. Through co-operation agreements, the Scottish Government has encouraged links with countries such as France, Malawi and China. We have much to learn from those countries, particularly  China. Like Jeremy Purvis, I am sorry that we have not heard more about the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning's trip to China. I would be interested to hear what she made of the Chinese education system, particularly its emphasis on vocational education, which I feel we should echo. I agree with Ken Macintosh and Elizabeth Smith about the subject matter for today's debate on education. I find it hard to believe that this is the burning issue in education. We could have debated one of many other key areas of concern. We are told this week that a third of 14-year-olds are failing the basic standard in reading and numeracy, and that half are failing the basic standard in writing. Surely there are other, more vital areas that we could be debating. Nevertheless, I end on a note of consensus by saying that international education is important and that the Conservatives will support the rather bland motion.

I share many of the member's concerns about the decline in the numbers of Scottish pupils and students who study foreign languages. However, does he agree that there is perhaps an overemphasis on teaching French, which is a traditional language to teach, in our schools? Perhaps other languages such as Spanish and Mandarin, which might be more important in responding to future opportunities in the world, should be taught more.

I welcome the new emphasis on literacy and numeracy and, in particular, the proposed new qualifications for S4, which will, in the light of the statistics that emerged this week, be very important. The cabinet secretary mentioned the continuous assessments in S1 to S3. Will she clarify whether those will be determining factors in the S4 exams on literacy and numeracy or whether those will be stand-alone exams?

I wish the minister every success with his new wind turbine. We currently have hundreds of speculative planning applications for wind farms all over Scotland, which puts huge strain on council planning departments and causes communities grave concern. Surely it is time to revisit national planning guidance on siting onshore wind farms to end that ludicrous free for all.

To ask the First Minister how physical education is being developed in Scottish schools. (S3F-697) I ask that question with a certain sense of déjà vu.

Wendy Alexander might have run out of questions, but I have not. I welcome the First Minister's commitment, but I am somewhat confused. Perhaps I can seek some clarity. In last weekend's Scotland on Sunday , a Government spokesman is quoted as saying: "it has now been agreed that the new curriculum framework should be outcome-based with no input requirements in terms of subject or time allocations." Who was that Government spokesman? Was he real or was he a figment of someone's imagination? Is he still in a job today? Or is it the case that the Scottish Government is all over the place on this issue?

Does the member agree that there is complete confusion at the heart of what the Government has proposed? One of the strengths of schools of ambition money is that it goes directly to the schools that are involved. I presume that if every school is to be a school of ambition, the money will simply go into local government budgets and will not be ring fenced, so there will be no guarantee whatsoever that it will go to individual schools. Is that not a major flaw in what the Government is saying?

Will Brian Adam take an intervention?

I think the minister was getting her St Ninian's schools in a twist—there are, of course, two. The one that Rhona Brankin mentioned is in Kirkintilloch, and had a glowing HMIE report on 4 March this year that highlighted the success of the schools of ambition funding that the school has received. However, I want to say a little about another school of ambition. Last Thursday evening, I had the great pleasure of attending a gala dinner at Blairgowrie high school in my region. It is an annual event that is attended by more than 100 members of the community. What is remarkable about the event is that all the catering, service and entertainment are provided by pupils at the school. In recent years, the school has developed an excellent reputation for catering and hospitality under the able stewardship of Lynn Smith, who is the head of home economics. Relationships have been developed with local hotels whereby chefs will mentor talented pupils who might want to consider careers in catering, and pupils have access to a programme whereby they can work in the kitchens of those hotels to learn vocational skills. That excellent initiative helps to provide skills for the workforce in a part of the country where tourism is the major industry. It is also an excellent example of the success of the schools of ambition programme. Blairgowrie high school has been able to access £100,000 a year for three years to help to support and develop such initiatives, and specifically to fund the construction of a new training kitchen in the school for pupils who are interested in a career in catering. Rhona Brankin's motion "deplores the Scottish Government's decision to axe the Schools of Ambition programme". The word "deplores" was carefully chosen and is appropriate. The SNP Government's decision to  scrap the programme is indeed deplorable, because the programme has been a success. It has helped schools such as Blairgowrie high school and schools throughout Scotland, many of which draw pupils from catchment areas that include pockets of deprivation, in all manner of different ways. As the Conservative education spokesman, it is not my function to praise slavishly the initiatives of the previous Labour and Liberal Democrat Executive, any more than it is my function to praise the initiatives of the SNP Government. Almost uniquely in the Parliament, the Conservatives have the opportunity to consider such initiatives dispassionately and to judge them on the evidence. Based on that evidence, I have no hesitation in saying that the schools of ambition programme has been a success, and I deeply regret that it is about to come to an end.

I am sorry. I simply do not have time. We can only wonder at the SNP's motivation. Perhaps it is simply that the programme was a successful initiative by the previous Labour and Liberal Executive, and that for reasons of narrow partisan party politics the SNP Government wishes to bring it to an end. However, perhaps there is something more sinister at play. We know that the SNP is wedded to a one-size-fits-all principle in Scottish education. It finds the idea of any sort of diversity within school education deeply offensive. It cannot stomach the thought of schools' being funded directly from the centre and making local decisions about how money is to be allocated. My amendment covers both points. Motivated by political dogma, the SNP has decided to scrap a successful programme. The real message of the decision is that the SNP Government has no ambition for Scottish education. Its message to schools and headteachers is, "Don't get above yourselves. Don't try to excel. Don't try to develop specialisations or expertise. If you do, we'll haul you down and reduce you to the lowest common denominator." The Scottish Conservatives do not believe that the SNP's approach is the way ahead for Scotland's schools. Let us keep the successful schools of ambition programme and send a clear message today that Parliament has more ambition for Scotland's schools than the SNP Government will ever have.  I move amendment S3M-1601.1, to insert at end: "and to continue to provide Schools of Ambition funding directly to schools and to support decisions being taken on the expenditure of such funds at school level."

Does the member agree with the comment that Fred Forrester, formerly of the Educational Institute of Scotland, made in The Herald last week? He said: "The notion that all secondary schools have equal need of targeted extra funding is palpable rubbish".

It is always a pleasure to follow Jeremy Purvis, even if it seems that he has been taking lessons in fashion from Christopher Harvie. However, we will forgive him for that.

Certainly, Presiding Officer. I agree with Mr Purvis that the debate has been generally consensual—

Indeed. The debate has also been wide ranging. I am sorry that Christina McKelvie, who is no longer in the chamber, decided to break the consensus with a rather partisan speech. I can only imagine that she was making a pitch for early promotion to ministerial office at the next reshuffle. If I were sitting on the SNP front bench, I would be getting worried; I would watch my back. As my colleague Elizabeth Smith said, the Conservatives warmly welcome the development of the curriculum for excellence. I have always believed that our current school system does well for the majority of our pupils. Of course, there are still problem areas in education, but we should not be afraid to celebrate the success that has been achieved. However, two groups are being let down by the current system. First, the top-performing 10 per cent or so of students are simply not being stretched enough. Elizabeth Smith made the point that, for many pupils, sixth form is not being properly utilised. Secondly, and more worrying, the bottom 20 per cent or so of achievers are too often being left behind. Earlier this week, we saw statistics that show that one in 10 Scottish school leavers goes straight into unemployment. Those youngsters are simply being failed by the current school system and that is perhaps the most serious problem in Scottish education. The curriculum for excellence is an opportunity to address some of those problems. We welcome the recognition that education is about more than simply passing exams, that the system needs greater flexibility, needs to produce well-rounded individuals and to involve the wider community. The need for greater flexibility was recognised in the OECD report to which the cabinet secretary and various members have referred. We have a tremendous resource in our teaching profession and Government needs to trust our teachers and head teachers more than it has in the past. The Scottish Conservatives want to see greater local decision making. I heard from one director of education on Friday about his ambition for top-performing students to start certified courses at least a year early. It is essential that schools have the flexibility to permit that.  We also need to expand vocational education—an issue that the Scottish Conservatives have raised regularly for many years. That will require greater flexibility than we have at present. The director of education to whom I referred also raised concerns about the provision of core subjects, especially in S3 and S4, not allowing sufficient time in the school week for a proper focus on other areas such as vocational education. To develop a curriculum that is truly based around the individuality of the child will require much greater local flexibility and decision making than before. The OECD report seeks to encourage vocational education. It says: "International experience suggests that Scotland would gain from a bolder, but also broader approach to vocational studies in schools than it has so far demonstrated." I hope that the cabinet secretary takes that message on board. Science teaching in schools was raised with me last week by members of the BioIndustry Association, which met members from various parties. Many of our successful industries in Scotland—not least bioscience—require a constant stream of quality science graduates and PhD students. Sadly, too few youngsters in our schools are being encouraged to take science subjects. In some schools, timetabling problems and a lack of resources mean that pupils cannot choose to take three science subjects to higher level. Other schools have difficulty in recruiting science teachers. If we are serious about developing Scotland's economy, the question of science in our schools—indeed, in higher education in Scotland—must be addressed.

Yes. Hugh Henry is right to raise that issue, which is one that I have raised on previous occasions. Newly qualified teachers sometimes have great difficulty in finding employment. The danger is that they will find employment in other sectors and will not return to teaching, despite the huge investment that the state has made in them by providing training and the huge investment that they have made themselves. It is a serious issue. We must also reconsider our current exam structure—Elizabeth Smith and other members referred to that. The introduction of the new curriculum provides an opportunity to assess the  qualifications that are currently on offer and wonder whether they are still fit for purpose. We especially need to look at what is happening in sixth form. In many schools there is concern about the lack of availability of advanced highers in certain subjects because of a lack of resources. Hugh Henry raised that issue earlier in an intervention on the cabinet secretary, who was too hasty in seeking to brush it aside. I welcome what the cabinet secretary said about a review of exams and I look forward to her announcement about how the Government intends to proceed. I agree with what she said about ending the two-term dash for highers and about encouraging youngsters to start studying for the higher qualifications earlier, where appropriate. I will be interested to see what the Government proposes about the baccalaureates, although I wonder why it would be right to have baccalaureates in science and languages but not in other subjects.

I hear what the cabinet secretary says, but that does not prevent baccalaureates from being introduced in other subjects, such as social science, geography, history or whatever. I hope that the cabinet secretary's mind is not closed on that point. The curriculum for excellence offers a real opportunity to improve Scotland's education system. Encouraging greater flexibility in local decision making should ensure that our education system is more tailored to the needs of Scotland's young people. In particular, we should not lose this opportunity to ensure that Scotland's education is improved for those who are currently being failed by the system. 16: 26

I warmly welcome the minister's announcement on altering the southern boundary of the Cairngorms national park. I have pursued that issue since the park was first established without the inclusion of any part of Perthshire. As members will know, in the previous session, John Swinney introduced a member's bill on the issue, which I was pleased to support. In his absence, it is appropriate to pay tribute to him for his campaigning on the issue. As we all know, when the boundaries of the national park were drawn up, they included parts of Inverness-shire, Moray, Aberdeenshire and a small part of Angus, but no part of Perth and Kinross. That was despite the fact that all objective views expressed on the matter said that the northern part of highland Perthshire should have been included in the park. Even the then Government's advisers on the matter, Scottish Natural Heritage, said that the boundaries should include part of highland Perthshire. Only the then Scottish Executive took a different view, but it failed to marshal any objective evidence to support its stance. The only conclusion that could have been reached at the time was that the decision to exclude Perth and Kinross was taken for political reasons, as it suited the then Executive to have a majority of the elected members of the Cairngorms National Park Authority board from Highland Council. There was, and is, a great deal of public support for amending the national park boundaries from all sorts of bodies in Perthshire and further afield, including the Pitlochry partnership, the John Muir Trust, the Mountaineering Council of Scotland, the Blair Atholl area tourism association and many others. Perth and Kinross Council and other groups led a vigorous local campaign. I pay tribute to that campaign, which has now paid off. Today's announcement will right a wrong, and it is good news for the highland Perthshire economy. There is no doubt that, as far as visitors are concerned, Blair Atholl is the natural southern gateway to the Cairngorms. Following today's announcement, Blair Atholl will come within the national park and will be able to develop as a proper gateway centre. Slightly further east, Spittal of Glenshee, which is on the A93, will now fall within the national park and should gain an economic benefit. That is good news, and I commend the minister, to whom I am warming by the week—much to his concern, I am sure. I will address some of the wider issues in the debate about the future of the national parks. Our  party's position was set out in some detail earlier by my colleague John Scott. David Stewart quoted from Professor Neil Kay's report. Professor Kay described park management as a "clunky, cumbersome, formal and bureaucratic muddle". Parliamentarians are right to be concerned when a respected academic produces such a report and uses such language. We are also right to be concerned about the costs of running national park boards. The duty on ministers, who are responsible for the purse strings, and on parliamentarians, who are responsible for holding ministers to account, is always to ensure that public money is properly spent. As John Scott said, it is right to ask whether a board of 25 is the right size. We do not presuppose the answer to that question, but it is right to ask whether 25 is too many. I understand that individual payments for the national park board members are lower than they are for the board members of many other bodies, such as SEPA and SNH, but the national park boards have more board members, so the cumulative cost is higher. Against a backdrop of decluttering the public sector landscape—an ambition that we share with the Government—and scrutinising costs across the public sector, it is right that we ask such questions. We are quite right to have a review, but I have two caveats. First, the Parliament wants to pay tribute to the people who have served on the boards of the two national parks until now. Whatever decision we take about going forward from here, we accept that, in the early days, when the national parks were being established, the board members did a lot of excellent work. A decision to restructure the boards or cut the number of members should not be taken as a criticism of the excellent work that has been done.

I am grateful to the minister for clarifying that point. Secondly, I reassure Jackie Baillie that our position has not changed and that we agree that there should be local democratic input, which should continue in relation to the boards. The minister accepted that point. If I remember rightly, Rob Gibson made an interesting proposal, which is worth examining,  that the boards should be entirely locally elected. At this time, when we are trying to promote public engagement and direct democracy, we should consider that option. Again, I do not presuppose the outcome of the review—indeed, the proposal shows why we need a wide-ranging review. I am afraid that we will not support Mr Rumbles's amendment. Like the minister, we feel that it is simply too prescriptive. I apologise to Mr Hume—the Liberal Democrat amendment is not in the name of Mr Rumbles. We have become very much engaged with governance and management in the debate; perhaps we have lost sight of some of the broader issues that are at stake. National parks are a tremendous resource for Scotland. They hold precious landscapes of international renown. People come from all over the world to visit Scotland to see our mountains, fish on our lochs and walk on our hills. They come to our national parks, which are a tremendous part of our countryside and make a tremendous economic contribution to our tourism industry. I question, as I have in the past, the good sense of building giant pylons through the Cairngorms national park, which will happen if approval is given for the Beauly to Denny power line upgrade. It is hard to imagine any other country with a national park talking about desecrating the landscape in such a way. I hope that ministers will consider that point seriously when they come to decide whether to grant consent for the upgrade. I do not dispute that we must have connectivity to the grid; I just wonder whether there are better ways of achieving that than building giant pylons, which is what is being proposed.

If Mr Whitton had followed closely what I have said in the past, he would know that I have talked about options such having as a subsea cable, which would run around the coast, and making greater use of the eastern Scotland route, where we already have much larger pylons. The point is that we are dealing with very sensitive landscapes in the Highlands and the national parks. I question whether such landscapes can take the size of pylons that might be appropriate elsewhere in Scotland. As I said, I welcome the announcement on the boundary change. There will be celebrations tonight in highland Perthshire, where, as Jamie Hepburn reminded us, there was a recent by-election. He is right to say that the SNP won that by-election, but the Tory vote went up by 4 per  cent—there is a double cause for celebration this evening.

The minister's announcement on the southern boundary of the Cairngorms national park is most welcome, but I seek clarity on one issue. On what date is it proposed to bring about the change?

Tonight I will have the pleasure of attending Blairgowrie high school's annual gala dinner, which showcases the talents of school pupils who are studying catering and hospitality. Blairgowrie high school's catchment area includes areas of deprivation and it is a school of ambition. The additional funding from the schools of ambition programme has provided for an expansion in the catering and hospitality facilities at the school. What message does the minister want me to take to the school pupils tonight, now that the Government has scrapped the schools of ambition programme and jeopardised the future of those facilities? Or will he tell us today that in future the funding allocated to a school such as Blairgowrie high will be at least as high as it has been over the past three years?

I congratulate Cathy Jamieson on securing the debate, which is on an important subject for her constituents in Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley, and I commend her opening remarks. My colleague John Scott, who asked me to pass on  his apologies tonight, has constituents who have children at Crossroads primary school, and other members' constituents are, I believe, affected by the issue. I do not represent East Ayrshire, so I do not want to address—nor do I have a detailed knowledge of—the circumstances there. However, I will talk about the issue in a slightly wider context, because this is a problem not just in East Ayrshire, but throughout Scotland. In recent weeks and months, I have been contacted by parents from all different parts of Scotland who face similar pressures to the ones that are faced in Cathy Jamieson's constituency. For example, I have been contacted by parents of children at Corrie primary school on Arran in North Ayrshire and at Roy Bridge primary school in the Highlands; and, indeed, in the Angus Council area, I have, over the years, spoken to and helped parents of children at Kilry school, Eassie school and Stracathro school. Arbirlot school, which is an excellent local primary in Angus, was famously saved after parents fought a vigorous campaign. That led directly to the formation of the Scottish rural schools network, which is a body that campaigns nationally to protect rural schools. It is only appropriate to pay tribute to the work that is done by Sandy Longmuir and Anne Marie Sim, who head that organisation very effectively. Notwithstanding some of what we have just heard, I do not believe that this is a party-political issue, because councils throughout Scotland of all different political complexions face many of the same challenges. All parties in council administrations have, at one time or another, faced the same problem. I agree with a lot of what Cathy Jamieson said about the importance of rural schools. They are important educationally, because—as we know—youngsters who attend a small rural school often get better results, whether at secondary school or when they go on to university, than do those who attend a larger school. All too often, when a case is made for closure, the impressive educational arguments that can be made for small schools are forgotten about. That is not the only reason why rural schools are important; they are also a vital part of rural communities. Over the years, many rural areas have lost local services—whether it be the filling station or the local shop; or perhaps the post office has gone or is under threat—but the rural school remains as a focus of local community life. When a school closes, often it takes the heart out of the community. The school building is not just there to educate youngsters; it is used outwith school hours as a focus for community life. When the school closes, young families are no longer prepared to go and live in the area, and young families who are already there move away to be closer to where the schools are.  The future of rural schools raises wider issues than simply the educational ones. Members might be aware that I have a proposal for a member's bill to fulfil a manifesto commitment of the Scottish Conservatives to bring in a presumption against the closure of rural schools. It will deal with improving the consultation that councils have to go through. I was very interested to hear what Cathy Jamieson said about the East Ayrshire situation, in which there are problems with the quality of the consultation that has been issued—that is reflected throughout Scotland. We need to consider the circumstances in which the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning can step in and effectively overturn the decisions taken by local councils, and we need to examine how we tie the issues in with additional funding for rural schools through local government. I am happy to work with Fiona Hyslop and the SNP Government on the matter. I met the cabinet secretary to discuss a way forward and I hope that we will make the necessary changes in the law so that the situation that Cathy Jamieson outlined is not repeated.

Will the member give way?

Mr Harper is rector of that fine institution, the University of Aberdeen, of which I am an alumnus. Does he share my concern that the process that has already been established and that he described does not allow the voices of students and lecturers to be heard? The only voices that are being heard are those of university principals. Would it not make sense for us to support a wider review to allow other voices to be heard?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

I will be brief, Presiding Officer. Is Mr Rumbles, as a unionist, not concerned about the dangerous game that he is playing today in propping up the SNP Government?

Will Mr Purvis give way?

In the stage 1 debate, I set out the Scottish Conservatives' concerns about the bill. I made it clear that the Scottish Conservatives opposed the introduction of the graduate endowment, which I gently remind Jeremy Purvis and his colleagues that the Liberal Democrats—and, of course, Labour—introduced while in government. However, abolition of the graduate endowment will take £17 million per year out of the Scottish Government's budget. Our concern was and remains that that has indirectly resulted in a poor financial settlement for Scottish universities. It is well known, as Rhona Brankin said, that our universities face a real-terms cut in funding for the next financial year. We already know of widespread concerns that our universities are falling behind their counterparts south of the border, which have the benefit of the additional income from top-up tuition fees of £3,000 per year. As we also know, in 2009, the cap on those fees might be lifted.

Let me make a point—I might give way in a moment. We in the Conservative party are immensely proud of our Scottish universities and of their contribution to Scotland's standards of education and economy. The Conservatives in government substantially expanded student numbers at universities in Scotland and created many more institutions. We should all be concerned if our universities' future competitive position is under threat. In our manifesto for the election last May, we called for a wide-ranging independent review of Scottish higher and further education. That review would consider not simply funding, but the purpose of higher and further education, the number of institutions, the proportion of young people who attend institutions as students and proper student support. I am pleased that our call for such an independent review has been echoed elsewhere and that the Labour Party has reached a similar conclusion to us. I have seen support for an independent review from the likes of Dr Andrew Cubie; Dr Brian Lang, who is the principal of the University of St Andrews; from student representatives, including the Coalition of Higher Education Students in Scotland; and from the University and College Union, which represents lecturers.

I will happily give way to Mr Rumbles, who voted to introduce the graduate endowment.

What is ironic is the position of the Liberal Democrats, who claim at every turn to be concerned about the future funding of our universities but who are prepared to vote for a measure that will take £17 million a year out of the Scottish Government's budget. That is irony. I will make progress.

Not at the moment, Mr Neil. The SNP Government has established its future thinking task force on higher education, but it does not go far enough. For a start, it is internal to the Government and is therefore unlikely to ask the hard questions that we need to ask, never mind come up with the answers. Further, apart from Government, only university principals are represented on the body. There is no room to hear the voices of students, lecturers or wider interests such as those of the business community. It is no surprise that Universities Scotland, which represents university principals, has welcomed the future thinking task force, but from a wider perspective it is far too narrow in its focus. The Conservatives are calling for an independent review to be established because we believe that it is time for a proper look at the future of further and higher education in Scotland, and in particular at threats to its future competitive position.

That is a fair point from Margo MacDonald. There are real issues regarding the relationship between further and higher education in Scotland. A lot of higher education is delivered within the setting of FE colleges, which is exactly the sort of issue that could be considered by a review. As I have set out, our concern about the graduate endowment is about taking money out of the higher education budget. However, if  Parliament can agree today to establish an independent review, that objection would be largely removed and we would be happy to vote for the abolition of the graduate endowment.

I am sorry—I am out of time. It would be a tremendous way forward if Parliament could speak with one voice on the issue and agree to abolish the graduate endowment, while at the same time agreeing to establish an independent review of the sector. I am happy to support the Labour amendment. It largely reflects our position, which our amendment fleshes out in more detail. We have still not heard one word from the SNP on fulfilling its manifesto pledge to write off student debt. In the run-up to the election, there was no doubt where the SNP stood on the issue. It would replace student loans with student grants and write off outstanding debts. We are coming up to the first anniversary of the election and there are still no detailed costings for the proposal, no proposed legislation and not even a consultation. It is perfectly clear that this is a manifesto pledge that the SNP has no intention of fulfilling. It is yet another broken promise from the SNP, and a betrayal of Scotland's students. We must have an independent review. I move amendment S3M-1367.1.1, to insert at end: "and whose remit and membership shall be agreed in partnership with the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee and which shall be set up by the end of June 2008 and shall report to the Scottish Government and the Parliament by the end of 2009."

Is the cabinet secretary aware of the University and College Union Scotland's comments on her  joint future thinking task force? It said: "If the new Scottish government is genuinely interested in a new approach to Scottish higher education, what is needed is something closer to a Robbins report rather than this narrow review." How does she respond to that criticism?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

As Richard Baker pointed out, the wording of amendments 1 and 2 would replace wording that Mr Purvis inserted at stage 2. The amendments would not change the bill's substance or policy intent. On that basis, the Conservatives are happy to support Mr Purvis's amendments, although if Mr Purvis has ministerial ambitions, he should improve his drafting technique.

How many complaints of breaches of the ministerial code were acted on during the first eight years of the Parliament?

I am grateful for the opportunity to speak in this morning's debate. I was a bit surprised yesterday when I read Jackie Baillie's motion calling for an independent input into the ministerial code—not that I disagree with the principle, about which I will say more in a moment. I was surprised that this has suddenly become a big issue for the Labour Party.  I listened with great interest to the quotations in Jackie Baillie's speech from luminaries from different parties in Westminster and here, but I cannot recall any time during the first eight years of the Scottish Parliament when Labour members raised concerns about the content or enforcement of the Scottish ministerial code.

That might be an issue of perspective. The perspective has changed as the Labour Party has made the transition from government to opposition. Labour does not have a good record of expressing concern about the issue. I looked through the Official Report to find out how often in the first eight years of the Parliament Labour members expressed concern about breaches of the code, but of course there were no instances of that happening. The transition from government to opposition has sharpened Labour's appetite for reform. However, I will not be too critical of Labour, because we welcome the general thrust of the party's approach and we are happy to endorse much of the motion. As Jackie Baillie said, the motion is timely. We learned yesterday from that fine publication, The Scotsman , that the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism, Jim Mather, had been in breach of the ministerial code in failing to declare his shareholdings on appointment. The ministerial code is clear on that point: a minister must declare his or her shareholdings "on appointment". Mr Mather did not do so. Indeed, he declared his shareholdings only after being rumbled by a reporter from The Scotsman who asked him about them. However, Labour members should not be too critical of Mr Mather. I dare say that there was no intentional wrongdoing on his part, and on that basis perhaps we should let him off with a mild reprimand. Here is the anomaly. If there is a serious breach of the code by a minister—let us say, hypothetically, that a minister were to act in relation to a large planning application—the person who enforces the code is the First Minister, who is hardly impartial, so where is the sanction? That is the key issue that must be addressed.

I agree with Mr Rumbles that we need an important independent element in the process. If he reads my amendment he will see that we call for an independent authority to oversee the administration of the ministerial code. That would go a long way towards addressing Mr Rumbles's concerns. I agree with many points that Jackie Baillie made. On the motion, I doubt that anyone disagrees with the seven principles of public life that were set out in the Nolan committee's report or that "a modern and progressive government has nothing to fear from ensuring transparency and accountability in all that it does", although I am surprised and impressed that the Labour Party accepts that the SNP Administration is to be described as "modern and progressive".

Our amendment acknowledges that we need independent input into policing the code. I do not accept the principle that we should use the UK ministerial code as a starting point, so our amendment would delete that part of the motion. That is simply because the situation at UK level is different from the situation in Holyrood—[ Interruption. ] I am sorry, Presiding Officer, I did not switch off my phone. I am clearly in breach of all sorts of codes this morning. The obvious difference between Westminster and Holyrood is that the Scottish Parliament is elected by proportional representation and we currently have a minority Government. If a Government minister misbehaves, the votes of only 48 members of the Parliament—or 50 members, if the Greens are loyal—will be needed to remove them. No such sanction exists at Westminster. The situation here is entirely different and requires a different approach. We accept that an independent authority should be involved, but the wording in our amendment is superior to the wording in the Labour motion. There is legitimate concern about potential conflicts of interest and the involvement of an independent authority to advise ministers and oversee the administration of the code is essential. Like Labour, we call for a statement to the Parliament by the First Minister when the review of the code is concluded. I hope that the Parliament can unite around our amendment to the Labour motion. This is not an esoteric debate. The public must have confidence in politicians and in Government ministers. The charade of a ministerial code that is enforceable only by the First Minister, with no independent  involvement—as was the case during the past eight years, when we had Labour and Liberal Democrat ministers and did not hear a cheep from either party—must be brought to an end. We can achieve that today, so it is with pleasure that I move amendment S3M-1434.2, to leave out from "oversight of the Scottish Ministerial Code" to end and insert: "authority to direct ministers in the appropriate arrangements for ensuring that their conduct as ministers is in accordance with the Scottish Ministerial Code to avoid conflict or potential conflict of interest, and to oversee its administration, and to bring forward a statement to the Parliament on this when the review is concluded."

Does the member agree that, whatever Jim Mather is, he is not poor?

To ask the First Minister how the NHS in Scotland will provide adequate support for war veterans and their families. (S3F-00521)

I welcome the announcement of support for veterans, particularly in mental health services, in which there have been serious inadequacies in the past. The First Minister will be aware of the report of the Commons Defence Committee that came out earlier this week, which was damning in its criticism of the Scottish Government's approach to the health needs of service personnel, describing it as "totally inadequate". Whether the First Minister thinks the previous Administration or the current one is to blame for that, will he accept that it is simply not good enough and that our veterans, who have put their lives on the line for the country, deserve far better?

It is my pleasure to be able to contribute to this afternoon's debate on Malawi. When I had the pleasure and privilege two years ago of being part of a cross-party parliamentary delegation that visited Malawi, I was of course struck by the great challenges facing the country, but I was also struck by the great natural beauty of Malawi and, above all, by the friendliness and approachability of the people. The memories of that visit will remain with me for a long time. Malawi has long historic links with Scotland. The links are remembered to this day, and the affection  of the Malawian people for the Scots is still very much alive and will be recognised by anyone who visits the country now. The links go back to David Livingstone, the great Scottish missionary and explorer, and the many others who followed him, such as Dr Robert Laws from Aberdeen. Those Scots went to Malawi not as conquerors or colonisers but as liberators. They went at a time when Malawi was being ravaged by the Arab slave trade, and they went—fundamentally, in Livingstone's case—to stamp out the slave trade. Livingstone went with the twin aims of bringing Christianity and commerce to Malawi. He felt that only by improving the economy of the country and by opening up trade routes could he provide alternative sources of income to the people of central Africa, thus ensuring that the slave trade would have no future. It speaks volumes that Livingstone is remembered with affection in Malawi today. When we visited Malawi, we visited some of the missionary graves, and I am sure that others who have visited more recently will have done the same. It is striking to see memorials to young Scots; many of them were in their twenties, and I do not remember any who were older than perhaps their mid-thirties. Those people would have gone to Malawi 150 years ago, or perhaps slightly more recently. It must have been a huge culture shock in the 19 th century to leave Scotland and go to a country on the other side of the world, where they faced disease and famine. Many of them gave their lives—a tremendous sacrifice that is still remembered by the Malawian people. It speaks volumes that in post-colonial Africa, when so many countries, on achieving independence, changed the names of their towns and cities to more African-sounding names, Malawi's principal city is still called Blantyre, after the birthplace of David Livingstone, such is the reverence that the people of Malawi still have for that great Scot. I pay tribute to the previous Executive and the current Government for the work that they have done in Malawi. Particular tribute should be paid to the former First Minister, Jack McConnell, for his personal interest in the Malawian project and for driving forward the 2005 co-operation agreement, which was signed by Mr McConnell and the President of Malawi. During my visit to Malawi, I was struck by the beauty of the country and the friendliness of the people. We visited the British High Commissioner's residence in Lilongwe and I was particularly struck by the elegance of the surroundings—the manicured lawns and the building's marble floors—and our attendance by staff in starched white uniforms, who looked after our every need. When we came home, I said to my wife Emma that I had found my perfect retirement job, which was as the British High Commissioner to Malawi. It seems that the ex-First  Minister had the same idea a little earlier than I did. I am sure that we all wish him well when he takes up that important role, and that he will use that role to develop the existing links between Scotland and Malawi. We will hear a lot today about the problems in Malawi, such as its economy, which has the fifth-lowest gross domestic product in the world. Malawi has low life expectancy, an horrendous rate of HIV/AIDS, a lack of basic health care and problems in education. I want to focus on civil society and governance, which is one of the strands of the co-operation agreement. Although the Scottish Government will allocate money from its budget to support Malawi, it will only ever be a drop in the bucket compared to the vast sums being spent by the UK Department for International Development and by other international aid agencies. The best way we can help is not necessarily to give money but to consider how we can help to strengthen some of the institutions in Malawi, and Government and civil society. There is a desperate need in Malawi to improve the economy and encourage foreign investment. The country has tremendous potential, not only in tourism, but in other sectors. Foreign investors need to have confidence in the stability of a country and in its political structures. Malawi is already well ahead of many of its African neighbours, but there is much more to be done. I have been interested to see the excellent work that has been done by Parliament—rather than the Executive—in building links with the Malawian Parliament in order to strengthen the role of that legislature. However, we need to do much more. In terms of the expenditure of the Scottish Government in Malawi, and its commitment to that country, there is a particular need to build up civil society there, and its Parliament as an institution. The minister referred to the excellent work that is being done by many voluntary groups throughout Scotland. When I returned from Malawi, I was amazed by the number of invitations I received from different groups—church groups and schools—to speak to them about my experiences in Malawi. Governments can do a great deal, but the people can do so much more. Voluntary groups throughout Scotland are doing excellent work—through the Scotland Malawi Partnership and by other means—to build up and develop links and to help people on a one-to-one basis. That is extremely valuable. I congratulate the Government on the initiatives it is taking and encourage it to push on with that important work, particularly in improving civil society and governance.

Does the minister agree that, in looking at a country such as Malawi, it is important to promote the institutions of democracy? Does she further agree that its Parliament needs to be seen as being strong against the Executive, which in turn strengthens the confidence that external investors, for example, have in the country? Will she say something about the links that the Parliament is making with the Malawian Parliament to try to build up that institution in Malawi?

The minister will be aware of the excellent work that is currently done at Perth College and of its ambitions to get university title as part of UHI, which would bring huge economic benefits to the area, developing Perth as a university town and helping with its bid for legal city status. Will she assure us that the Scottish Government will do all that it can to assist UHI attain university title? We have been waiting an awful long time for that to happen.

I welcome the proposal in the concordat to give universities greater freedom, not least because we first read about it in last May's Scottish Conservative manifesto. Does the First Minister acknowledge the key concerns about the funding of our universities, not just today, but from 2010 onwards in particular? That makes the case precisely for why we should have an independently chaired review of university funding to address all such issues and ensure that our institutions do not lose their competitive edge.

I wonder whether Mr Paterson listened to the earlier part of the debate, in which Mr Ingram, who is on the SNP's front bench, made an important point. He said that we dwell too much on the gloomy aspects of Scottish history. Does Mr Paterson accept that?

The Scottish Conservatives are pleased to have the opportunity to discuss the important issue of Scottish history in the school curriculum. I thought that I might have wandered into the wrong debate earlier, because the minister was eight minutes into her 11-minute speech before she even mentioned history. I am delighted that we got there in the end. The debate really started a few weeks ago, with comments made by the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning in The Scotsman about the teaching of Scottish history. I agreed with much of what she said. Of course, Fiona Hyslop is by no means the first Scottish politician to take an interest in Scottish history. In January 1997, the then Secretary of State for Scotland, Michael Forsyth, asked the Scottish Qualifications Authority to consider introducing a standard grade in Scottish history. That coincided with the then imminent publication of the final consultation paper of the Scottish consultative council on the curriculum's review of Scottish history in the curriculum, which had also been requested by Michael Forsyth's civil service team. I point out as gently as I can to Ken Macintosh that the proposals were abandoned in May 1997 by the new Government, following Labour's victory in the general election. Rather ironically, it was reported at the time that the review had been suppressed because it was thought by the new Labour Government to be "too nationalist" in tone. Here we are, 11 years on, with the current  Government following in the footsteps of the Conservatives all those years ago, and the need for proper teaching of Scottish history is as important as ever. The level of ignorance among many young people about the history of our country is quite startling. A recent survey showed that when offered reasons why Scotland became part of the United Kingdom, 37 per cent of young Scots said that it was because English forces conquered us and 28 per cent thought that it was a result of a referendum, but only 24 per cent opted for the correct answer, which is that the Scots Parliament at the time voted for it. Similarly, the battle of Culloden was seen as a conflict between "wholly Scottish and wholly English armies" by 41 per cent. Of course, most Scots at the time of the battle of Culloden supported the Government's side—a fact that is all too often forgotten. As we know from history, when news of the result of the battle reached the central belt there were celebrations in Scottish cities at the defeat of the Jacobites. That history is not well remembered today. Children were similarly unenlightened about Scotland's contribution both to the industrial revolution and the enlightenment. One child even thought that Ramsay MacDonald was famous for the invention of the hamburger. We therefore applaud the Government's intention to strengthen the teaching of Scottish history in the school curriculum. However, we have some qualifications, which are addressed in my amendment. We certainly do not wish Scottish history to become parochial and inward looking.

I am delighted to hear Rob Gibson agreeing with me. From 1707 onwards, Scottish history is linked with that of Great Britain, and it of course needs to be seen in a world context. Like Ken Macintosh, we do not want a nationalist tinge to Scottish history teaching. Enough myths already exist about Scottish history without Government seeking to add to them and present a "Braveheart" version of our country's past. I was reassured by what the minister said on that point, although she was rather undermined by SNP backbenchers' interventions—perhaps she will be undermined again.

If the member listened to his colleagues, he would know exactly what our concerns are. We should not be inward looking; we should be  outward looking and we should recognise Scotland's role in the United Kingdom and in the world. We make that point gently in our amendment, and the Liberals make it rather less gently in theirs, but the point is important. I hope that SNP members support the amendments, because that would reinforce my view of what, I hope, can unite us all—that we should not have a partisan viewpoint on the teaching of history. I think that we can all agree on that. We need to be wary that we do not concentrate too much on the negative aspects of Scottish history. Whether we are talking about the collapse of the Darien scheme, the aftermath of Culloden or the Highland clearances, too often there is a tendency to portray the Scots as victims. I remember my grandmother complaining to me that the only Scottish history that she was taught in school was about the clearances. The fact that she started her school education in 1897 demonstrates how long the problem has been around. We all know that Scots have made a tremendous contribution to the world, both as part of the UK and on our own. The teaching of Scottish history needs to be about celebrating our successes in the past as much as hearing about the darker aspects.

Absolutely. I am pleased that that point was reinforced, although stressing the successes of the past is nothing new in the teaching of science. However, it is important for young Scots to have role models and to learn about those who led the way in the past. Going back to Adam Ingram's point, I am something of a sceptic about Carol Craig's thesis about a crisis of confidence. However, any ammunition that helps us to ensure that more Scottish history is taught in our schools and is taught to young people is much to be welcomed. If we are to teach Scottish history well, we must have high-quality courses and ensure that the correct teaching resources are available. That will require Government investment, including investment in our teachers. That point is also addressed in our amendment. We must remember that we have never had a nationally set compulsory curriculum in Scotland, and therefore it is for individual schools to decide which subjects are offered. I do not want that situation to change. By all means, let us  encourage the teaching of Scottish history, but let us avoid a top-down approach from the centre. I hope that the Government is prepared to take on board the concerns that I have raised. I welcome the general thrust of its work on the teaching of Scottish history and I have pleasure in moving the amendment in my name. I move amendment S3M-1238.1, to insert at end: "however, emphasises that it is important that Scottish history is taught in a balanced manner, which encourages young people to evaluate the evidence critically and come to their own conclusions, and that it is taught in its rightful context, namely alongside local, British, European and world history, and further emphasises that courses must be of a high quality with teachers being supported by new teaching resources and continuing professional development training as necessary."

I do not wish to be unkind to the minister in any way, but when will she address the subject of the debate, which is the importance of Scottish history in the school curriculum? She is six minutes into her speech.

My question is about the First Minister's policy of no compulsory redundancies. I understand that his aim is to work with public servants who are involved with the trade unions. Does he appreciate that reducing staff numbers without compulsory redundancies can be extremely disruptive to organisations? Often those who come forward when volunteers for redundancy are sought are good people whom organisations want to retain. If an organisation is slimming down, it does not always make sense for it to rule out compulsory redundancies. Will the First Minister reflect on that?

The Scottish Conservatives warmly support the call in the Scottish Government's motion for the UK Government to have a referendum on the new EU treaty. I certainly do not agree with everything that the minister said in her opening remarks—for example, I did not think that it was necessary or appropriate for her to bring up once again the issue of independence and separate representation for Scotland—but I agreed with many of her comments, particularly on the key issue of whether there should be a referendum. It was not so long ago that the proposal was for a new EU constitution. As we heard in the debate, there was never any doubt that such an issue should be subject to a referendum. As Ted Brocklebank said, the Labour Government made it clear in its manifesto that it believed that the constitution should be put to the people's vote. Now the argument is that because we have a treaty rather than a constitution, a referendum is not required. As we have heard throughout the debate, however, the treaty is just the old constitution reinvented, with some very minor changes. The treaty will create the new post of EU president, who will control a power base of 3,500 civil servants. For the first time, the EU will have a foreign minister, but he will not be called the foreign minister—he will be called the high representative of the Union for foreign affairs and security policy. The EU will be given a single legal personality for the first time, 60 further national vetoes will be abolished at a stroke and the EU will acquire new powers over criminal justice matters.  Crucially, the fact that the old constitution has simply been rebranded as an EU reform treaty is acknowledged by leaders from across Europe. Members have been bandying quotes around all afternoon, so let me produce some of my own. The German Chancellor Angela Merkel said: "The fundamentals of the Constitution have been maintained in large part." The Irish Prime Minister Bertie Ahern said: "Thankfully they haven't changed the substance—90 per cent of it is still there." Valéry Giscard d'Estaing, who drafted the original constitution, said of the treaty that the public was being "led to adopt, without knowing it, the proposals that we dare not present to them directly." On the position of EU foreign minister, Bertie Ahern said: "It's the original job as proposed but they just put on this long title". The new treaty is a constitution in all but name, and that is precisely why we need a referendum. I am delighted that the SNP has joined us in calling for a UK referendum in which the issue would be put to the people. I am disappointed but not surprised by the fact that the Labour Party is sticking to its guns and loyally defending Gordon Brown, whose position is indefensible; that is only to be expected. However, the Liberal Democrat approach to the issue is, frankly, bizarre. Not so long ago, under their former leader, poor old Ming the hapless, who was brutally assassinated in the traditional Liberal manner—he was stabbed in the back as he shuffled down the road to collect his pension—

Under Ming Campbell, the Liberal Democrats supported a referendum, not on the reform treaty, but on whether we should be a member of the EU at all.

I will be happy to let Mr Rumbles rebut my point once I have made it. Membership is not the point in question, because it is quite possible to reject the European treaty or constitution and still to be good Europeans who want to be part of the EU. As I said in debate a few weeks ago, the Liberal Democrat position is a bit like taking someone to a very expensive restaurant that has an extensive menu and telling them that if they will not eat the tripe, they will have to go home hungry.

We will never support a referendum on independence. I will take no lessons on referendums from Mr Rumbles when his party cannot make up its mind. Perhaps there is hope, however. Under their new leader—Chris Clegg—the Liberal Democrats might finally make up their minds on their position. Did rejecting the EU constitution make the people in France or those in the Netherlands bad Europeans? No, it did not. It is not a question of being in or out of Europe; it is a question of the type of Europe that we want, and the people have a right to choose. The Labour Government has tied itself in knots over the issue and seeks to deny the people a referendum. Gordon Brown could not even bring himself to turn up to the signing ceremony in Lisbon. He sneaked in the back door and signed it late. Poor old David Miliband was sent all alone to be present at the ceremony. When all the other foreign secretaries from across Europe were shaking the hands of their heads of Government to celebrate, he was left shaking the hands of poor Ms Verena Schubert, an usher in the building. Poor old David Miliband was left hanging out to dry by our Prime Minister. The Prime Minister and the Labour Party were so reluctant to associate themselves with the treaty that they would not even turn up for the formal signing. That tells us all that we need to know about their confidence in the measures. The matter should be referred forthwith to a people's referendum. It is right that people should have their say, which is why we are pleased to support the motion.

Will the member give way?

Does the minister agree that the reason for the change of heart on the part of the UK Government is that it knows that if it held a referendum it would lose?

They were all mine.

As has been said, today is an historic day on which three parties in the Parliament have combined to agree a way forward for devolution. That is an unprecedented move in the history of the Parliament and of devolution and we should not underestimate its importance. It is 10 years since the referendum on devolution in 1997—10 years on, now is the right time to look again at the Parliament's powers.

Not at the moment—I want to make progress. It is important that consideration of the Parliament's powers is done not only in Scotland, but throughout the United Kingdom. David McLetchie made the important point that devolution is a bilateral arrangement between Scotland and the UK. One party in a bilateral relationship cannot unilaterally decide to change its terms. That is why it is important that we engage with colleagues at Westminster and involve the UK Government in the discussion. As Ross Finnie said, it is important that we have parliamentary endorsement for the process, which represents the mainstream view of Scottish politics. I hope that, tonight, 78 of the 129 members of the Parliament will endorse the  proposal. I believe that it has the majority support of the Scottish population. Does not our positive and forward-looking initiative contrast with the narrow and backward-looking stance that we have seen today from the SNP members who have spoken?

No. Where is Alex Salmond? Where is the First Minister, the man who wants a national conversation, but who cannot even be bothered to turn up to engage in a debate? That just confirms what we always knew about Alex Salmond: the only conversation that he wants is one in which he does all the talking. I say to Mr Salmond that it is not a conversation when it is all one way. Of course, the SNP does not really want a conversation on the issue, because its mind is closed—the only answer that it wants is independence. It has not come to the Parliament to seek endorsement for its so-called national conversation, but it has committed funds from the Government.

There will be a parliamentary majority for our conversation—that is the difference between what we are doing and what the SNP is doing. If the SNP wants to lodge its referendum bill and seek support for it, bring it on. Where is the bill? We were promised it in the first 100 days of the session, but it has not appeared. Today, the SNP has been outfoxed and outgunned. Its nationalist conversation has been left irrelevant and in tatters. It has been left behind by the new ambition of three Opposition parties. There has been a fundamental divide in outlook between us and the SNP, as has been evidenced in the tone of many speeches. We have had fine, well-constructed speeches from Conservative, Labour and Liberal Democrat members. They have been positive, forward looking and optimistic. What a contrast with the SNP speeches this morning, which have been negative, carping, narrow minded, backward looking and full of party-political point scoring. Whether it is Nicola Sturgeon, Roseanna Cunningham or Kenny Gibson, SNP members would rather attack than engage, and they would rather grandstand than debate—they refused interventions. The SNP troops are left bewildered and confused. The SNP is on the run. Its leader is hiding in his bunker. If I was the Salmond family dog today, I would be very worried. However, it is not too late for the SNP to change. Even now, it can leave behind its  ideological baggage and come and join our conversation. In the last minute available to me, I will say a little bit about the Conservative position. As Annabel Goldie explained, we have come a long way as a party since 1997. Now, we are not just signed up to devolution but willing to discuss further powers for the Parliament. We have moved faster than we have been given credit for in the SNP amendment, which refers to our "changed position". If ministers had bothered to do their research and look at our manifestos for 2003 and 2007, they would have read that we talked then about considering additional powers for the Parliament. We spoke previously about a royal commission on tax powers. Members know that I personally have long believed in improved financial accountability for the Parliament. Sometimes, in saying that, I was a rebellious voice; sometimes I got myself into trouble. On a personal level, I am delighted to have this issue, which is of great significance, debated. This is an historic day, with three parties working together to take the Parliament forward. I am delighted to support the motion in Wendy Alexander's name.

If it is so bad for us to engage with people who are accused of breaking the law, what are the SNP and its leader doing writing to Robert Mugabe, seeking support for their nuclear policy? [ Interruption. ]

I congratulate Christine Grahame on securing a debate on this very important subject. I enjoyed hearing Des McNulty's reference to my members' business debate earlier in the year on the Passchendaele memorial. I had the pleasure of going to Flanders in August to see the unveiling of the Scottish memorial at Passchendaele. The trip was tremendous and I am sorry that Des McNulty—having been deprived of ministerial office by the cruel electorate—was not able to join us. I assure him that Linda Fabiani very much enjoyed attending on behalf of the Scottish Government. We are debating the sinking of the Lancastria, an event in world war 2 that affected and still  affects hundreds of families and many communities throughout Scotland and the rest of the United Kingdom. I pay tribute to the Lancastria Association of Scotland for all its work and dedication in endeavouring to ensure that all those who were on board the Lancastria at the time are remembered and honoured appropriately. Christine Grahame set out the facts and the history. The Lancastria was sunk on 17 June 1940, while taking part in operation Ariel, with an estimated loss of 4,000 lives. The number of lives lost makes the sinking of the Lancastria the single bloodiest engagement for UK forces throughout the second world war. One of the many tragedies of that day is that we do not know how many people died, because there is no itinerary to show how many people were on board the vessel when it was sunk. The Lancastria was evacuating soldiers and civilians from France in the face of the German occupation. People were rushing on to the boat at the last minute, so no proper record was kept and we have no idea exactly how many died. Christine Grahame referred to the eyewitness accounts of survivors. What those who survived had to face on that day is indescribable. They watched friends and thousands of fellow soldiers perish, some from the initial bomb blasts, drowning in the sea, choking on the 1,400 tonnes of fuel oil that had leaked from the ship, dying in flames or being shot by the German aircraft that were circling overhead seeking to kill the men in the sea. Hundreds of Scottish soldiers lost their lives. In mid-Scotland and Fife, there were sons of Perthshire such as Auchterarder's Corporal James Whittet of the Royal Air Force, and Coupar Angus's Private Thomas Young. Trooper William Kidd of the 1 st Fife and Forfar Yeomanry and Walter Small of the RAF from Angus were also among those who died. Every community throughout Scotland lost young men during the second world war, and the loss of hundreds of Scots through the sinking of the Lancastria scarred many communities. As Christine Grahame said, the massive loss of life led to the British Government banning any public announcements about the disaster by means of the D-notice system, which was put in place to silence the media, if need be, during the war effort. It is hard to look back and disagree with Winston Churchill's decision to sign the D-notice. The Government of the time was trying to keep the nation's morale high when we were in our most perilous state in fighting the Germans. To hear of such a tremendous loss of life would have been a terrible blow to national morale at a time when we were trying to talk up the success of Dunkirk.  Of course, that decision should have been overturned. The fact that it was not seems not to have been malicious; not lifting the D-notice was simply an oversight by the Government at the end of the second world war. However, the consequence is that there has been no proper recognition of the tragedy. I agree with Christine Grahame that now is the time to recognise it. I do not understand why the British Government will not designate the site as a war grave under the Protection of Military Remains Act 1986. I welcome, and join, Christine Grahame's call for the Scottish Government to recognise the tragedy. I am not entirely convinced that we should strike medals—the Scottish Parliament's record on striking medals is not particularly happy. However, official recognition from the Parliament and the Government would be welcome.

Like Robert Brown, I welcome the debate, and the publication of the strategy, "Getting it right for every child in kinship and foster care". This has been a good debate, and a consensual one, as evidenced by the fact that no amendments to the Government's motion were lodged. I am sure that the motion will have cross-party support at decision time. That is important, because there should not be party-political divisions on this subject. Indeed, it has been one of those important debates that the Parliament sometimes has that are consensual and which deal with important issues that affect people's lives. Although important, I suspect that such issues get little attention in the media, which is obsessed by much more trivial issues—I will not dwell on that. Many members have talked about the importance of the family environment. The briefing for the debate from Children 1 st makes some important points. It says that it is widely accepted that children who are looked after away from their home experience usually have poorer outcomes than those who are looked after within their wider family. That is what makes the issue of kinship  care so important. Many children who are removed from their families and placed with foster carers or in residential care are left to fend for themselves when they get to 16. Some end up in temporary or unsuitable housing; some end up not in education, employment or training; and some end up with addiction problems. Many end up in the justice system, or suffering from mental illness. Others have difficulty caring for their own children. Placing children in kinship care generally delivers much better outcomes: better health—both physical and mental—and better opportunities in later life. That is not to denigrate in any way the excellent work done by foster carers, who play an important role, but it demonstrates the importance of kinship care. The Government is right to highlight that important issue. Many members have talked about additional support for kinship carers and, in particular, the financial implications of kinship care. Kinship carers make a major financial sacrifice when they take on children who are not directly their own. There are major costs to be borne in bringing up children. Looking after someone else's children is already a personal sacrifice in terms of time and commitment, never mind the financial package that goes with it. It makes sense for government to step in and be prepared to support kinship carers with finance. That makes sense in the long run because if those children were not being supported in kinship situations, some of them might end up having to go into foster care, which could prove more expensive. As Elizabeth Smith and other members have said, we have a mixed bag of provision at present. The situation varies throughout local authority areas. Of the 32 local authorities, only 12 pay the main categories of kinship carers the same as they pay foster carers. A further 10 pay an allowance that is a fraction—in most cases a third—of what is being paid to foster carers. The idea of a nationally-set allowance to put matters on a proper footing is therefore welcome. However, probably the only discordant note in the debate was struck over the need for clarification of that funding. Mary Mulligan, Jeremy Purvis, Duncan McNeil and a number of other members made the case for clarification, and it would be helpful if the minister would clarify where exactly the funding is and whether it will be available nationally. Consistency is needed across our local authorities so that the current patchwork of delivery does not continue, and I welcome the fact that COSLA has agreed to recommend a consistent approach to its members. There is always a tension. I support the desire for localism and the Government's general approach of removing ring fencing in a number of areas. That is entirely right. For too long, we have  run down local government, taking away its importance. However, the local approach creates a tension with national Government's desire to deliver on its targets, so I would be interested to hear how ministers intend to address that issue. Paragraph 26 of the strategy makes an important point about Government interference. It states that Government should not "distort existing and future family relationships by any unnecessary interference in ... kinship care arrangements". Many such arrangements already exist naturally. They do not require the Government, local authorities or social workers to set them up. That is the correct arrangement, but it is also important that those families get the right support. That is why the programme to provide kinship carers with additional support and information—which it is proposed that citizens advice bureaux throughout Scotland will deliver—is important. There is also a need for advocacy. Many young people have difficulty getting their voices heard, which is why the idea of family group conferencing is welcome. Family group conferences put the child at the centre, balance the wider family's interests and, we hope, reduce the need for a series of subsequent meetings, which can be highly disruptive and cause a great deal of upset and concern to the children. This has been a good debate on an important subject and the strategy is welcome. It may not make tomorrow's front pages, but it is no less important for that.

I thank the cabinet secretary for an advance copy of her statement, but I cannot see for the life of me why she bothered to make it. Apart from the call for political unity, there is nothing new in the statement. There is no costing for this policy pledge or any timescale for implementation. Indeed, when asked at this morning's meeting of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture  Committee about costings for the concordat, COSLA representatives responded only by saying that they had no figures to hand for specific education priorities, including the class size policy commitment. In its manifesto, the SNP stated clearly: "We will reduce class sizes in Primary 1, 2 and 3 to eighteen pupils or less". That was the pledge. It contains no ifs, buts or maybes, and there is no reference to its being dependent on local government or down to a concordat. When exactly will the pledge be delivered? Will it be delivered by 2011 or by some other date, or does it simply follow the pledges to write off student debt and to make available 1,000 extra police officers as another SNP broken promise?

It would, of course, be entirely ungracious, unkind and inappropriate of me to recommend that any  young ladies who hear dogs barking in the vicinity of Jeremy Purvis tomorrow night should run in the opposite direction. Earlier, Ted Brocklebank gave us an erudite history lesson on St Andrew's contribution to Scotland. Interestingly, very few members have referred to the historical or, indeed, religious dimension of this issue. After all, as a saint's day, St Andrew's day was originally a day of religious celebration. I find it a little regrettable that that element has been entirely forgotten. Of course, the celebration of saints' days went out of fashion in post-reformation Scotland. Although I am a member of the reformed church, I think that we should remember that our patron saint was the Lord's first apostle and consider the religious element of St Andrew's day to be worth celebrating. There has been much discussion about St Andrew's day as a public holiday. I must say that I had forgotten about that. Although my staff have tomorrow off, I seem to have a full diary—as is usual on a public holiday. Perhaps next year I will get round to ensuring that I have the day off.

I dare say that my diary for Saturday is also full.

Oh yes. Mr Smith is right to point that out. Perhaps I will get some time off then. In the previous parliamentary session, I was a member of the Enterprise and Culture Committee that examined the St Andrew's day question and, like other members, I commend Dennis Canavan for his work on promoting the cause. Everyone recognises that the St Andrew's day holiday will have economic benefits—I recall evidence that suggested that Dublin benefited from St Patrick's day to the tune of €80 million a year—as well as benefits from promoting national identity and social cohesion. However, against that, the committee had to recognise concerns about the potential cost to business as a result of creating an additional public holiday. Indeed, the Department of Trade and Industry estimated the cost at £200 million. The Conservatives, therefore, promoted the compromise position of making St Andrew's day a holiday that people could choose to take in place of another public holiday. As usual, the Conservatives led opinion on this issue in the Parliament and everyone came to agree with us. I agree, for once, with Iain Smith on his amendment's reference to broken promises. Once again, the SNP has broken a promise. There was  no doubt about what the SNP manifesto said: it promised to make St Andrew's day a full national holiday. Indeed, the SNP said in its 100 days document that that would be one of its first acts as a new Government. Now that it is in government, that promise has gone the same way as the promises on student debt, smaller class sizes and the elusive 1,000 extra police officers. I regret to tell Malcolm Chisholm that we cannot agree to his amendment because we welcome the Scottish Government's decision to overturn the decision that was made in the previous parliamentary session to commission a study into the impact of a ban on large retailers trading on new year's day. Some members on the Labour benches put forward the bizarre argument that because the previous Parliament had taken that decision it would somehow be disrespectful to overturn it. The fact is that when another party wins an election, it always overturns previous decisions, and it would be ridiculous to suggest otherwise.

It is pretty obvious. A new Government is elected to overturn a previous Government's decisions. However, a new Government should not promise one thing in its manifesto and do something quite different when elected. We do not regret what the SNP has done. However, as I pointed out last week to Kenny MacAskill, if the study was such a bad idea, why did the SNP vote for it when in opposition? Kenny MacAskill's response, which was that it was something to do with the Edinburgh trams, was the most bizarre and pathetic excuse for a U-turn that I have ever heard from a minister. I agree with the comment made by many members that St Andrew's day is for everyone in Scotland—it is for old Scots, young Scots and new Scots from whatever background, creed, class or racial group. It should not be hijacked by any narrow partisan or political cause. In that respect, I agree with the Brown brothers—Robert and Gavin—both of whom made excellent speeches on that point. Just as St Andrew's day should be a day for all Scots, so the saltire—our flag—should be a flag for all Scots. The minister and the SNP would have more credibility if they did not try to appropriate the saltire for party-political purposes. In recent years, we have seen the deplorable sight of the British National Party—an organisation with which I deeply disagree—seeking to appropriate the union flag for narrow, partisan, political purposes. It is very much to be regretted that the  BNP has gone some way towards trying to tarnish the reputation of the union flag. That is to be deplored. I hope that the SNP will take on board the message that the saltire is a flag for us all. We should all be entitled to fly it. No one should try to hijack it. Let us all—unionists and nationalists of whatever political persuasion—unite in flying the saltire and celebrating St Andrew's day.

I welcome what the minister says on the subject. However, does she accept that, when SNP candidates are out on the street during election campaigns, it is unhelpful for them to hand out the saltire as if it were a party political symbol? Will she pass that comment to her party headquarters and try to encourage SNP candidates not to do that? Surely the SNP, in handing out saltires, is trying to appropriate Scotland's national flag for party political purposes.

Will the cabinet secretary confirm that, when she met university principals last week, she told them that, should additional funds become available, the Cabinet would look sympathetically on increasing the amount of money that is available to universities? Of course, the Parliament voted last week that, should additional resources become available, they should be spent on reducing business rates. Will she tell us what the priority is should additional resources become available?

I, too, thank the cabinet secretary for the advance copy of his statement. When it was announced last week that HMRC had contrived to lose 25 million names, addresses, dates of birth and national insurance numbers in a demonstration of breathtaking incompetence, I dare say that there might have been some hubris in the corridors of the Scottish Government and the feeling that it could not happen here. The disclosure of lost information by the SPPA is certainly not on the same scale, but it is worrying nonetheless. On top of that, we learn today from The Courier that the Inland Revenue managed to send to a Dundee company through the post the personal and financial details of more than 50 people, and that the information was intended to be sent to the Inland Revenue's Cumbernauld office. One must wonder whether the reported incidents are simply the tip of the iceberg. All the evidence points to a systemic failure in information handling at all levels of government, which should be of serious concern to us all. I welcome the cabinet secretary's statement and his confirmation that an urgent review will be carried out, because public confidence in the Government's handling of personal information must be restored. However, I have a couple of questions. First, does the cabinet secretary think that it is acceptable that, for the four weeks from 26 October to 23 November, the SPPA was unaware that the packet in question had not reached its destination? The SPPA has procedures for tracking packages, but why was no alert system in place? Secondly, does he accept that the public have a right to be informed when sensitive information about them goes missing? Does he accept that that did not happen in the SPPA case, and will he undertake to ensure that, in future, members of the public who may be affected by the loss of information will be made aware of the situation at the earliest possible opportunity?

I commend Mr MacAskill for seeing sense on the issue. However, if the study was such a bad idea, why on earth did he vote for it?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans there are for expansion of the open prison estate. (S3O-1295)

I thank the First Minister—I apologise, I am promoting Mr MacAskill already. I thank the cabinet secretary for his reply. He might be aware that there is some concern among the community around Castle Huntly prison about the possible expansion of that prison. Does he agree that if there is to be an expansion of the open prison estate, we should be looking to expand Noranside prison in rural Angus, where there is ample scope for expansion of the buildings and where the local community would be relaxed about the prospect, rather than expanding further at Castle Huntly?

Perhaps I could give the First Minister some friendly advice. Does he accept that he would have more credibility on the issue if he was big enough to stand up and admit to the Parliament that universities are facing a real-terms cut in funding in the coming financial year?

To ask the Scottish Executive what future it envisages for local tourist information centres. (S3O-1192)

The minister may be aware of the real concern in Perth and Kinross—an area where tourism is a primary industry—about the future of the TIC network and the potential for several centres to have their opening hours cut or even to be closed altogether. I listened with interest to what the minister said, but does he accept that the process is largely driven by budgetary pressures on VisitScotland? Will he give an assurance that the Scottish Government will provide the necessary finance to VisitScotland to ensure that any changes or closures come about not because of budgetary pressures, but for the operational reasons he outlined?

Does the member believe that, when Valéry Giscard d'Estaing said that the treaty is simply the EU constitution under a different name, he was wrong?

For eight years in this Parliament, no debate on Europe was complete without a robust contribution from our erstwhile colleague Phil Gallie, who is sadly no longer with us. I am sure that members are aware that he has ambitions to join the European Parliament and that they wish him well in that ambition—if only so that we can see more colourful debates in the Parliament in Strasbourg. I have no wish to be seen as the poor man's Phil Gallie, but I thought it might be worth reflecting on what he might have made of this debate and the Government's EU policies. To pick up a point that John Scott made in his intervention, Phil Gallie would have wanted to reiterate the point that was made about the air route development fund. There is a serious threat to the future of that fund, in  particular to the development of new routes. The air route development fund is vital to airports such as Prestwick, and to the wider Scottish economy. The fund was robustly supported by the SNP when it was in opposition—Fergus Ewing spoke up for it on many occasions—and it would be helpful to get some reassurance from the Government that it will fight to retain it. We have heard throughout the debate that the Government has announced no fewer than 21 priority areas relating to EU policy and six political objectives. Like Ted Brocklebank, I wonder whether, if we have so many priorities, any of them can be a singular priority. I also wonder why the Government has identified so many areas that are reserved to Westminster. I look forward to reading the more detailed Europe strategy document when it is published in the new year—it will make excellent bedtime reading, particularly for insomniacs, at that time of year. Phil Gallie would have been disappointed if I did not spend most of my time addressing the European reform treaty, which many members have spoken about. The issue is: should there be a referendum? It does not necessarily follow that there should be a referendum on every treaty the UK Parliament enters into, but this treaty is simply the old EU constitution, which was rejected in a referendum by people in France and by people in the Netherlands. It is that same old EU constitution, dressed up and given a different name. Malcolm Chisholm said that the treaty is simply another amending treaty. Let us look at some of the characteristics of the new reform treaty. It creates an EU president. The holder of the new post will control 3,500 civil servants and, unlike the current arrangement whereby the presidency rotates every six months, it is a semi-permanent position. There will be a new EU foreign minister, but we will not call him or her the foreign minister—we will call them the high representative of the Union for foreign affairs and security policy. The Irish Prime Minister, Bertie Ahern, let the cat out of the bag when he said: "It's the original job as proposed but they just put on this long title". We will have a single European external affairs action service—which will effectively be an EU diplomatic service. We will have a single legal personality for the EU, allowing it for the first time to join international organisations in its own right. The treaty will be self-amending, which will allow further adjustments to be made without the need to go back to an intergovernmental conference. The national veto will be abolished in 60 new areas and we will have  new powers for the EU over criminal justice matters. To all intents and purposes, it is simply the constitution rewrit. Members should not take my word for it; they should consider what other European leaders have said. Angela Merkel, the German Chancellor, said: "The fundamentals of the Constitution have been maintained in large part". Bertie Ahern said that, "thankfully, they haven't changed the substance—90 per cent of it is still there". Valéry Giscard d'Estaing, who drafted a lot of the constitution, said that "the public is being led to adopt, without knowing it, the proposals that we dare not present to them directly". That sums it up. Its supporters say that the treaty is not the same as the constitution because we are not having an anthem or a flag, but at any European event one hears the "Ode to Joy" from Beethoven's ninth symphony—unless, perhaps, I misheard it. And did I imagine seeing flying on a flagpole outside this building the European flag that one sees flying everywhere—12 gold stars on a blue base? Was it a mirage? Does a European flag not already exist, as does an anthem? Of course it does. That is why we need a referendum. As Margo MacDonald said, the Labour party does not want a referendum because it is afraid that it will lose it. Shamefully, the Labour party is supported in its stance by the Liberal Democrats. The Liberal Democrats will not back a referendum on the treaty because they say that they want a referendum on the wider issue of whether we sign up to the treaty or pull out of Europe altogether. That creates an entirely false choice between swallowing the lot or getting out. It is like taking somebody to a restaurant with an extensive menu and telling them that if they will not eat the tripe they will have to go hungry. That is what the Liberal Democrats are saying, and it is neither liberal nor democratic. Only the Conservatives are prepared to offer a referendum because only we trust the people. The treaty represents another massive transfer of sovereignty to the EU, and the people are not being consulted. It is time to say no. I hope that, in proposing a referendum, we will have the support of the SNP. By all means let us have a debate in Parliament on the issue. Presiding Officer, you know that that is what Phil Gallie would have wanted.

Does the member accept that the peace was kept in Europe for all those years not by the EU, but by NATO? Many countries in Western Europe were not members of the EU during that time, whereas they were all members of NATO, with some singular exceptions.

To ask the First Minister how teachers in schools will be protected from violence. (S3F-252)

I am sure that the Deputy First Minister agrees that before we can begin to tackle  the problem of protecting teachers in schools from violence, the fullest and most accurate statistics on school assaults should be available. I know that she will agree with that because that was the SNP's position when it was in opposition. The then shadow education spokesman, Fiona Hyslop, said in the chamber on 17 March 2005: "If we regard indiscipline as a serious issue, it is important that regular statistics should be produced so that there can be accountability. The production of statistics every three years is not good enough."— [ Official Report , 17 March 2005; c 15454.]  Why, in government, has the SNP done a U-turn on its promise to publish such statistics? Is that not just another SNP broken promise?

The minister has been telling us for some time, and has repeated today, that the SNP Government's commitment is to plan for the dualling of the A9, yet we read in today's press that transport improvements are likely to be the victims of a tight budget round. Will he give us a commitment today that by 2011 we will see real progress in dualling the A9, or is his commitment to plan for dualling simply an empty slogan?

The cabinet secretary is right to highlight the success of such initiatives. However, he is aware of the serious crisis among upland livestock producers as a result of the foot-and-mouth disease outbreak. Will he say how a policy of local food procurement might help to breathe life back into that troubled sector?

I associate myself with the remarks made by my good friend Alex Neil on the matter of time delays. I have previously raised concerns, which I know others share, about the quality of the investigations that are conducted by the SPSO, in particular the lack of a forensic approach to investigations. Given what he has already said, can the member tell me what role the corporate body has, if any, in influencing the ombudsman's office in relation to this matter, in particular regarding the training of investigators and any budgetary implication for the corporate body? It is quite clear that the public are often not being well served by the operation of the ombudsman's office at present.

If I may assist the minister, I want to go back to the first question that my colleague Elizabeth Smith asked earlier. The question concerns the impact on the voluntary sector's infrastructure and budgets of dealing with the additional bureaucracy that arises from the—very necessary—administration of child protection. How will the Government try to assist the voluntary sector in dealing with those burdens, in particular any retrospective checking of staff if that is required?

The debate has been wide ranging. In the short time that is available to me, I will address a few issues that have been raised. I will start by commenting on the amendment in the name of my colleague Elizabeth Smith. We in the Conservative party make no apology for raising the important question of government support for the institution of marriage. The reason for that is simple. It is not because we wish to make a moralistic point, but because the evidence all points in one direction—marriage is good for society and particularly for children. In general, children who are brought up in a family where their parents are married to each other do immeasurably better than children who are brought up in other families in their health and educational outcomes and in relation to crime, antisocial behaviour and criminal justice system figures. I do not denigrate other households that come about, whether deliberately or by accident but, in general, the evidence is incontrovertible: marriage is a good thing, so marriage is a model to which society should aspire.

I am happy to give way to Mr Foulkes.

I will happily provide Mr Foulkes with all the evidence that he requires, but doing all that will take more than the six minutes that remain to me. I say in passing that I am sure that Mrs Foulkes has all our sympathies for the 37 years. The important issue is that Governments should not be neutral on marriage, which they have been. Governments should actively support marriage as a good thing for society. I will move on to other issues in the debate. Many members have said that parenting is difficult and brings many challenges. Societal changes in the past 30 or 40 years have in many ways added to those challenges. Increasingly, parents rely hugely on child care providers—much more than many years ago, when one parent often did not work or parents relied on immediate family members to provide child care. For many, child care is too expensive and too inflexible. David Whitton made good points in describing some of the challenges of accessing affordable child care. For the Conservatives, some of the main weaknesses of pre-school nursery entitlement are that it gives too much control to local authorities and that parents lack choice. We should enhance the parental right to choose. Whether parents want a local authority nursery or a private sector nursery—if that suits them better—or whether they think that money to which they have access would be better used to pay a family member to care for a child, that should be a matter for parents and not for ministers or local councils to determine. We also need to be careful to avoid duplication of provision by the public sector when there is already good private sector provision. I can think of an example in which the local authority is talking about opening up a nursery to provide wraparound child care, which can only take youngsters away from the excellent existing private sector nurseries. We should not encourage such action in circumstances in which existing child care provision is working well. The people who provide such services should be supported and we should look to local authority provision to fill the gaps in need.

That is a very interesting point, but it is rather outwith the scope of the debate; perhaps we could address it on another occasion. The use of salary sacrifice child care voucher schemes should be extended across the public sector and the Government should encourage their use in the private sector. I turn briefly to smaller class sizes, to which the Labour amendment refers. Smaller class sizes are important, but they are not the be-all and end-all of education policy. As Hugh Henry said, there are other important issues that could and should be addressed. Many teachers would prefer to teach a class of 30 well-behaved pupils than a class of 18 in which there are disruptive pupils or pupils who have been mainstreamed inappropriately and whose education might be better served elsewhere. The issues of mainstreaming and discipline require to be considered in the context of class sizes. As we have heard, the Government's commitments on class sizes raise huge issues, such as teacher recruitment and the cost of providing infrastructure and new buildings. As yet, the SNP Government has given us no idea of where the money will come from. There will be a negative impact on parental choice and composite classes will become an issue. Fundamentally, it should be up to heads to decide the priorities in their schools. If the Government wants to give them extra cash, they should be able to decide whether to use that to lower class sizes or for additional investment in other areas. It is not for the Government to dictate to every school the size of its classes; that decision should be taken at school level. We will support the Labour amendment because it is true that we need more information on the Government's proposals and on costings. Councils need to know where they stand if they are to plan their school estates and their teacher rolls for the future, but they are simply not getting the information from the Government. Do I have time to make a few, brief closing remarks, Presiding Officer?

Thank you. There is much in the motion with which we agree, but it lacks detail. Fine words are all very  well, but we need to know what policies are proposed to advance the motion's sentiments. Perhaps the cabinet secretary will expand on that when she winds up the debate. We need to know what policies are proposed, what they will involve, what they will cost and where the money will come from. In principle, we accept the value of early intervention and the importance of the early years but, as my colleague Elizabeth Smith said, early intervention should be exercised only when families require it; such provision should not be one size fits all but should be targeted at those families who need it. With those caveats, we will be happy to support the wording of the Government's motion.

The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning will no doubt be pleased to hear that I do not want to get into a debate with her on participation rates in higher education. The Conservatives never supported the graduate endowment, but is the cabinet secretary aware of concerns in the higher education sector that the policy to abolish it is taking money out of the sector at a time when money should be going in? Does she agree that it is time we had an independent commission to examine higher education funding in Scotland? Such a commission would include people from throughout the sector, and indeed from outside it, and would consider all the possible options for future funding.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to tackle antisocial behaviour among young people in rural towns and villages. (S3O-814)

An important part of tackling antisocial behaviour is a visible police presence, which is an ambition shared by both the Conservative party and the Scottish National Party Government. Is the minister able to tell me how many extra police officers will be on the streets of Tayside by 2011?

The subject of this debate is broken promises. What would Mr Russell say to a member of the business community who voted SNP because of its manifesto pledge to bring in a one in, one out policy on regulation? That pledge has now been broken.

I am sorry to start my remarks on a note of disappointment. When I saw the Labour motion for debate, I assumed that the new Labour leader would be taking this opportunity to set out her stall and impress members with her rhetorical flourishes as she laid about the SNP Government for its numerous policy failures. Alas, it was not to be; instead we have had Iain Gray standing in for his leader. I had rather hoped that Wendy Alexander would be leading from the front, but, on this occasion at least, we have been disappointed.

Members are asking where Annabel is. I hate to have to remind them that this is a Labour Party debate, and one would expect the Labour Party leader to be here. Perhaps Wendy Alexander had good reason to stay out of the debate. It would take an exceptionally well-polished brass neck for the Labour Party to accuse anyone else of having broken their promises in government. At least Iain Gray has the excuse of not having been part of Government for the past four years, having been relieved of his ministerial responsibilities by my  good friend David McLetchie and the voters of Edinburgh Pentlands. As Nicola Sturgeon said, Labour is in no position to accuse anyone else of breaking pledges. The Labour Administration told us that growing the economy was the top priority, but economic growth throughout Labour's period in office routinely trailed that of the UK as a whole. That was the Administration that told us that it was going to reduce class sizes in secondary 1 and S2 for maths and English to a maximum of 20, but said later that that figure was merely an average, not a maximum. That was the Administration that told us that there would be public involvement in health service reorganisation, but, nevertheless, went ahead with cutbacks and closures in the face of vigorous local opposition. That was the Administration that promised us new bands for the council tax, which, thank goodness, it never got around to delivering. That was the Administration that promised to eradicate poverty and social exclusion, but under whose stewardship the gap between rich and poor actually widened.

I am happy to take an intervention from Mr Park, who, of course, is not culpable, having not been part of the Administration over the past eight years.

As Mr Park knows, the Conservative party will shortly be back in government and we will be able to assess our prospects then. Just in case the Liberal Democrats think that they are getting off the hook on this one, I remind them gently that they are equally culpable for all the failures of the past eight years. The subject of the debate is SNP failures. Iain Gray has set out well what those are: the failure to employ an additional 1,000 police officers, which has been watered down; the failure to implement smaller class sizes in every primary school, which we know cannot be afforded; and a failed plan to give £2,000 to first-time home buyers, which has been quietly dropped—although I am delighted that the Conservative party has now offered to  help those self-same buyers by pledging to abolish stamp duty on purchases up to £250,000. There is one other pledge that the Labour motion does not mention but which is covered in our amendment: the commitment in the SNP manifesto to adopt the Better Regulation Commission's one in, one out policy, which means that each new regulation must replace another. The Conservative party supports that eminently sensible proposal. However, the proposal has already been ruled out. Last week, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth told us that the proposal had been ruled out because it was "too simplistic." What a pity that the SNP did not consider whether the policy was too simplistic before it decided to put it in its manifesto. If the policy is too simplistic, what does that say about all the other carefully crafted policies in the SNP manifesto? Are they all to be equally damned and quietly forgotten about now that SNP leaders have the responsibility of government? I will set out the likely SNP defence to today's charges, of which we have already had a flavour. The first line of defence will be that the SNP cannot carry out its pledges because it does not know whether it will have enough money to do so; it needs to wait until the CSR. However, as Iain Gray said, that position is no different today from what it was in May or at any point in the run-up to the election. If it was in order to make all those pledges back in May, it is simply no excuse to say today, "We don't know if we have the money." That is simply a cop-out, and it shows that the promises are not worth the paper that they were printed on. The SNP's second line of defence is to say that the Government will not have enough money to implement all its pledges because it has had to pay for the Edinburgh trams. However, it was made perfectly clear back in June, when we had the parliamentary vote on the Edinburgh tram scheme, that this Parliament could not bind the SNP Government and that it was entirely a matter for Government to decide whether to proceed with the Edinburgh tram scheme. That very tram scheme, which it opposed, is now an essential element in the SNP Government's plan to link Edinburgh airport to the Scottish rail network. That line of defence will not wash, either. This week, the third and final line of defence has started to be spun: the Government will not have enough money to pay for its pledges because Gordon Brown is going to short-change us. Big, bad Gordon is going to be mean to poor, wee Alex and the SNP Government and leave them out of pocket. Gordon Brown is a political opponent of mine but I cannot believe that even he would be so stupid as to walk into that trap. It would be an  own goal of monumental proportions, even for this Labour Prime Minister. However, that line of defence is instructive in relation to what it can tell us about the approach of the SNP. We were told that this new Government was elected on a message of hope and optimism. Even many people who are not nationalists welcomed the tired Labour-Liberal Democrat partnership being turfed out of office in May and new faces taking over as Scottish ministers. We were promised a bright, new future for Scotland with a positive and forward-looking agenda. How quickly the SNP has reverted to type, however. The sunny uplands have been left behind and we have gone back to the old SNP approach of girn and groan and whine and moan. The great big tartan chip is back on the shoulder and all the whinging and cringing about Westminster has returned. The SNP Government will now blame Westminster for everything that goes wrong—even its own failures to implement its own manifesto commitments, which it now recognises were too simplistic. Scotland expected better than that from this SNP Government. Scotland deserves better than that. Frankly, this is a Government that has already let Scotland down badly. I move amendment S3M-607.1, to leave out from "regrets" to end and insert: "notes the SNP Government's failure to implement a range of policies that the SNP pledged to take forward in its election manifesto and its document, It's time to look forward , including reneging on the promise to set out plans to employ 1,000 additional police officers, backtracking on a council tax freeze, failing to implement smaller class sizes in every primary school, shelving the commitment to adopt the Better Regulation Commission's policy of "one in one out" and not delivering on plans to give £2,000 to first-time house buyers; recognises that the SNP Government is already letting down communities and hardworking families across Scotland, and calls on Scottish ministers to make a statement to the Parliament explaining why they have failed to implement these policy pledges."

Does the minister share my concern that in the city of Glasgow there are now almost as many bogus colleges as there are bona fide ones, and that those bogus colleges are part of a visa scam to allow people to circumvent the immigration system? What action has the Scottish Government taken to deal with that serious issue since it was first drawn to its attention earlier this year?

This has been a historic day. We were all entertained by the sight of Ross Finnie losing his virginity as the leader of an Opposition debate. Without being unkind, I should say that I appreciate that that is not a mental image that we want to dwell on for too long. I enjoyed Ross Finnie's speech, which was entertaining and effective. Much of the debate has concentrated on waiting time targets. However, that is not the only issue in the health service, nor is it the only issue that is referred to in the Liberal Democrat motion. I will concentrate my remarks on primary health care, which the motion touches on, because, although waiting times for treatment are important to people, they are not always the most important thing; the interface between the patient and primary care can be more important, particularly in relation to out-of-hours cover. Anyone who has had to contact the health service in the middle of the night because they have a sick child or adult in their house knows that that can be stressful. It is essential that high quality out-of-hours care is available as part of our primary care services. I am sure that the minister will be well aware of the recent Audit Scotland report on primary care out-of-hours services, which highlights the continuing pressure that out-of-hours services are under. The report found that many health boards are having difficulty filling GP out-of-hours rotas and that, if more GPs opt out of working out-of-hours cover, as many have already done, the future of the service will be at risk. The report says that there is a significant risk that current models of service delivery are not sustainable in the long term. That is a serious criticism and the Government urgently needs to make a serious response.  On many occasions, I have raised concerns about how NHS 24 operates, particularly in relation to rural areas, such as parts of Angus, Perthshire and Stirling in my parliamentary region. There is no doubt that the changes to the out-of-hours service have not been welcomed in many of these rural areas. It seems that the need to use NHS 24, combined with GPs opting out of providing out-of-hours cover, has resulted in a poorer health service—one in which lives could be put at risk. I had thought that those criticisms were shared by the SNP, at least while it was in opposition. In the Sunday Herald of 23 July 2006, Shona Robison said: "We believe there needs to be a fundamental restructuring of the service, with it devolved to health boards to provide the out-of-hours service, including the element of NHS24."

I am pleased to hear that good progress is being made, but that reassurance does not seem to have reached my constituents, who continue to be concerned about the operation of NHS 24 and the out-of-hours service that they receive. We need improvements to the service and a thorough review of the structure of NHS 24, so that better local health care provision can be delivered, particularly to rural areas. Tied in with that issue is the question of ambulance cover because, clearly, the changes in out-of-hours cover have an impact on the ambulance service. As the cabinet secretary knows, I have written to her to express my concern about the fact that the number of ambulances stationed in Pitlochry has been reduced. Although the minister has set out the reasons for the reduction in ambulance cover, I believe that halving the number of ambulances in Pitlochry from two to one could have an adverse effect on response times to accident and emergency call-outs in highland Perthshire. One ambulance now covers an area of roughly 400 square miles in highland Perthshire. That massive area includes a major section of the A9—Scotland's most dangerous road on which all too many serious accidents occur—and areas where people climb, canoe and enjoy other potentially hazardous activities. To put it into context, if the ambulance stationed in Pitlochry is occupied and another is required for an emergency call-out, the nearest available ambulance that serves highland Perthshire will have to come from Blairgowrie,  Crieff, Killin or even Perth itself. The situation could arise—

As I am discussing the part of the motion that highlights the lack of investment in primary care, I would have thought that my remarks were competent. However, I will draw quickly to a close. I am concerned that an ambulance travelling from Blairgowrie or Perth to the north-west of highland Perthshire might take an hour and a half to reach a casualty. I realise that ambulance response times in rural areas will not be the same as those expected in Dundee and Glasgow—represented by Shona Robison and Nicola Sturgeon respectively—but I think that people in those areas can reasonably expect an ambulance service that responds to the demands placed on it. I make no apology for raising serious issues that affect the delivery of primary care and the future of out-of-hours GP services. They are key areas both of health service activity and of public concern, and ministers must be able to reassure the public that the service for which they are paying is not getting worse and is not putting their health—or, indeed, their lives—at risk.

Will Mr Finnie be reassured that there is nothing to be concerned about because the disappearance of civil legal aid will mean that no one will be in any position to pursue a case?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to ensure that farmers receive a fair price for their produce. (S3O-628)

I thank the minister for the content of his reply, as I am aware that John Scott also has an interest in the subject. The minister is clearly aware of the widespread concern among the farming community about the level of farm-gate prices and in particular the current concern about prices of red meat and lamb. I have listened with interest to everything that the minister has said, but does he agree that it is time for a robust code of practice—legally enforceable if necessary—to be put into place with the supermarkets to ensure that they treat their suppliers more fairly than has been the case in the past?

I read this morning in that fine and always accurate publication, The Daily Telegraph , that the First Minister is due to meet the Secretary of State for Defence, Des Browne, to raise with him concerns that the golden thread that links different parts of Scotland with their historic regiments is being broken. When the First Minister speaks to Des Browne, will he tell him that the Scottish Conservatives—and, I am sure, many others in the Parliament—are appalled at that breach of promise from the Ministry of Defence and the Army, which goes against all the pledges that were made at the time of the mergers? Does the First Minister agree that it is a real irony that, in the week when the National Theatre of Scotland's production of the play "Black Watch" is opening to great acclaim in Los Angeles, back home, the proud institution that it celebrates is being weakened still further?

I thank all members who have stayed for the debate and the members from all parties who signed my motion. I also thank the many individuals and groups who have travelled to the Parliament to watch the debate from the public gallery. Before I begin, it is appropriate for me to put on the record my thanks for all the hard work of individuals and groups, such as Scotland Before Pylons and the John Muir Trust, who have done so much to ensure that the voices of communities are heard. They have worked continuously on the public inquiry, and they have given up much time and many resources to try to protect Scotland's landscape. There is not enough time available this afternoon to raise all the concerns that have been expressed to me by objectors, but I will give some brief background. In July 2005, Scottish Hydro Electric Transmission Ltd and Scottish Power Transmission Ltd published the proposed route for a 400kV overhead electricity transmission line. The proposed line will replace the existing 132kV transmission line between Beauly, which is west of Inverness, and Denny, which is west of Falkirk. In September 2005, the developers submitted applications to the Scottish ministers to construct and operate the line. In August 2006, the Scottish ministers referred the application to a public inquiry. The inquiry began in February of this year, and it is hoped that the report of the inquiry will be submitted to ministers during the course of 2008 for a final decision. As is fairly well known, it is the largest public inquiry in Scotland's history. The line in question cuts through four local authorities: Highland, Perth and Kinross, Stirling  and Falkirk. All four councils have lodged objections to the proposal. There has also been an objection from the Cairngorms National Park Authority, and a further objection from Clackmannanshire Council. In addition, 17,295 objections to the proposal were made to the then Scottish Executive. The purpose of this debate is not to consider in detail the substantive arguments for or against the new line. There are real concerns relating to the proposed line—I am sure that other members will refer to them in the course of the debate—including concerns about potential health issues, the impact on the environment, the impact on the tourist industry and the impact on Scotland's world-famous heritage sites, such as the Wallace monument and Stirling castle. Roughly 60 per cent of the proposed route does not run along the existing line, and the new pylons would be roughly double the height of the existing ones, averaging 45 to 50 metres. We are holding a public inquiry in order to allow those concerns and views to be aired fully and fairly. That is the plan: to have full and open consideration of those issues. My motion refers to concerns raised about the handling and the conduct of the public inquiry. Even before the inquiry began, it was something of a David versus Goliath contest. On one side, we have a multinational company with deep pockets, and on the other side we have community groups and charities that are stretched and find it difficult to fund expert advice against the legal and technical experts fielded by the applicants. Evidence is being dismissed by the reporter, who states that it is inadmissible due to missed deadlines. After giving evidence, Professor Andrew Bain OBE, who is an economist and former visiting professor at the University of Glasgow, said: "The reporters struck out some of the evidence I was giving on the grounds that it should have been submitted at an unreasonably early date - in fact, before I'd even seen the material I was commenting on. The effect of this is there has been no significant criticism of key evidence. I knew it was going to be difficult but the procedures they are adopting make it difficult for the truth to come out." In addition, the evidence that the reporters are taking is not being fully examined because the reporters, for understandable reasons, are having to stick rigidly to the inquiry timetable. There is therefore little opportunity, in some cases, to investigate important evidence further. Another problem with the inquiry is that it seems to presuppose that the power line is needed and that overhead transmission lines are the only way in which to transmit power from the Highlands to the rest of the United Kingdom. There is no real opportunity to question whether the power line is needed at all and no recourse fully to discuss  alternatives such as undergrounding and subsea transmission. The broader issues at stake are not being considered. There is also concern about the treatment of people who are giving evidence. One individual stated: "I have attended the public inquiry on approximately 5 days and have been shocked at the manner in which Scottish Hydro Electric's cross-examination of witnesses has been conducted. It has been both aggressive and demeaning in content and manner of delivery." We have evidence being dismissed; evidence not being fully investigated; poor treatment of witnesses who give evidence; an assumption that the power line is needed regardless of whether that is the case; and no real chance to discuss alternatives. All that is fundamentally wrong. The most powerful evidence on that comes from Sir Donald Miller, the chairman of Scottish Power from 1982 to 1992 and a respected Scottish industrialist. After giving evidence, he stated: "Since there is no apparent concern by the Reporter to establish facts or to hear evidence that is not supportive of the Applicant's case it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that the whole exercise is a sham. Certainly the procedures are without precedent in my fifty years' experience of Public Inquiries and are totally inappropriate for a technical and complex subject such as that under consideration. The Reporter's arbitrary rulings as to the admissibility of evidence put witnesses in an impossible position and make a mockery of the Executive's stated objective of encouraging participation in the planning process." That is the crux of the problem. After attending the public inquiry, many of the witnesses have no faith in it. I do not want to take a decision at the end of the process when it has lost the trust of those who have presented evidence to it. I have a number of questions that the minister should address. First, is he satisfied with the current conduct of the public inquiry? What steps will the Scottish Government take to address the concerns that I and others have raised? Has there been a full consideration of alternative routes and methods of transmitting power? Is there a national strategy for the transmission of power and electricity across the country? How can the inquiry come to a fair conclusion if it does not consider all the issues? With so much at stake, the public inquiry must be open and transparent so that all views and evidence can be aired and the public can be satisfied with its conclusions. This is a serious issue that will impact on Scotland for generations to come. The public inquiry must get it right.

The minister has had the pleasure, as have I, of meeting the Antonine Guard, who re-enact Roman encounters.

I am sure that the minister would join me in praising the Antonine Guard for its sterling work in keeping alive Scotland's Roman heritage. Is she aware of its campaign for a Roman heritage centre in Scotland? Is she sympathetic to that cause?

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

I am happy to give constructive opposition. Will the cabinet secretary answer the question that I asked? If the SNP Executive is pledging to lower class sizes to 18 in primary 1 to primary 3 and there is an SNP-run council, will she guarantee that, by 2011, there will be no primary 1  to 3 classes of more than 18 children in that council area?

What has been striking about the debate is that members from different political parties have lined up to expose the disarray at the heart of the SNP's education policy. Accusations of hypocrisy were bandied about earlier. I do not like using such words, but let the facts speak for themselves. Yesterday, in a debate on the skills strategy, Fiona Hyslop said: "It is irresponsible, however, to start spending a vast amount—hundreds of millions of pounds of taxpayers' money—without knowing the outcome of the comprehensive spending review and the results of the budget allocation from Westminster."—[ Official Report , 12 September 2007; c 1587.] I agree, but if that is her position the question for Fiona Hyslop is why she and her colleagues, four short months ago during the election campaign, ran around Scotland making huge spending commitments on education and everything else. If it is irresponsible today, why was it not irresponsible in May? During the election campaign, the Centre for Public Policy for Regions analysed the manifestos of the different political parties. It said that there were 35 uncosted pledges in the SNP manifesto. What is responsible about that? SNP members are condemned from their own mouths. They are acting irresponsibly, and the criticisms in the Labour motion are entirely justified. The SNP's flagship policy on education is to cut class sizes to 18 in primaries 1 to 3. We have heard a lot about that this morning. There is a debate about how important cutting class sizes is for educational attainment, which I recognise. Nevertheless, it was a clear commitment from the  SNP, and it is apparent that there are huge holes in its delivery. As Elizabeth Smith said, there are examples from across Scotland of why the policy cannot be delivered without substantial extra investment in the school estate—in new buildings and additional classrooms. In the meantime, there will be a loss of art rooms, gym halls and dining halls, and there will be composite classes. We never received an answer to the question several members, including Lewis Macdonald, asked about the impact that the policy will have on parental choice. Are we, because of a dogmatic approach from the SNP, going to start turning pupils away from popular schools where their parents want them to go? We have had no answer from the SNP to that question. Above all, there is a huge bill attached to the policy—a bill that Fiona Hyslop yesterday told us it would be irresponsible to pledge. In response to a question from Bill Butler, Adam Ingram said that the policy would be implemented across Scotland only with the consent of local authorities. I entirely accept that—it is not right for the Executive to dictate to local authorities what they should do at every turn—but does it mean that we have an unequivocal guarantee from the SNP that, by 2011, the policy will be delivered in SNP-controlled council areas such as Perth and Kinross and Aberdeen? Will there be no primary 1 to 3 classes larger than 18 in those areas? Do we have that guarantee today? The cabinet secretary needs to address that point. As we have heard from several members, there is real concern about the future funding of higher education. On that vital issue, the SNP has nothing to say—not one word. It has not even mentioned it in its amendment this morning. Instead, it is proposing to scrap the graduate endowment, which would take money out of the system rather than put it in. We still have the ludicrous plan to wipe out student debt. As Hugh Henry said, many people voted SNP thinking that their student debts would be wiped out and their student loans paid off—at a cost of £1.8 billion. Where is the money? According to Fiona Hyslop, it would be irresponsible to pledge that money at this point. I could not agree more—it is a ludicrous, unaffordable policy that will do nothing to secure the future competitiveness of Scottish higher education. If anything typifies the disarray at the heart of the SNP on education, it is the extraordinary behaviour of the SNP group on the City of Edinburgh Council, to whom David McLetchie and Gavin Brown referred. It backed the Liberal Democrats, but the minute it became clear that school closures was an unpopular policy—frankly, we did not need a crystal ball to work that one out—it had a collective attack of cowardice and  backed away from the proposals. As David McLetchie said, the rumour was that that was ordered by the dark powers at McDonald Road. Whatever the reality, the fact is that the SNP did not have the guts to take a hard decision and stick to it in the face of public opposition when the going got tough. It does not augur well for this Administration if that is how its colleagues in local government behave. The SNP has been exposed today—the honeymoon is well and truly over. It has made empty promises that it cannot possibly keep. It pledges huge sums of money, and in the next breath says that it is irresponsible to do so. At council level, the SNP has no backbone and walks away from difficult positions. On the strength of its performance to date, the SNP is simply not fit for government.

No! No!

Will the minister be so kind as to acknowledge that those great Scotland victories have all come while Scotland is a part of the United Kingdom?

I congratulate Sarah Boyack on securing this debate and allowing us to discuss important areas of the law and how the courts interpret it. Like Roseanna Cunningham—although I suspect that this may be the only point of agreement between us this evening—I preface my remarks by declaring an interest: I am a walker and a climber. Indeed, I am pleased to say that, this summer, I officially became a half-Munroist, when I passed the 142 mark. I still have a long way to go though. I have also long had an interest in access and the balance of rights between those who own the land and those who wish to exercise access over it. I should preface my remarks by saying that I have no brief for Ann Gloag, and nor, for that matter, for Perth and Kinross Council. Further, I have no brief for the Ramblers Association, although I pay tribute to the work of the association, with which I have been pleased to work on a number of issues, among them opposing unwanted and unsuitable wind farms in many parts of Mid Scotland and Fife. We are currently working on opposition to aspects of the Beauly to Denny power line, on which the local public inquiry is on-going. Sarah Boyack's motion is defective in four areas. First, as Mike Rumbles said, there is no such thing as a statutory right to roam. When the Parliament passed the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003, it was clear that what we were creating was a statutory right of responsible access.  Secondly, the motion says that the declarator applies to parts of the estate where access was previously allowed under the act, as if to suggest that Ann Gloag sought to change the status quo, but that was not what the case before Perth sheriff court was about; the declarator is about Ann Gloag seeking to determine whether access rights existed over that particular piece of land and whether she was entitled to protection of reasonable privacy that exists under the act. It is not true to say that the act took away a right that already existed. The third area in which the motion is defective is that it says that the decision of the court "undermines the clear will of the Parliament". That may be a statement of opinion, but it is veering towards being insulting to the sheriff in this case, whose job is to take the law as passed by Parliament and apply it to a set of facts and a set of circumstances and come to a conclusion. I do not conclude that he undermined the clear will of Parliament. If the will of Parliament had been clear, he would not have been able to reach the decision that he did in this case. Fourthly—Mike Rumbles also made this point—the motion is defective because it states that the court's judgment "ignores the significance of the Scottish Outdoor Access Code approved by MSPs". The act makes it clear that the code is for guidance on whether access has been exercised responsibly, not whether access rights apply. The application of access rights is set out in the act, not in the access code. In a parliamentary democracy such as ours, we in the legislature pass laws, and we rely on the courts to interpret them. To do that, we must have faith in the ability of the courts. Other members have already made the point that we have a mechanism for appeals to higher courts, to try to reach judgment on difficult circumstances. I accept that it is quite proper for a Parliament to look again at legislation if it feels that a pattern of court judgments is developing that goes against the intention of legislators at the time the act was passed, but I find it ludicrous that we should propose a review of the situation after one judgment—which, for that matter, was made in a sheriff court, sets no precedent and against which no appeal has been made. It is far too early for such a move.

The member has, like other members, raised a legitimate concern about the cost of access to justice, but we should not restrict that issue to cases under the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003; it goes right across the board. I reiterate that it is—to put it mildly—premature to raise concerns about the act on the basis of a case that has been determined in the sheriff court, that sets no legal precedent and against which there has been no appeal. Although I understand the member's motivations for lodging this motion, it is seriously defective. We should not rush to take action on the basis of a court judgment that we do not like.

Mr Purvis will be aware that we already have a number of specialist schools in Scotland. For example, St Mary's music school in Edinburgh is a centre of excellence that takes pupils from across Scotland who come to Edinburgh to specialise and develop excellence in music. Would the Liberal Democrats take away the funding from that centre of excellence?

The Scottish Conservatives welcome the opportunity to debate the Scottish Government's skills strategy, which was published on Monday. However, at first glance, I was rather disappointed, as the new Government seemed to have inherited from the previous Administration an unhealthy affection for thick, glossy and colourful strategy documents. As we know all too well from the actions of the previous Administration, the delivery of policies too often does not match the investment in the publications that promote them. However, I do not want to be too dismissive of the skills strategy. In general, there is a lot in the document that we welcome. We all understand the need for a high-skilled economy, and I agree with much of what Iain Gray said. In an ever-shrinking world, there are more and more competitive nations that are trying to take our business away from us. We have heard about the competitive nations of India and China turning out millions of highly skilled graduates who are looking to take our jobs. If we are to compete, it cannot be on the basis of low wages; it must be on the basis of our skills and expertise. Scotland has always had a good record in having a well-educated and highly skilled workforce. We must work as hard as ever to maintain that competitive position, but we have problems in certain areas. Many employers complain about skills gaps in the economy and the difficulty in filling particular vacancies. More and more employers rely on new recruits from eastern Europe to meet their needs. The sad thing is that I speak to far too many employers who tell me that, when they take on young people from eastern Europe, they are impressed not only by the skill set that they bring with them, but by their work ethos, which, all too often, exceeds that of people from our shores. That is a depressing situation of which the Government needs to be aware. Allied to that, we have a serious problem with youngsters in the NEET category, in respect of which Scotland fares badly in international comparisons. Much of the Government's skills  strategy talks about education, which is to be welcomed. It is good to see a focus on the fundamentals of literacy and numeracy as well as on soft skills such as team working and communication. Above all, our employers are looking for school leavers who can read, write and add up accurately, who can fit well into a working environment and who can relate to other people and customers. If they can do other things on top of those, that is welcome, but far too many of our school leavers lack those basic, essential skills. Our support for the strategy is by no means unqualified and our amendment refers to two serious failings that have not been properly addressed. First, it was announced by the Government on Monday that there would be a merger of Careers Scotland and learndirect Scotland to create a new skills agency, although that proposal is not mentioned in the skills strategy document. Unlike the Labour Party, we welcome that proposal as far as it goes; the problem is that it does not go far enough. The Scottish Conservatives believe that we should have a new skills agency for Scotland that would combine the functions of Careers Scotland and learndirect Scotland, but which would also take on the skills and training functions that are currently exercised by Scottish Enterprise. We believe that it would make sense to bring together all the public sector skills responsibilities under one remit, not least from the point of view of streamlining Scotland's cluttered quango environment—an ambition that many people in the SNP Government hold dear. It is a pity that that bold step has not been taken at this stage. Nevertheless, I remain hopeful that, as part of the on-going review of Scotland's public sector—in particular, the review of the functions of Scottish Enterprise by Ms Hyslop's colleagues—that will happen sooner rather than later. I was interested to hear Ms Hyslop's comments on the issue, although she gave no commitment. We await with interest the outcome of the discussions in Cabinet on the matter. Our second concern relates to vocational education. We have long believed that we need to increase substantially the opportunity for all youngsters from age 14 to access vocational training. We have had many debates in the Parliament over the years about the benefits of such a move. Time does not permit me to expand on those benefits at length, but it would be good news for the youngsters involved, good news for employers and good news for our wider economy.

There is no reason why, in a rural area such as that which Mr Rumbles  represents, there could not be skills units in all high schools. We could have skills academies in urban areas where there was an element of choice and where people were able to move around; in a rural area, the approach would have to be somewhat different. The important point—

Let me finish this point. The important thing is that we move away from a one-size-fits-all education system to a more diverse system that provides greater opportunity. Where youngsters have a particular aptitude for, say, science or mathematics or technical subjects, why should we not be prepared to offer them the opportunity to access education in a different way from the current provision, given that that would provide benefits for them and for the wider economy?

Mr Purvis seems to have forgotten that he was part of a coalition that ran the Government of Scotland for the past eight years. If every school is not a centre of excellence at the moment, he should look to himself and to his party for the reason. We want a diverse system in which different schools can excel in different subjects. That is the way to create excellence. The reality is that having comprehensive schools that provide the whole spectrum of subjects will not enable us to develop the excellence that would be possible in a smaller number of centres. That is a simple point about the practical delivery of policy. Returning to vocational training, I am pleased that the skills strategy document pledges that the Government will address the capacity issues that act as a barrier to prevent young people from accessing vocational learning opportunities. The document also talks about expanding school-college partnerships. If those can be delivered on, that will be good progress indeed.

As Mike Rumbles said in his earlier intervention, funding for further education colleges is an issue. I recognise that, if we are to expand further education provision, more funding will be required to make the system work.  Presiding Officer, I am already over time so let me conclude by saying that the skills strategy contains much that we welcome, although it also has serious omissions. I would give the cabinet secretary six out of 10 so far. If the Scottish Government is able to deliver everything in its glossy strategy document, I may in time be prepared to revise my mark upwards. I have pleasure in moving amendment S3M-443.1, to leave out from "and urges" to end and insert: "believes that all young people should be given the opportunity to access vocational education from the age of 14; calls on the Scottish Government to consider the establishment of skills academies as part of a diverse education system, and, while welcoming the merger of Careers Scotland and learndirect Scotland, calls on the Scottish Government to go further and add the skills functions currently exercised by Scottish Enterprise to the remit of the merged body, in order to form a complete skills agency."

I speak in support of the Executive's motion. My colleague Derek Brownlee has already paid tribute to the cross-party campaign that led to the saving of higher education at the Crichton campus, and I endorse his remarks. I have to oppose the rather mean-spirited Labour amendment. I gently point out to my friends in the Labour Party—and to their Liberal Democrat colleagues—that they had their chance to deal with the issue while they were in government and they failed to deliver. Frankly, it is a bit like carping for them to be criticising what is happening now. In the short time available, I seek to address a couple of wider issues that arise from the situation  at the Crichton, the first of which is covered by the final part of the Executive's motion, where it refers to recognising "the importance of the ability of students in rural and island communities to access higher and further education". What happened at the Crichton campus highlights a wider issue. There is no doubt that delivering education in this way rather than on the traditional model of having a centre of learning on a campus comes at a cost. It costs more to have decentralised education. I hope that we would all come at the argument from the starting point of agreeing that decentralised education is a good thing. It gives people the opportunity to study closer to home. In particular, it gives mature students or those who have family commitments and cannot go down the traditional route of leaving their home town to study in a city or traditional seat of learning for terms at a time the opportunity to gain qualifications nearer to where they live. Of course, to an extent, the Open University fulfils that role, but not everyone necessarily wants to follow the distance-learning route. People might prefer to study through a more traditional method. That is the sort of gap that the Crichton campus has filled successfully so far and will fill in the future. This issue is not just one for the south-west of Scotland but is also particular to the Highlands and Islands. I followed for years and with great interest the campaign to establish the university of the Highlands and Islands to see where it progressed. I was brought up in the Highlands and, like many of my generation, when I reached the age of 18, I had to leave to study elsewhere. Far too few of my peer group returned to the area, and that happened in the Highlands for decades, if not for more than a century. Talent and people were leached away from the Highlands and Islands and that has had a negative impact. Alasdair Morgan made some similar comments. The university of the Highlands and Islands is not restricted to the Highlands and Islands. The region that I represent has Perth College, which is part of the UHI network. It is doing a lot of excellent work in Perth and in outreach centres that bring people in from throughout Perthshire. Again, I am talking about mature or adult students who might not have had access to the traditional path of higher education. The huge advantages to a town of having a university—the vibrancy that is created by the existence of a student quarter, the buzz, the energy and the spin-off from new ideas—are well documented, which is why it would be tremendous if university colleges were established in Inverness and Perth. Universities bring clear economic advantages. That is why the UHI project is so  exciting, for Perth as well as for the Highlands and Islands. However, funding is an issue. When the cabinet secretary winds up the debate, I would like to hear her say that the Scottish Government recognises that such a model of higher education delivery will ultimately be more expensive than the traditional, campus-based model. I would like the Executive to acknowledge the importance of such a model and say that it is prepared to bear the cost. I will briefly address higher education funding as a whole. The cabinet secretary is well aware that university principals are concerned about a potential funding gap between Scottish institutions and those south of the border. Scottish institutions have been well funded historically, but the introduction of top-up fees down south has led to a situation in which English institutions are becoming better funded and—perhaps more serious—have a borrowing capacity to invest in infrastructure that exceeds that of Scottish institutions. The situation will be exacerbated if the cap on top-up fees in England is lifted after 2009, as it may well be. The funding gap is potentially serious. We cannot afford to have the status of Scottish universities reduced as they lose qualified and talented academics to the south, where there are opportunities for higher salaries and better facilities. That is why we have called for an independent review, to consider the future of higher education funding in Scotland.

I must defer to my party's finance spokesman on the details of the budget. Mr Purvis is right to identify the medium-term issue during the next three years, but the independent review that we are calling for would look further ahead. If the review were established, it would not consider the next three years, because it would probably take two or more years to report; it would consider the situation in the longer term after 2009. No party in the Parliament supports the introduction of top-up fees in Scotland. However, if we are not going to introduce top-up fees, we must all address a serious situation and try to find another way to fill the funding gap. We must consider all the options. I have addressed wider issues, but I reiterate my party's support for the motion and for the work that  has been done by the cabinet secretary and the Executive in helping to secure the future of higher education at the Crichton.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it intends to review the performance of NHS 24. (S3O-458)

The minister will be aware of the serious criticisms of out-of-hours services that are expressed in the recent Audit Scotland report. On 23 July 2006, Shona Robison, who is now the Minister for Public Health, told the Sunday  Herald : "We believe there needs to be a fundamental restructuring of the service, with it devolved to health boards to provide the out-of-hours service including the element of NHS 24." Is that still the position of the SNP now that it is in government? If so, when will we see that necessary review of the working practices of NHS 24?

This is the first debate in the Parliament with a new rebranded Scottish Executive. There are numerous examples of significant name changes in recent times: Harry Webb became Cliff Richard, Maurice Micklewhite became Michael Caine, Cat Stevens became Yusuf Islam, Windscale became Sellafield, and now the Scottish Executive has become the Scottish Government. Of course, people and institutions are entitled to change their names if they wish, and I have no particular difficulty with the rebranding of the Scottish Executive. The only pity is that, unlike in the cases of private individuals such as Mr Richard, in the case of the Scottish Executive it is the poor taxpayer who has to foot the bill. Now £100,000 for a rebranding exercise may not seem like a great deal of money to ministers, but it is an unnecessary extravagance that they may well come to regret during the budget process when they start to run out of money for all their pet projects and finally start having to say no to those who are clamouring for additional cash. Government is all about difficult decisions. If the evidence of the Scottish National Party group on the City of Edinburgh Council is anything to go by, this Government may find the going harder than it expects. Having said that, today we are here to debate the programme of Government for the new SNP Administration. It is, frankly, pretty thin material to work with. This is a string vest of a programme, which is more noticeable for the holes than for the material. That is not necessarily a bad thing because, as the First Minister acknowledged, Governments are often far too quick to legislate. It should be a rule in any liberal democracy that Governments should pass laws only when there is a compelling reason to do so and only as a last resort when other non-legislative measures have failed.  Sadly, that was not a lesson learned by the previous Administration. It promised, in a famous slogan, to "do less, better". Sadly for it, most people—including, it seems, most of the electorate—did not realise that there was a comma in that phrase. Over the past eight years we saw unwanted and unnecessary legislation in a whole range of areas, from a ban on fox hunting to the introduction of compulsory landlord registration—tagged on to antisocial behaviour laws—a ban on tail docking of dogs, and the introduction of unwanted single seller surveys. We had eight years of a Labour-Liberal coalition that rushed to legislate as the easy option at every turn. If we are going to see a departure from that practice, it can only be a good thing. We have here a pretty thin programme to debate, but at least there are some items in it that we wish to support. I was delighted to see the publication of the bill to abolish tolls on the Forth and Tay bridges—a policy that is firmly supported by my party and which formed part of our manifesto. The only issue that surprises me—it requires to be cleared up—is that there has been no mention of the repeal of part 3 of the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001. That piece of legislation, which gives power to local authorities to implement road tolls, was opposed by my party but supported by the SNP. In reply to a question from me in this chamber on 22 February 2007, the then SNP transport spokesman, Fergus Ewing, said that the SNP supported the deletion of that part of the 2001 act. That was a most welcome U-turn, but where is it today in the Government's programme? Perhaps we will be told later in the debate. We in the Scottish Conservative party have made it clear that we want to engage constructively with the new SNP Government. Where there are areas of common ground between us, we will be happy to work with the Government—whether it is on tolls, on protecting rural schools or on cutting business rates—but when the SNP proposes measures that we do not agree with we will vigorously oppose them and look to build informal alliances with other parties in order to defeat them. Above all, we reject the proposal for independence. The option of cutting us off from our neighbours in the other parts of these islands is persistently opposed by a substantial majority of our fellow Scots. What a pity that the SNP Government is wasting time on an unwanted national conversation when it should be tackling the real issues. Whatever it calls itself, if this Government wants to be a success, we will be happy to point it in the right direction.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I seek a ruling from you in relation to the terms of motion S3M-254, in the name of Bruce Crawford, which he has just moved. The motion proposes a number of appointments, including that of Helen Eadie MSP to the Subordinate Legislation Committee. Now, I know that I am getting old but, unless my memory fails me, I seem to recall that some two weeks ago we overwhelmingly passed a similar motion; I recall voting for it. On that day in the chamber, we were compelled to listen to some petulant and ill-mannered remarks from Mrs Eadie about my party's convenership of the Equal Opportunities Committee. She went on to complain about being proposed to serve on both the Subordinate Legislation Committee and the Equal Opportunities Committee without her consent and she promised to resign from both committees in protest. I am sure that none of us would want to see a repetition of the infantile behaviour that was displayed by Mrs Eadie on that occasion, if motion S3M-254 should be agreed to at decision time. Before we vote on the motion, therefore, I ask for clarification from you as to whether on this occasion Mrs Eadie agrees to her appointment to the Subordinate Legislation Committee. If that is the case, can she be given the opportunity to apologise to the chamber for her remarks about my party's convenership of the Equal Opportunities Committee, which she clearly now repudiates?

To ask the Scottish Executive how it will improve standards of discipline in schools. (S3O-260)

I am sure that the cabinet secretary agrees with me that in order to understand the discipline problem, statistics must be published. I know that she agrees with me about that because when she was in Opposition, she called for the publication of statistics and said: "regular statistics should be produced so that there can be accountability."— [ Official Report , 17 March 2005; c 15454.]  The cabinet secretary told my colleague Elizabeth Smith during yesterday's debate that she was committed to looking at "options" only, rather than publishing statistics. Will she tell us why she has changed her mind?

Will the member give way?

rose—

Finally, the member gives way. I have no particular view on whether Scotland should be part of a Great Britain football team at the Olympics. Does Mr Maxwell accept the advice of FIFA president Sepp Blatter who, when asked about that scenario, said: "The four British associations will not lose the rights and privileges acquired back in 1947."

I start on a note of consensus: I hope that all members can unite round a message of support for Glasgow's bid to host the Commonwealth games in 2014. I congratulate everyone who is involved in the bid on the work that has been done to date. It is a testimony to their work that, only last week, John Tierney, who is the chairman of the Commonwealth Games Federation evaluation commission, highly praised Glasgow's bid for the 2014 games. When the evaluation commission visited Glasgow, John Tierney stated that all aspects of the city's bid, from infrastructure to political support, had been "truly impressive". That is a credit to the organisers. I am sure that all members wish them every success in their bid to bring the Commonwealth games to Glasgow in 2014. That is enough consensus from me this morning. The second part of our motion states that Scottish athletes, in the interests of sport in Scotland and in their own interests, must compete as part of a British team in the 2008 Olympic games and at subsequent Olympic games. I accept that that argument applies equally to the Paralympics, as set out in Johann Lamont's amendment, which we are happy to accept.

Nobody is suggesting that we should be part of a British football team. We have separate football and rugby teams and nobody is suggesting that that should change; we are suggesting that there is nothing wrong with the current set-up. We compete as Scotland in the Commonwealth games and as Britain in the Olympic games. As I will point out in a second, that is exactly the way that our athletes want it. It is time that the Scottish National Party started listening to them.  Let me put the debate in context. At the SNP annual conference in Perth in October 2006, Alex Salmond pledged to pull Scottish athletes out of their British Olympic teams, which he wants to happen in time for the London Olympics in 2012. On top of that, various SNP members have voiced their desire for a Scottish Olympic team. Linda Fabiani, who is on the front bench today for the Executive, held a members' business debate on that very subject in 2005. Let us be absolutely clear what is behind that call: it is nothing whatever to do with promoting Scottish sport or Scottish athletes; it is all about the SNP's pursuit of a narrow separatist agenda and about playing politics with the future of Scotland's athletes. Members do not have to take my word for it—we should listen to the athletes. After hearing of the SNP's proposal for a Scottish Olympic team, Chris Hoy, the cycling gold medallist, said: "I think if we do that it would dilute the resources and the expertise we've got in the British team." I echo Chris Hoy's view when he went on to say: "I'm a very proud Scot, but I'm also proud to be British and I think they don't have to be mutually exclusive. You can be part of a Scottish team and part of a British team." Legendary Scottish sprinter and Olympic gold medal winner Allan Wells was even more scathing. He said of the First Minister's proposal: "I am disgusted. What ... Salmond is proposing is stupid and irresponsible ... The SNP has to grow up and realise it is a great honour for a Scots athlete to wear a British vest."

Lord Foulkes was doing so well, but he nearly lost me on that point. However, I am happy to concede it to him. I thought that, in its amendment, the SNP would leap to the defence of the First Minister's call. However, to my astonishment, the SNP amendment contains not one mention of its policy of having a separate Scottish Olympic team. Why ever not? Is that yet another U-turn from the new Administration? Has the policy been abandoned so early in the new session of Parliament, or is it simply that the SNP lacks the courage to put its idea to a vote in the Parliament—and lose? The Conservatives realise that the SNP's call for a Scottish Olympic team is politically motivated and would do nothing to bring about a renaissance in Scottish sport. We need to encourage participation in sport at all levels and to provide support for elite athletes to fulfil their potential. Experience has shown that pooling resources and  being able to tap into a broad network of facilities and expertise is the best way in which to do that. Like all political parties, we support the London 2012 Olympics—we are a bit uncertain about the logo, but we will live with that. The Olympics promise much for Scotland, including a morale boost for Scottish athletes in the British team and a network of training facilities for them to access afterwards. We can expect a flow of tourists coming to Scotland as part of their trip to London for the games. Scotland can share in the excitement of the Olympics, which are games not just for London, but for Britain. I accept that Labour should perhaps have managed the finances better and I believe that we should not risk such a large bill for the public purse or allow other lottery-funded projects to be threatened. However, in my eyes, if thousands of Scottish children take up sport after the games, we can say that the money was worth it. I am sure that our athletes will inspire our youngsters. The Parliament has the opportunity to send a clear message to the First Minister that, on this issue, he does not speak for Scotland; the Parliament speaks for Scotland, and the Parliament supports Scottish participation in a UK Olympic team, as that is good for our athletes, for Scottish sport and for our nation. If the First Minister goes to the International Olympic Committee seeking support for a separate Scottish Olympic team, he will do so in the teeth of the Parliament's clear and stated view. A wider issue is at stake. In democracies such as ours, the Parliament is sovereign, not the Executive, which merely borrows power from the Parliament. In the end, we represent the people and we, as their Parliament, have the final say. Mr Salmond would do well to remember that when he tries to play politics with our national interest. I have pleasure in moving the motion in my name. I move, That the Parliament fully supports Glasgow's bid to host the 2014 Commonwealth Games; wishes our competitors every success in the 2010 Commonwealth Games and looks forward to them building on the 29 medals brought back from the 2006 games, which is the largest number of medals ever won by a Scottish team at overseas games; also wishes the British team every success in the 2008 Beijing Olympics, and believes that the interests of sport in Scotland and our athletes are best served if they compete as part of the British team in the 2008 Olympic Games and at subsequent Olympic Games.

As the recently appointed Conservative spokesman on education and lifelong learning, I welcome this opportunity to debate education, lifelong learning and skills. It is perhaps disappointing that there was a delay in holding this subject debate and that all the other cabinet secretaries held debates on their subjects first, but I am glad that we are now having the debate. I was interested to hear the new Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning's priorities for education and I genuinely hope that there is a lot of common ground between the parties. For example, the SNP is keen to promote smaller class sizes and early intervention, and we in the Conservative party are happy to support those two principles. As a general rule, we are sympathetic to smaller class sizes, but they should not be thought of as the be-all and end-all of education policy. Many teachers would rather teach a class of 30 well-behaved youngsters than a class of 20 pupils, two or three of whom are poorly behaved. All sorts of other issues are thrown up by the policy, some of which the  minister and Hugh Henry mentioned in their speeches. There is a question about the school estate. If we force through a programme of smaller class sizes, we will have to create more classrooms, which means having to build more classrooms or putting huts in the school estate. Alternatively, it means capping the size of the school roll, which takes away parental choice. Generally speaking, parents will not favour smaller class sizes if they mean restricting their choice and not letting them get their youngsters into the schools that they want. Parents would rather have their children taught in the school of their choice, even if it meant larger class sizes, than in a second-choice school. I would welcome some reassurance from the minister that parental choice will be safeguarded in that respect. In pursuing the agenda of smaller classes, we need to safeguard against the growth of composite classes, which are not popular with either parents or teachers. If the price of smaller class sizes was more composite classes, it would not be a price that many would be happy to pay. There are many issues that need to be addressed by the Executive, although I welcome its general direction of travel. We look forward to hearing much more from it on the subject. Another issue that relates to smaller class sizes is the lack of employment for new teachers who complete their probationary period; I was pleased to hear the minister address that issue. I should declare an interest, as I am married to just such a teacher, who gave up a successful and rather lucrative career in accountancy to retrain as a teacher, so drawn was she by the promises made by the previous Administration on the attractions of a career in teaching. My wife does not regret that decision for one moment, and indeed she is one of the lucky ones because she has already been offered employment for the coming year. Sadly, far too many of my wife's peer group face unemployment or, at best, an uncertain future. I understand that, in the Perth and Kinross Council area alone, there have been 160 applications for a mere dozen vacancies. Some newly qualified teachers are even talking about having to return to their previous professions. After having sacrificed a great deal to retrain—taking a year off work, going to university to do the postgraduate qualification, perhaps having to borrow money, and then going through a probationary year—they have found themselves without employment.

I would not like to accuse Mr Henry of passing the buck to the local authorities when he was the Minister for Education and Young People, but if he is aware of an issue, it is something that the cabinet secretary should look into. I welcome the cabinet secretary's announcement of an extra 300 jobs across Scotland. That will go some way towards addressing the problems, but not all the way. I was also interested to hear her say that she will create 250 extra places for trainee teachers, which in some ways may exacerbate the problem if we do not create the vacancies in the profession after training. We need a rounded and well-thought-out approach. If the cabinet secretary wanted to intervene, I would welcome that.

I welcome that assurance, but the difficulty will lie in getting it right. We must ensure that those who have gone into teaching as a profession—particularly those who have given up another career to do so—do not lose out due to expectations and promises that were made to them. In the brief time remaining to me, I will set out a few thoughts on the Conservative agenda on education. We propose three key principles in relation to our schools. First, we want greater devolution of power to headteachers, to school boards or parent councils and to schools themselves. We regret the decision that was taken by the previous Executive to scrap school boards and replace them with parent councils. We believe that the way to raise standards in education is to put greater trust in the management at school level. As a general principle, decisions should be taken as close as possible to parents, teachers and pupils, rather than by distant education authorities or, worse still, by a distant education minister. Secondly, a serious approach must be taken to discipline—my colleague Elizabeth Smith will say a little more about that. We know that the indiscipline problem in Scotland's schools is growing. The way in which to tackle that problem  and to turn it around is to return to headteachers and schools control over discipline. Thirdly, we support greater school diversity. We do not believe in a one-size-fits-all approach. We want schools to develop specialisms, whether they be in sports, music, the arts, science, languages or whatever. That is why we have supported calls for skills academies and have suggested a pilot scheme for a city academy in Glasgow, which would give youngsters there a different type of education. Of course, we have called for vocational training from the age of 14 to be expanded. We believe that every youngster should have the opportunity to access such training from that age through school-college links. All the parties have much common ground on education issues. Some of what the new minister plans to do will find favour with us and, when it does, we will be happy to provide support. However, when we see a failure to address serious issues, we will not hesitate to hold ministers to account. I hope that, in that way, we can all contribute to bringing about a better education system for all Scotland's children.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Last Wednesday, I made a point of order in connection with a statement from the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning on higher education, the contents of which had appeared in a number of newspapers the previous weekend, in articles that trailed an Executive announcement on the abolition of the graduate endowment. I regret that today there seems to have been a repetition of the same offence. Today's edition of The Herald carries a story, which is tagged as an exclusive, that there will be an announcement today from the Executive on extra free nursery provision. The article says: "Fiona Hyslop, the Cabinet Secretary for Education, is expected to unveil the £15m initiative during a debate on education at the Scottish Parliament." That might be deemed educated guesswork from the journalist, but I suspect that he would have needed clairvoyancy talents akin to those of Mystic Meg to be so right and to be able to tag the story as an exclusive. He goes on to quote the Minister for Children and Early Years, Adam Ingram, as saying that the announcement on free nursery education is a "significant step". When I made my point of order last week, I pointed out that when members who now occupy the Executive benches were in opposition they complained regularly about the then Executive trailing ministerial announcements in the press before informing the Parliament. There have been three incidents in the past week in which details—on the graduate endowment, on fees for free personal care and on nursery education—have gone into the press before the Parliament was informed about them. That is deeply discourteous to members. The new Executive appears to be a serial offender at a very early stage in the new parliamentary session. After he was elected, the First Minister told the Parliament: All of us in the Parliament have a responsibility to conduct ourselves in a way that respects the Parliament that the people have chosen to elect. That will take patience, maturity and leadership on all sides of the chamber. My pledge to the Parliament today is that any Scottish Government that is led by me will respect and include the Parliament in the governance of Scotland over the next four years.—[ Official Report , 16 May 2007; c 36.] Those were fine words from the First Minister, but the events of the past two weeks suggest that they have been all too quickly forgotten. Presiding  Officer, will you rule on whether the Executive is in breach of parliamentary procedures in this matter? Should this not be a case of three strikes and you're out?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. During First Minister's question time today I asked the First Minister about comments made in the chamber yesterday by the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, Fiona Hyslop. I told the First Minister that, in response to a question on higher education funding, the cabinet secretary said that Scotland's universities were currently well funded. In his response, the First Minister corrected me and said that what the cabinet secretary in fact said was that they were properly funded. I have now had an opportunity to consult the Official Report of yesterday's meeting, and I see that Fiona Hyslop said: "I think that our universities are well funded."— [ Official Report , 13 June 2007; c 639.]  I am sure that the First Minister did not knowingly intend to mislead Parliament, but nevertheless that is what has happened. Presiding Officer, can you advise me how, under standing orders, the record may be put straight?

Yesterday, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning said in response to a question that Scottish universities are "well funded". That statement will have raised eyebrows in the university sector, which is worried about its competitive position. Does the First Minister agree that it is time for an independent review of higher  education funding and student support in Scotland that is modelled on the Cubie committee review, so that we can try to safeguard universities, which are important institutions?

Ladies and gentlemen—I mean Presiding Officer. [ Laughter. ] I am in the wrong forum all of a sudden. I am back at the student union. It is disappointing that as their first subject for debate in this session the Greens have picked a reserved issue—not just any reserved issue but one that, as Mr Harvie said, the Parliament has debated many times before. I am not sure whether any more light will be shed on the issue than was shed on previous occasions. The reality is that no matter what the Parliament resolves at 5 o'clock, it will mean nothing whatever. This is a massive exercise in self-indulgence on the part of the  Greens and their supporters in the Parliament. It means nothing. I came along this morning hoping that the Labour Party in Scotland might have rediscovered its backbone. I was sadly mistaken. There was little evidence of that backbone during the recent election campaign, when I sat in hustings meetings with various Labour candidates—some of whom are here today—in different parts of the country. By remarkable coincidence, not a single Labour candidate with whom I shared a platform during the election campaign supported the Labour Party's policy on Trident. Every single one of them seemed to oppose it. I hoped that this morning we might hear Labour Party members defend party policy on Trident—a policy that has often been stated in the House of Commons. Sadly, even the redoubtable Mr McMahon was disappointing. In his speech—which lasted five minutes, with lots of interventions—he said not a word about the substantive issue of Trident. If Labour Party members will not do so themselves, it is, again, left to the Conservatives to defend the position of the Labour Government at Westminster.

I will happily give way to someone who may be prepared to defend the position of the Labour Government.

I appreciate that Lord Foulkes is a relative newcomer to the chamber, but he will be aware that we have debated reserved issues on many occasions in the past—as indeed, to be fair, do other fora throughout the land, such as local councils. I do not have a particular problem with debating Trident, but we should get on with debating the real issue, about which we have heard very little in the previous two speeches. I wish that we lived in a world without nuclear weapons—a world in which they had not been invented or in which they could be uninvented. However, we do not, and neither of those things is  possible. So long as others have nuclear weapons, we should retain them. I remember the debates in the 1980s about unilateral nuclear disarmament. The debates today are not so different—only the faces of the unilateralists have changed. Back then, Tony Blair, John Reid and Jack McConnell had all signed up to CND and were all opposed our nuclear deterrent—all of them wrong to a man. They now accept the error of their ways, because the Conservatives won that debate. They have been converted to our cause. I believe that we should retain our nuclear deterrent because we live in an increasingly uncertain world. We do not know where the threats are coming from, and we do not know where the rogue states might be that threaten our security in 30 or 40 years' time. It would be madness to give up our deterrent at this time. The unilateralists were wrong in the 1980s and they are wrong today. It would be foolhardy for us to give up our nuclear weapons unilaterally. We should reject the Green motion and, even if the Labour Party are too feart to make the arguments their party stands for, they can still serve their party's will. I move amendment S3M-169.1, to leave out from "congratulates" to end and insert: "notes that defence matters are wholly reserved to Scotland's other Parliament at Westminster and that on 14 March 2007 a majority of MPs voted for the replacement of Trident."

I thank the cabinet secretary for providing an advance copy of her statement. Today's announcement will doubtless be popular with student groups, but there is more to government than grabbing a few cheap headlines and a few cheers from the back benches. Scottish Conservatives are no fans of the graduate endowment, but my criticism of the cabinet secretary's announcement is that it utterly fails to address the real issue in relation to higher education. The cabinet secretary said in her statement that she wishes to focus on "promoting excellent teaching and research in our colleges and universities." She must be aware of the growing concern among Scottish universities that they face a competitive disadvantage compared with English institutions because of the additional revenue that those institutions can derive from top-up fees. The situation will be exacerbated in a few years' time when the £3,000 a year cap on top-up fees will be lifted. The real issue for the Scottish Government is how to fill that funding gap. In her first statement on higher education, the cabinet secretary had not one word to say on that vital issue. Scottish Conservatives, recognising the serious nature of the issue, have called for an independent review of higher education funding and student support. The Scottish National Party's response has been to propose a policy that will take money out of higher education rather than put it in. In 2003, the SNP manifesto pledged: "We will reconvene the Cubie Committee with a remit to review financial support for students at present, as well as  the overall context of further and higher education funding. The committee will not be restricted in its remit". Why has the SNP abandoned that perfectly sensible commitment, for which it would have had our support? Is it because the balance of expert opinion is likely to run counter to its stance and question the scrapping of the graduate endowment that was announced today? Will the cabinet secretary join us in committing to establish an independent review of higher education funding, or is she happy to sit back and do nothing while the future of our great universities is put in jeopardy?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. My point of order is about the statement on higher education that we are about to hear from the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning. Reference to the contents of the statement appeared in a number of newspapers at the weekend, trailing an Executive announcement on the abolition of the graduate endowment. I understand that it was not idle speculation on the part of the newspapers involved, but rather that the media was briefed expressly on the content of the statement. Moreover, I understand that various student leaders have been invited to Parliament today and that their availability for interview by the media has been circulated, presumably on the basis that they will welcome the contents of a statement that members of this Parliament have yet to hear. Presiding Officer, "I am concerned that—yet again—we seem to be reading about Government announcements in the press rather than hearing them in the chamber."—[ Official Report , 2 November 2000; c 1259.] Those are not my words, but those of the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, Fiona Hyslop. While in opposition, members who are now on the Executive benches complained regularly about the then Executive trailing ministerial announcements in the press in advance of Parliament being informed. Although I am sure that the Executive would not wish to appear to be guilty of double standards, this is surely a case of gamekeeper turned poacher. Presiding Officer, will you rule on whether the Executive is in breach of parliamentary procedures on this matter? At the very least, gross discourtesy has been shown to Parliament and members of all parties.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has any plans to review the regulations that introduced new tests for private water supplies in Scotland. (S3O-90)

I thank the minister for his response which, if warm, was not terribly supportive. The minister will be aware that there is widespread concern in rural Scotland that, under the new regulations, many small businesses are being clobbered with large bills from the Scottish Environment Protection Agency. Does he agree that, in order to avoid unnecessary damage to the fragile economies of our most rural and remote areas, it is time to review both the implementation of the regulations and the grant scheme that was introduced to help to defray costs?

What is the SNP Government's position now on specialist schools? Does it favour the creation of more such schools, or does it just want to keep the ones we have?

I welcome Fiona Hyslop to her new position as the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning and her team of Maureen Watt and Adam Ingram. We look forward to engaging energetically with them in the years ahead. The Conservatives welcome the opportunity to discuss skills and vocational education in the first education debate of the new session. We have long championed the cause of greater vocational education. As far back as 2002, a Conservative  amendment was passed in the Parliament that urged the Executive to extend access to further education courses to school pupils from the age of 14. That position has often been restated in the Parliament, with support from all sides. The Conservative party does not believe in a one-size-fits-all approach to education. We believe that a system that means that all children must concentrate fully on academic subjects after the age of 14 is increasingly out of date. Such an approach is failing to meet the needs of our economy, as the Labour motion recognises. The current system also fails too many youngsters, who are simply turned off by academic subjects but might welcome the opportunity for more vocational learning. Such learning might help to motivate them to engage more fully within the school environment, with all the benefits that that would bring.

I will address that point later, if I may, but will make two brief comments now. As Mr Henry said, existing units in schools could be used. We must also recognise that urban areas have a higher concentration of schools and that those schools will have greater opportunities to develop specialisations than will schools in rural and remote areas—that is inevitable. I am pleased that the Labour Party's motion recognises the business community's concern about "the shortage of school leavers proficient in science and technical subjects". I am sorry that it has taken the transition to opposition for Labour to become aware of it, but its concern is welcome. I am pleased that Labour is again talking about the creation of skills academies. In January, the Conservatives lodged a motion supporting the principle of skills academies and we were rather disappointed that Labour members did not support us on that occasion. The idea is attractive in principle, but we are still waiting for further detail from Labour about how skills academies might operate in practice.

Given that I was talking about Labour, it is only fair to allow Mr Macintosh to intervene.

I have no wish to intrude on a debate on this subject that is taking place in my party south of the border. I reassure Mr Macintosh that it is not the policy of the Scottish Conservatives to support selection. Labour's new approach, which I commend, recognises the realities of modern Scotland and stands in stark contrast to the antediluvian approach of the SNP. As a party, the SNP has set its face against specialist schools and skills academies. SNP members must recognise the realities of 21 st century Scotland. As a nation, we must be more ambitious and must set about creating an education system that meets the needs of modern Scotland, rather than, for purely ideological reasons, clinging to a system that is past its sell-by date. Our amendment says that we should recognise the need for new specialist vocational schools—such as the skills academies that Labour is talking about—as well as the need to develop links between schools and colleges, which is what Miss Hyslop referred to in her remarks. Every Scottish youngster from the age of 14 should have the opportunity to access vocational education. That might not necessarily be done at a specialist school, which might answer Mr Rumbles's point. We do not support a two-tier system because every child should have the opportunity. A lot of good work has already been done in developing links between schools and local further education colleges, and much more could be done in that field. I am aware that I am already over my time. Scottish education has reached a consensus that we should encourage more vocational courses. I believe that many in this chamber want to go further than that and encourage more specialist schools such as skills academies or science centres of excellence, although I have not had time to talk about those this morning. Scottish education should be going that way and we look forward to working with other parties to bring about those changes. I move amendment S3M-126.1, to insert at end: "but also appreciates the excellent facilities and expertise in further education colleges and believes that more use must be made of these for educating school-age pupils so that, taken together with the introduction of specialist  vocational schools, this ensures that every young person can readily access vocational education courses from the age of 14, and further believes that each local authority should work with head teachers and local further education institutions to produce a strategy for teaching science and technology."

Will the minister take an intervention?

I never thought that I would live to hear a Liberal Democrat in the chamber accuse others of naked political opportunism while keeping a straight face, but Iain Smith never disappoints. I welcome Stewart Stevenson to his new position as a minister and wish him well in the job. I also thank him for his kind words about me earlier. I congratulate all the members who gave their maiden speeches, all of which were fine contributions to the debate. I do not want to single out any of them, but I will say a word about Nigel Don. Any man who says what he has to say and sits down before his time is up is a particularly welcome addition to the chamber and a lesson to us all. I welcome the announcement of the abolition of the tolls. As my colleague Alex Johnstone said, the policy is supported by the Conservatives and appeared in our manifesto for the election that has just taken place. I am delighted that Conservative support has made it possible for the Executive to bring forward the proposal. A long campaign was fought to abolish the tolls. Tricia Marwick referred to it in her speech and, like her, I pay tribute to The Courier newspaper for the part that it played in campaigning in Tayside and Fife to scrap the tolls.  A couple of weeks ago, I signalled my intention to introduce a member's bill on the issue, which will not be necessary if the minister sticks to his timetable to introduce legislation in September. I do not intend to proceed further with my member's bill. I look forward to supporting the detail of the minister's legislation when it is introduced. It is important to stress that we in the Conservative party do not object in principle to the idea of tolls, especially for new infrastructure projects. The issue here is simply one of fairness. Once the Parliament took the decision to scrap the tolls on the Skye and Erskine bridges, it was in no way fair that the only people paying tolls should be people in Fife and the east of Scotland. That is why it is right also to get rid of the tolls on the Tay and Forth bridges, and why we championed that cause. I welcome the conversion of the other parties—Labour and the Liberal Democrats—which have said that they, too, will support the abolition of the tolls. The only discordant note was struck by the Greens. How Robin Harper must regret doing that deal to prop up an SNP minority Government when he hears what they are saying today. However, he will have to examine his own conscience in that respect.

That is a fair question, which Mr Swinney might like to address in his winding-up speech, although I expect that his answer will be that this debate is about road transportation, not the railways. There are issues to address in relation to Mr McNulty's amendment, which we will be supporting. There is an issue about staff. Tricia Marwick made a good point. Like her, I do not remember a word being said about the staff who were employed to collect the tolls on either the Skye or Erskine bridges when the abolition of tolls on those bridges was being proposed.

Perhaps somebody else needs to examine their conscience as well.  There is also an issue about traffic management. Getting rid of the toll plaza on the Forth bridge cannot happen without other work being done, because there are two lanes of traffic on the A90 and two lanes of traffic on the A8000. A traffic management system will be required if a bottleneck is to be avoided. I am sure that the minister will examine that issue. There is also the extremely important question of the new Forth crossing, to which Ted Brocklebank and others referred. I agree with Jim Tolson in that regard. Of all the transport infrastructure projects in Scotland, the number 1 priority has to be getting that new crossing in place. If that is not done, the east of Scotland economy will face a real issue. There is a question about how that bridge is to be funded. I see that Mr Stevenson has slipped all too easily and comfortably into his new job as a minister, because he did not answer the question that I put to him earlier. Perhaps Mr Swinney can answer it when he winds up. The question is this: is the Executive opposed to tolls in principle, and does that mean that it rules out any element of tolling on or user contribution towards a new Forth crossing? We must have an answer to that important question. Time will not allow me to address other issues that have been raised, such as the trams and EARL, but I want to say a word about the A9. Alison McInnes, in her fine speech, referred to the dualling of the A9. As it is a cause that I have championed for years, I was delighted when I saw in the press on Tuesday morning that the A9 was to be dualled not only from Perth to Inverness, which would be tremendous enough, but from Perth all the way to Thurso. Tremendous news. However, my delight turned to dismay when the First Minister said yesterday that it was simply a long-term project with no timescale. We need to have a little more clarity on these issues. Perhaps with experience the Executive will learn to improve its news management in relation to such issues. I am delighted that we are abolishing the tolls. It is a good day for the new politics, a good day for this Parliament and a good day for Scotland.

Will Mr Smith take an intervention?

Will the minister give way?

I will break into the self-congratulation for just a second. I take it from the minister's tone that the Executive opposes tolls in principle. Does he therefore rule out any tolling for a new Forth crossing?

I warmly welcome the First Minister's commitment to abolish the tolls on the Forth and Tay bridges,  which, of course, is a policy that featured in the Conservative manifesto and one that will have our support in the Parliament. Earlier in the week, I announced my intention to introduce a member's bill on the issue to encourage the Executive to act—I am pleased to have scored such an early success. When will the First Minister introduce the legislation and on what date will the tolls be abolished?

indicated agreement  .

I have pleasure in speaking to amendment S3M-26.2, in my name, which seeks to delete the name of Richard Lochhead from the list of Cabinet secretaries who are to be appointed. I make it clear that neither I nor my party bear any particular ill-will towards Mr Lochhead. He has had his reward for years of slavish loyalty to his leader, and we wish him well with his new appointment. We might just as easily have substituted the name of another appointee for Mr Lochhead's in our amendment. For example, I considered opposing Mr Swinney's appointment, as Tavish Scott has done. However, as Mr Swinney knows, I have had little success in opposing him in recent contests and I suspect that today would have proved no different. Moreover, I fear that it will be punishment enough for Mr  Swinney that he will have to sit in the same Government as his old friend and trusted colleague Michael Russell—a man who, despite his many qualities, possesses only a passing acquaintance with the concept of slavish loyalty. However, I come to praise the new Executive, not to bury it. The Scottish Conservatives wish the new Government well. Indeed, we are delighted that the new Administration's first act has been to adopt a sound Conservative principle: smaller Government with a slimmed-down Cabinet. I look forward to that new spirit of Conservative thinking infusing the approach of the Scottish National Party Government. If Mr Salmond would like me to point out to him other sound proposals in the Conservative manifesto that his Government can adopt, I will be only too happy to oblige. Perhaps that is expecting too much, even from this consensual Administration. The new Executive has been classified as slimmed down. We have fewer ministers than before, but only by two. I hope that the new approach will not stop at the ministerial level of Government, but will be followed at all levels. Will there be a reduction in the ever-increasing fleet of ministerial cars? Will there be a reduction in overall administration costs? Will there be a cut in the number of spin doctors working at the taxpayers' expense? The Scottish Conservatives will ask those questions in the coming weeks. We need to know that today's announcement is not window dressing, but the start of a commitment to reducing Government. We welcome not only the slimline nature of the Cabinet, but its new structure. We believe that the new portfolios will bring greater focus and coherence to key policy areas. That is particularly relevant in relation to matters such as enterprise—or should I say sustainable development—where transport, finance and Scottish Water are all in the same stable, and in education where pre-school, school and post-school learning are all combined. Of course, the question of who is in the new Cabinet is much less important than the question of what those new ministers will do and what they will achieve in those roles. The Scottish Conservatives have made it clear that we do not want to see an Executive that spends its time picking fights with Westminster and indulging in the distraction of endless constitutional debate. We want to see an Executive that, in a departure from the practices of the past eight years, starts to tackle the people's priorities. In the election campaign, my party talked relentlessly about bread-and-butter issues. We make no apology for doing so and today I make no apology for repeating that call. What people in Scotland want from their Government is simple—they want the Government to be committed to  tackling problems such as the scourge of drugs, which blights many of our communities; the lack of police officers on our streets; the lack of affordable housing, which holds back many of our young people; the centralisation of health services far away from where people live; the decline of our town centres and the overburdening of our small businesses with costs and red tape; and the crying need for improvements in our transport infrastructure. Those are the people's priorities. They are our priorities, and they should be the Scottish Executive's priorities too. We wish the new ministers success. It is clear what needs to be done. I hope that this new Government will get on and do it, and if it demonstrates that it will tackle the people's priorities, the Scottish Conservatives will give it a fair wind. I move amendment S3M-26.2, to leave out "and Richard Lochhead".

I will be succinct in my remarks, although I fear that, on this occasion, I might not be able to take any interventions. I commend Mark Ruskell for the motion and congratulate him on securing this, the final members' business debate of the session. We in the Conservative party believe in giving members of the public the opportunity to travel by rail, and we are in favour of reconnecting communities by rail, for all the reasons that have been outlined in the debate. There is an important point to stress. We do not view this as an either/or issue. It is not about having rail instead of increased investment in roads. We believe that there should be both, and that they should be complementary. Along with Mark Ruskell, and indeed Roseanna Cunningham, I have campaigned for the reopening of Blackford station. Members of COBRA—the campaign to open Blackford railway again—must be congratulated on their work to keep the issue on the political radar. I would like the new parliamentary session to be used to review train station viability on that line, as well as on the highland route across Perthshire and up to Inverness. We have already heard reasons why Blackford station should be reopened. The same reasons apply to the halt at Greenloaning. Roseanna Cunningham and Mark Ruskell referred to the congestion that is caused at Dunblane by the pressure on the park-and-ride facility. Many of the  people who go to the Dunblane park and ride come from points north and west of there. If the facilities were available at Greenloaning or Blackford, that would provide a new opportunity for commuters to take their cars there, rather than clogging up the streets of Dunblane, as happens at the moment. Opening new halts in that part of the world would widen the market for those who wish to use rail, particularly those who commute to Edinburgh and Glasgow. I would like to add another station to the list of those that could be reopened: that at Bridge of Earn. Bridge of Earn is a community with a growing population where a substantial number of new houses are planned. There would be clear environmental benefits in providing a new station at Bridge of Earn. It would enable those who live there to commute to work in Perth or Edinburgh and also, of course, allow locals and visitors to use the train for shopping and leisure activities. Rail services have been high on my agenda for some years. We should be encouraging greater use of the train and reopening stations that have been closed. There are substantial environmental benefits to be gained in pursuing that agenda. I hope that we will see progress on that in the next session of Parliament.

Not by the member, I am sure.

Mr Scott is aware that I have raised with him and the corporate body several concerns about the ombudsman's office's handling of complaints. I have expressed concerns about undue delays in the preparation of cases, to which Mr Purvis referred, and weaknesses in the quality of investigations and reports. What assurances have been sought from the ombudsman that procedures will be altered, on her reappointment, to ensure that such failings will be prevented in the future?

Does the minister share my concern that the draft Tayside and Central Scotland transport partnership strategy makes no reference to the need to dual the A9, which is regarded by many in the area as the top priority for investment? Does he agree that unless the TACTRAN strategy corrects that omission, it will not deserve public support when it is finalised?

Does that mean that Mr Rumbles will support our amendment, which clearly articulates the position that he is setting out?

The Scottish Conservatives never make any secret of the fact that we believe in the union. It has given us 300 years of peace and prosperity and led to Scotland making a tremendous contribution to the wider world. We look forward to hundreds of years more of shared success with the other peoples of these islands. However, I admit that I am somewhat confused this morning, because yesterday the Executive lodged a motion in the name of Margaret Curran, supported by George Lyon. It was a fine motion, if I may say so, which extolled the virtues of the union, said, quite rightly, that devolution is a process, not an event and, crucially, talked about extending the Parliament's powers where appropriate—a stance that the Scottish Conservatives were happy to endorse. Yesterday afternoon, I set about diligently drafting a gentle addendum to the motion in order to strengthen it. Imagine my surprise when, within the course of the afternoon, the motion was mysteriously withdrawn and another motion was lodged, without the crucial wording about the extension of powers.  What could be behind that unprecedented development? Did the Executive inadvertently lodge the wrong motion? Did Mrs Curran, in an uncharacteristic lapse, give too much ground to the Liberal Democrats when she drew up the wording? Did she not think to check with Jack McConnell what his position was before she lodged the motion? All was revealed this morning when I opened my copy of The Herald . That fine journalist, Robbie Dinwoodie, as usual, got to the truth of the matter: it was, apparently, a clerical error. That is fine. I am glad that we have cleared it up. However—oh no—Mr George Lyon, who is strangely absent from the chamber this morning, disputed Mrs Curran's version of events. He said, of the motion: "It was agreed and signed off in the normal way. Labour saw it on the order paper this morning and panicked. I can see no way in which this could be described as a clerical error." Which is it? Who is speaking for the Executive? Is it Mrs Curran or the absent Mr Lyon? Perhaps we should be told. If Mrs Curran would like to intervene, I would be delighted to give way.

Even if Mr Lyon was not around yesterday, he was still available to give quotes to Mr Dinwoodie of The Herald . He was happy to speak to the press, but not to his ministerial colleagues.

The fact is that this is an absolute shambles. If this Liberal Democrat-Labour coalition cannot sort out something as simple as lodging a motion for debate, how can we trust it to run the country? We Conservatives are nothing if not helpful. Our amendment simply restates the original wording of the Executive motion. I trust that Mrs Curran, Mr Lyon and all those on the Executive benches will be happy to support their own wording. There is a particular test for the Liberal Democrats. I am sure that, true to their principles as they always are, they will want to support the wording of our motion, which represents their position. I am sure  that they will not want the Labour Party to dictate to them once again what they should say. All this is a great pity, because this could have been an occasion on which three major parties in the chamber could have been united in support of a positive case for the United Kingdom. Margaret Curran set out her defence of the union based on the Executive's record, which is not the strongest ground that she could have chosen. That is the problem: the more the Executive bases its defence of the United Kingdom on its record, the more it puts people off and the more the union is at risk. We Conservatives do not think that the union should be set in stone forever as it currently exists. We have already seen a significant change in the past 10 years, with the advent of devolution to Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, and we are open to the idea of further change, if it is in the interests of preserving the union.

I hope that Mr Neil will forgive me, but I have already taken a number of interventions and I need to make progress on the substance of the debate. In recent weeks, we have seen Labour and SNP politicians bandying around figures about the balance sheet on an independent Scotland. We have had debates on the Government's revenue statistics, on North sea oil revenues, and on the question of who subsidises whom. Frankly, the debate is sterile and unenlightening and it is turning the public off. We need to engage in a more mature debate about Scotland and its place in the union. We need to articulate new arguments for the union that are not based simply on economics or finance. Scotland is a successful nation and one of the most ingenious nations ever. We gave the world television, the telephone, penicillin, whisky and golf. Adam Smith, who is buried a few hundred metres from the Parliament, gave the world capitalism and free markets. We did all that in our own right within the United Kingdom. The key point is that we do not want to separate ourselves from the rest of the United Kingdom. That is the view of the majority of Scots, and any poll that suggests otherwise is a product of disaffection with the Lib-Lab pact rather than disaffection with the union. I compare the union to a marriage. I do not sit down with my accountant on my wedding anniversary every year, work out whether marriage has been to my financial benefit, and on that basis decide whether to sue for divorce. It is irrelevant to me whether or not I am better off married, because I am married for all sorts of other  reasons. Most people want to be married primarily for love, support, comfort and companionship rather than simply for economic reasons. I feel the same way about my Britishness. Scotland and England have 300 years of shared history, traditions and culture that bind us together with the other nations in the UK. Millions of Scots have family members who live south of the border, and millions of people in England, Wales and Northern Ireland have friends and relatives in Scotland. We speak the same language, use the same currency, eat more or less the same food, watch the same television programmes and have substantially the same culture. We should not think that those arguments are less important than financial arguments.

What sense would there be in dividing us in Scotland from our neighbours in the rest of these islands, with whom we have well-established family, cultural and historical links? Doing so would be an insular and narrow approach in a world that is growing smaller, not larger. Scotland has benefited enormously from the union in the past 300 years, and we will continue to benefit in the future. At the election in a few weeks' time, the good people of Scotland will do what they have done on every previous occasion and reject the narrow nationalist position of the SNP. I have pleasure in moving amendment S2M-5779.3, to leave out from "; and notes" to end and insert: "whilst, where appropriate, increasing the powers available to the Scottish Parliament."

As we have heard, John Swinney's bill has a simple objective: it is about righting a wrong. When the boundaries of the Cairngorms national park were drawn up, they included parts of Inverness-shire, Moray, Aberdeenshire and a small part of Angus, but no part of Perth and Kinross, despite the fact that all objective views on the matter were that the northern part of highland Perthshire should be included. Even the Government's own advisers on the matter—from Scottish Natural Heritage—said that the boundaries should include part of highland Perthshire. The only people who took a different view were the Scottish Executive, but ministers failed to marshal any objective evidence in support of their view. Clearly, the only conclusion that could have been reached at the time was that the decision was taken to exclude Perth and Kinross for political reasons, because it suited the  Executive to have a majority of the councillors elected to the park board from the Highland Council area. Mark Ruskell referred to the cross-party support for the bill from local representatives among the Scottish National Party, the Conservatives, the Greens and even the Liberal Democrats—as well as from the independent member, Dennis Canavan, who, I am very sorry to say, is clearly not able to join us for this afternoon's debate. It is perfectly clear from the evidence that was presented to the Environment and Rural Development Committee at stage 1 that there is overwhelming support for the bill's general principles. Evidence was taken from bodies such as the Pitlochry partnership; from Bill Wright of the Perthshire Alliance for the Real Cairngorms; from the Mountaineering Council of Scotland; and from the Blair Atholl area tourism association. The John Muir Trust stated: "the Cairngorms can definitely be defined. As I say, they define themselves. The logic is to have the national park boundary following the area that defines itself."—[ Official Report, Environment and Rural Development Committee , 5 February 2007; c 4024.] Like Fergus Ewing, I have climbed many, if not most, of the mountains in the Cairngorms, including many of those around Blair Atholl. It is immediately apparent to anyone standing on the top of Beinn A'Ghlo that it is at the heart of the Grampians and at the southernmost edge of the Cairngorms massif. Why should a mountain like Beinn A'Ghlo be treated to any less protection than Beinn Bhrotain or Ben Avon or any of the other mountains in the Cairngorms? Why should Glen Tilt be treated to any less protection than Glen Feshie? They are all equally part of the Cairngorms, and they should all be treated in the same way. There is an important economic issue here for highland Perthshire. There is no doubt that, as far as many visitors are concerned, Blair Atholl is the natural southern gateway to the Cairngorms. At present, people enter the Cairngorms national park on the A9 at the Drumochter Pass. Apart from a lay-by beside a very busy main road with trucks rolling past at 60mph or more, there is no visitor experience there. Would it not make more sense to have Blair Atholl within the national park as a proper gateway centre?

The House of Bruar is an excellent visitor experience, but it does not lie within the Cairngorms national park. The purpose of the bill is to extend its boundaries and bring the  House of Bruar and Blair Atholl within them. That would solve the problem and would create a visitor experience at the southern end. There are good economic arguments for the inclusion of Blair Atholl and, on the other side, Spittal of Glenshee. Let there be no doubt that opposition to the bill is driven purely by politics. It is a great shame that Nora Radcliffe of the Liberal Democrats is not here to defend her position. Nora was clear when she spoke in the members' business debate on the subject back in April 2005, as Ted Brocklebank mentioned. She said: "I hope that the Scottish Executive will move at the first sensible opportunity to review the boundary and to adopt the one that was extensively consulted on and that won a high degree of consensus."— [ Official Report , 20 April 2005; c 16218.]  We have reached that "sensible opportunity" but, unfortunately, Nora Radcliffe decided to vote against it in committee. To put it as gently as I can, that is a most disappointing U-turn on Nora Radcliffe's part, and it shows the contempt that members of the Liberal and Labour Executive parties have for the views of those in highland Perthshire and throughout Mid Scotland and Fife. The current boundaries of the Cairngorms national park were a mistake by the Executive. The Cairngorms National Park Boundary Bill is about righting a wrong, and it is time to put matters right. We have great pleasure in supporting the general principles of the bill.

Would Mr Swinney, as the SNP's finance spokesman, like to reflect on the value for money of the committee's decision? Parliament has spent a lot of time and money in considering the bill and taking evidence only to park the decision for a year. I presume that the whole process will have to be gone through again as part of the quinquennial review. Is not that a waste of taxpayers' money?

I commend Karen Gillon for her motion and congratulate her on securing the debate, which is on a subject that is dear to her heart and to many of us around the chamber. With several other members, I was part of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association delegation that visited Malawi just over a year ago. My memory of that visit is fresh, as Dr Jean Turner's obviously is. I say honestly that that trip was one highlight of my parliamentary career to date. The motion refers to the Scotland Malawi Partnership's pledge, which has been circulated. I am pleased to say that I have signed that pledge and that I have encouraged other members of the Scottish Parliament to sign it. I have also circulated it to Conservative party candidates, many of whom will join me on these benches after 3 May. I hope that they are signing up to it and that they will be committed to supporting the Scottish Executive's work in Malawi when they come to the Parliament. I recognise that some people are concerned about the role that the Scottish Executive plays in Malawi. Some will say that international development is a reserved matter for Westminster. As a general rule, that view is correct. If the Scottish Executive were to launch a hugely ambitious international development programme in an attempt to take over the ground that is currently occupied by the Department for International Development, which is the responsibility of Westminster, that would be a legitimate cause for concern, but the relationship that the Executive and the Parliament have forged with Malawi is not at all in that league. The Executive has made a total commitment of £3 million a year to promote links with Malawi, which is one ten thousandth of the Executive's annual budget of £30 billion a year. I do not regard that sum or proportion as outrageous. It is entirely reasonable and proper that a devolved Parliament such as the Scottish Parliament and a devolved Executive should seek to build links with other small countries around the world, especially places such as Malawi. Scotland has historic links with Malawi that go back hundreds of years, to the times of the early Scottish missionaries. Karen Gillon referred to the "Frontline Scotland" programme on Malawi. I did not see it, but I have heard enough about its contents to concern me. I accept that free countries and open societies such as ours need journalists who are prepared to question what Governments do. In particular, journalists are needed who are prepared to  question how taxpayers' money is being spent. However, my experience of the many Scottish voluntary organisations and charities that work in Malawi is that, far from wasting money on administration, they run extremely lean organisations. Virtually every penny that is raised is spent on the front line. It would be a tragedy if the programme that was shown on the BBC affected the flow of cash into organisations that do exceptionally important work in Malawi. I appreciate that people who make television programmes want people to watch them and that they want to generate headlines, but the media have a responsibility and an obligation to act in a reasonable and responsible way. I am concerned that the "Frontline Scotland" programme crossed the line. The relationship between Scotland and Malawi is important, and I want us to develop it and build on it. We in Scotland and the Parliament should be proud of it. I commend Karen Gillon for lodging the motion and—perhaps more important—for all her work on developing links.

Perhaps Mr Rumbles will enlighten us on Liberal Democrat policy. Is it still the policy of the Scottish Liberal Democrats to propose a 2p tartan tax cut, or has that now been ruled out?

Yes they have.

I welcome this afternoon's opportunity to debate the future of the Scottish economy and, in particular, support for small businesses. The debate is timely as, only on Monday, I launched our Scottish Conservative business manifesto, which proposes a range of measures to benefit small businesses in particular. We have produced a fully costed package for annual business rates reductions of £150 million, aimed at small businesses. A small business with a rateable value of £7,000 or less would receive a 100 per cent discount on its rates. It would pay nothing at all. There would be a sliding scale of discounts for businesses with rateable values up to £15,000. I know that such measures would deliver a real saving to more than 100,000 small businesses across Scotland. Small businesses have been struggling with the weight of business rates, water charges and overregulation over the past 10 years of Labour government at Westminster and over the past eight years of the Lib-Lab pact in Edinburgh. We should never forget that it was Jack McConnell who, when he was Minister for Finance, raised the business rate in Scotland  above the rate that was payable south of the border—a measure that has cost Scottish businesses more than £900 million in additional taxation. Our proposals do not stop there. We are also planning a £20 million annual town centre regeneration fund, which would be available for local communities throughout Scotland to bid into to pay for much needed improvements to, for example, car parking, signage or toilet facilities—or to pay for a shop-front scheme, for instance. We all know that many of our traditional town centres are suffering because of the growth in out-of-town retail parks and the construction of many new supermarkets, which are cheap and convenient and have free parking on their doorstep. We have to start levelling the playing field and breathing life back into our traditional town centres. That is exactly what our policies will do. There are many communities in my region—towns such as Kinross, Crieff, Blairgowrie, Brechin and Kirriemuir—where a package of business rates cuts for small businesses and a town centre regeneration fund would go a long way to reduce the number of empty properties and "to let" signs, which seem to be a feature of too many small town centres. Our proposals go even further. We are determined to tackle red tape and to bring in sunset clauses on new legislation. We will charge all quangos such as SEPA and Scottish Natural Heritage with an overriding obligation to promote economic growth. All too often, it is the actions of those quangos that hold up and hinder businesses that are trying to grow.

It will have a budget of £170 million. We are proposing to transfer away from Scottish Enterprise—which is a largely discredited organisation that deals with economic development—its remit for skills and training. We propose also to take Careers Scotland, which is currently an orphan organisation that nobody wants to have, and create a new skills agency that is focused on upskilling the economy. The current Scottish Enterprise budget for dealing with skills and training would be transferred over to that new agency. That is a sensible suggestion that I hope the Scottish National Party will be prepared to support—if it gets round to costing its own manifesto.  We will bring in new procurement rules to create a single point of entry to the public sector for businesses, and we will examine the application of European Union tendering rules to ensure that small businesses and social enterprises get a fair slice of the cake. One key difference between our plans and those put forward by the SNP is that, unlike it, we would not penalise small businesses with the introduction of the ludicrous local income tax. We need to remember that the vast majority of small businesses are unincorporated, so they pay income tax rather than corporation tax on their profits. Every penny of their profits is taxed at income tax rates and would be subject to the 6.5 per cent local income tax proposed by both the SNP and the Liberal Democrats.

Mr Neil is now going to justify that outrageous tax grab against small businesses.

We have made it perfectly clear where the money to fund our pensioner council tax discount will come from. When we move Scottish Water out of the public sector and create it as a mutual company, we will save the revenue subsidy that is currently paid. It is interesting that we have talked about mutualising Scottish Water for years and that we have been derided for being out of touch and extreme in proposing it, yet we now hear that the Liberal Democrats are joining us and support our policy. Is it not reassuring that Ross Finnie—the Scottish Executive minister responsible for Scottish Water—has now adopted our policy on Scottish Water? That proves that the Conservatives are the trend setters in Scottish politics. Mr Neil did his best to deflect us from talking about the local income tax, but he is not going to get away with it. The SNP is proposing uncosted plans for rates cuts for small businesses and proposing to take the money back through imposing a local income tax. The SNP and the Liberals would clobber small businesses with tax rises. They cannot be trusted.

Do I have time, Presiding Officer?

I will happily give way.

Nobody can prejudge the outcome of the election. Who knows where we will be after it? The Conservatives may be sitting here with a much expanded group and—as everybody is starting to accept—holding the balance of power. Let us not rule anything out. Who knows what may happen? We already see other parties taking their lead from us. I am pleased that Mr Purvis and his party have taken our lead on Scottish Water, and I am pleased to see other parties reacting to the lead that we have given on drugs policy. The Conservatives are setting the agenda. Even the SNP is following, with Alex Salmond talking about procurement on Monday. I am delighted that he has read our manifesto on procurement and is taking some lessons from us. It is encouraging to see that; it is just a shame that he will not be here after May to implement any policies. Small businesses in Scotland have been neglected by government at all levels for too long. It is time to give them a boost. They are the backbone of our economy. For too long they have borne the brunt of high rates, high water charges, poor transportation and excessive regulation. It is time to redress that balance, which is exactly what the Scottish Conservatives will do. I have pleasure in moving my amendment. I move amendment S2M-5690.1, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: "condemns the proposals put forward by the SNP and the Liberal Democrats for a local income tax which would represent a significant new financial burden for the many small businesses that are unincorporated; further condemns the policies of the Lib-Lab pact which have done so much to harm business, especially the decision taken by Jack McConnell MSP to abolish the uniform business rate in 2000 which has cost Scottish businesses an extra £900 million, and welcomes the fully costed proposals put forward in the Scottish Conservatives' business manifesto, including the abolition of business rates for all firms with a rateable value under £7,000, a tiered rates cut for all firms with a rateable value of between £7,000 and £15,000, a £20 million annual town centre regeneration fund, a dedicated public procurement unit to cut through the bureaucratised process of approval when businesses are tendering for public contracts, five-year sunset clauses on all primary legislation, a presumption against gold-plating of EU regulation, a new dedicated skills agency to work with  business, schools and colleges to tackle the skills shortage, extra investment in the road network to prioritise improvements on key links such as the A9, A75, A96 and A82, and the building of a new Forth crossing, a package which will deliver real benefits to Scotland's small business and lead to higher economic growth."

Will the member tell us how the SNP's plans for a local income tax of 6.5 per cent, which would be  paid on the profits of every unincorporated small business in Scotland, would help to grow the economy?

I will try to return to the subject that we are supposed to be debating. I commend Karen Whitefield for her efforts on this member's bill; even though I disagree with much of its content, I  know that she has put a lot of work into it and that it has taken up a lot of her time. However, the bill's passage through Parliament has been a sorry tale of Executive confusion. It is clear that, from the outset, the Executive has been in difficulty, and it has simply failed to provide leadership or set a clear line. That was summed up in the bizarre and sorry situation of amendments being lodged, but not moved, by the Executive during stage 2 consideration of the bill by the Justice 2 Committee, convened by my colleague Mr Davidson. Today the Executive has lodged a number of manuscript amendments, presumably because it cannot agree what position to take, but its sorry compromise is simply a fudge designed to win support from Labour back benchers. We are left with the rather unfortunate impression of an Executive that is in the pocket of the trade union lobby.

If the Executive is not even prepared to move its own amendments, it can hardly expect other members to support them at committee.

I am sorry, but Mr Purvis should not try to shift the blame for the situation. The trouble with the bill is that it tries to deal with two separate and distinct issues. I have no problem with the principle of protecting Christmas day—although, as I have pointed out before, there is no evidence base to suggest that we need legislation to do that at this stage. I accept that legislation might be required on this issue in future, but at the moment there is no evidence that shops are prepared to open on Christmas day. The position with new year's day is quite different. As we heard, there is clear demand from the retail industry and bodies such as VisitScotland for shops to open on new year's day. That is part of the tourist market. Simply to pass the bill without amendment, which would have prevented large shops from opening on new year's day, would have had a detrimental effect on the economy. The bill is inconsistent. For example, although the member intends the legislation to protect  workers' rights, it does nothing of the sort. All it does is to prevent shops above a certain size from opening their doors to the public. Of course, many people work in shops when they are not open to the public. Moreover, why should those who work in small shops not have the same protection afforded to those who work in large shops? Why should we offer protection only to shop workers in large shops and not to those who work, for example, in the hospitality industry, for which Christmas day and new year's day are among the busiest times of the year? The bill is arbitrary, not properly thought out and riddled with flaws and inconsistencies. The Executive keeps telling us that its top priority is growing the economy. However, this bill is a test of the balance between economic growth on the one hand and the lobbying power of the trade unions on the other. In deciding to lodge its compromise amendment, which puts the interests of the trade union lobby before the interests of economic growth, the Executive has made the wrong choice and come down on the wrong side of the debate. This is a sad and sorry tale, and we will not support the bill.

Would Mary Mulligan extend that criticism to her Liberal Democrat coalition colleagues?

The Scottish Conservatives' position on the bill has been clear from the outset—I made it clear when Parliament debated the bill at stage 1. We do not have difficulty with the provisions relating to Christmas day, although there is no evidence that there is demand for shops to open on that day and the case for legislation has not been made. However, we have a specific problem with the proposal to ban shops above a certain size from opening on new year's day, for the simple reason—as members of the Justice 2 Committee heard in evidence—that there is a developing trend, especially in Edinburgh and other large cities, for shops to open for part of new year's day. The Scottish Retail Consortium made it clear in its evidence that it sees the opening of shops on new year's day as an important part of the economy. The city authorities think that it is important to the development of the tourism trade around hogmanay and new year's day. As I said at stage 1, I can remember no more depressing place in previous years than Princes Street, Edinburgh, on the afternoon of new year's day, with all the shops shut and tourists wandering up and down looking forlornly in the windows. Parliament should not be in the business of closing down the economy, especially when steps are being taken to expand it. I listened with great interest to what Mary Mulligan had to say. She asked why shop workers should be the only people who are excluded from participating in the Christmas and new year's day holidays, but we should remember that many other  people have to work on new year's day; for example, new year's day is one of the busiest days of the year in the hospitality industry. Why should only workers in large shops be given a protection that will not be given to people who work in the hospitality industry or other industries? There is clearly inconsistency in the bill.

The minister makes the argument for extending the bill to cover shops of all sizes and other industries. Why does the bill restrict trading only in particular shops and not in the hospitality industry? The bill is flawed. We support amendment 1, which makes it clear that the bill will not apply to new year's day. However, amendment 2, which will keep the door open to a future ban on new year's day trading, is a fudge and represents a feeble attempt to find a compromise and spare the Executive's blushes by postponing a decision on new year's day trading, perhaps until after the election. We need legislation that is clear and not confused. Amendment 1 meets that test, but amendment 2 does not and we will not support it.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met the chief constable of Tayside police and what issues were discussed. (S2O-12178)

When the minister next meets the chief constable of Tayside police, she might like to ask him why only two out of 32 police stations in Tayside are open to the public 24 hours a day. Does she accept that in some of our smaller communities having a police station open 24 hours a day not only acts as a deterrent to crime, but provides reassurance to a public who are increasingly concerned about rising levels of crime and offences?

The background to this debate, as we know, is the 1.8 million objections on the Downing Street website to the road pricing scheme proposed by number 10 and Douglas Alexander. We lodged the motion for this morning's debate in the hope that we would get some detail from the Minister for Transport, Tavish Scott, and the  Liberal Democrats, in the form of Mr Rumbles, on exactly what they propose, but not a word of detail did we hear. Even when I challenged Mike Rumbles with a simple question about the cost of the proposed scheme and how it would be implemented, he could not answer. Mr Rumbles said that people were queueing up behind the Liberal Democrat scheme. If he had only looked over his shoulder at the Labour benches, he would not have seen a single person nodding in support of what he had to say.

As the RAC Foundation for Motoring poll found, nobody believes the Government when it says that the scheme will be revenue neutral, and I do not think that we can trust what the Liberal Democrats say on the matter. As Christine Grahame said in an eloquent contribution, like the rest of the country, Labour members are fed up with the duplicity of the Liberal Democrats. They are pro bridge tolls in Edinburgh and anti bridge tolls in Dunfermline. Despite this debate, we are none the wiser about whether we are talking about a Liberal Democrat or a Scottish Executive proposal.

I will make some progress and then give way. Tavish Scott said about road charging in an interview published on 7 February: "We need to make it happen more quickly in Scotland". On 13 February, a Scottish Executive spokesman told that fine organ, the Daily Mail : "The Transport Minister is in favour of the introduction of road user charging as a way of combating congestion. This should be done as part of a UK approach." Then, on 15 February, Annabel Goldie challenged Jack McConnell at First Minister's question time about whether it was the official policy of the Lib-Lab pact to make road charging happen more quickly in Scotland. The First Minister said no.

I will give way in a second. Now, we see the minister's amendment, on behalf of the Executive, the end of which states that the Executive "believes that the potential benefits of all new measures to tackle congestion, such as road user charging, need to be fully assessed, tested and evaluated in order to keep Scotland moving." What is the policy?

Mr Scott cannot get away with denigrating a fine publication such as the Daily Mail . I was simply quoting what an Executive spokesman told the newspaper, not the spin that it might have put on such a statement. We know that the amendment is simply a fudge to protect the Executive, as does everyone else. Indeed, it is perfectly clear from the demeanour of the Labour members sitting behind the minister that they know it too. Despite the denials, we have learned this morning that Tavish Scott wants Scotland to go it alone. Such a proposal is ludicrous, because it would require the devolution of fuel duty and road tax to Scotland and the implementation of border controls to prevent people from down south from driving to Scotland to fill up on duty-free petrol. It would turn Gretna into the biggest petrol station in Europe. I want to deal with the issue that has been exercising the Liberal Democrat members all morning: my own party's position on the matter. We have never said that, in principle, we would oppose an affordable and workable national road pricing scheme. However, as David Cameron, Chris Grayling and I have said all along, none of the current road pricing proposals is acceptable or workable. We simply cannot go down that road at this stage—unlike the Liberal Democrats, who, despite the fact that Tavish Scott's proposals do not meet any of the criteria, are determined to push ahead with the policy. We do not support tolls, because they are a regressive tax and, despite what Mike Rumbles says, they are not revenue neutral. They would involve huge set-up costs that would have to be paid for. If there was a resulting fall in the tax take and therefore in income to the Exchequer, the motorist would have to pay higher costs. In fact, no one believes the Government's claim that such tolls are revenue neutral. For example, in its poll, the RAC Foundation for Motoring asked the simple question:  "Research has found that the majority of motorists would support tolls on 10% of the most congested roads provided that there was a reduction in fuel duty. How confident are you that the Government would stick to this promise?" Zero per cent of respondents said that they were "Very confident", 16 per cent were "Fairly confident", 49 per cent were "Not very confident" and 35 per cent were "Not at all confident". That means that 84 per cent of respondents did not believe that tolls would be revenue neutral, because they cannot trust Governments north or south of the border. As for the SNP, it has made a massive U-turn this morning. After all, it supported part 3 of the Transport (Scotland) Bill in 2000. Mr Ewing might well smile at that—he knows that I am right to highlight this issue, because Bruce Crawford attacked us for opposing part 3. However, there is more joy in heaven over one sinner who repents than over all the other righteous persons, and I am delighted that Mr Ewing, who is blushing manfully on the SNP front bench, now accepts that we were right. I welcome the SNP's conversion to the stance that we have always taken against local congestion charges. Tavish Scott's proposal is unworkable in practice and undesirable in principle. No one believes that it would be anything other than an additional tax on motorists. The public can show its support for our stance on this issue by visiting our website www.scotlandsaysnototolls.com and joining the thousands of others who have already signed up. Tonight, the Parliament can vote to kick out Mr Scott's ludicrous proposal and consign Tavish's tolls to history.

Will the minister give way?

It was a statue.

Can we just get some clarity here—is it or is it not the policy of the Scottish Executive that we need to make road pricing happen more quickly in Scotland than in the rest of the UK? Yes or no?

Mr Rumbles has been careful to stress that the Liberal Democrats' proposal should  be adopted on a revenue-neutral basis. However, all the estimates suggest that the set-up costs of a national road pricing scheme would run into hundreds of millions of pounds. How can it be revenue neutral? Who will pay the cost? Is not it the case that there will have to be an additional tax to pay the running and set-up costs?

Will the member give way?

The SNP's amendment does not delete the part of our motion that calls for the repeal of part 3 of the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001. Do SNP members now accept that they were wrong to support part 3 of that act, and that they were wrong to attack us for opposing it?

The Conservative party has never said that it objects in principle to a national road pricing scheme. What differentiates us from the minister is that the minister wants a unique tax in Scotland alone. Is that not his position?

To ask the Scottish Executive how it is encouraging the development of small-scale hydro power schemes. (S2O-12015)

The minister will know that I have been corresponding with him about the delays that small-scale hydro developers face in obtaining section 36 consents. However, I raise another issue with him today. The cost of the planning application process includes a non-returnable fee that is payable to the Scottish Environment Protection Agency for the granting of a controlled activities licence. A developer of a small hydro proposal that generates 1.2MW has to pay an upfront, non-returnable fee of some £22,000 with no guarantee that the application will be successful. Does the minister accept that such fees put a barrier in the way of small-scale hydro developers, whom we should be encouraging if we are to meet our renewable energy targets?

It is perfectly fair for the European Commission to investigate claims of an unfair tax regime benefiting Iberdrola. However, does the minister agree that to argue in principle against all such takeovers would be to adopt a narrow and isolationist approach? Surely such a view would simply damage the Scottish economy in the long term. I am thinking in particular of Scottish companies such as the Royal Bank of Scotland that have been very successful in expanding their operations overseas.

Or draft budgets.

If the minister had listened to my speech, he would have heard me saying that we support national road pricing in principle. That does not mean that the current piecemeal approach, whereby there are tolls in some parts of the country and no tolls in other parts, should be taken. Such an approach discriminates against people in Fife and the east of Scotland.

I welcome this opportunity to debate the future of tolls on the Forth and Tay bridges. Scottish Tories believe that there can no longer be any justification for the tolls, which are a unique form of taxation on the people of Fife and the east of Scotland. The tolls have had their day and, today, Parliament must make it clear that they must go. The Conservative party does not object in principle to the idea of tolls in certain circumstances; indeed, the principle of a road pricing scheme is one that many people in our party find attractive, although the scheme that is currently proposed by the UK Government is too seriously flawed to merit support. It is not unreasonable to expect the users of major new infrastructure works, who will derive the most benefit from them, to make a direct financial contribution, but—this is an important "but"—if that is the principle that we apply, it should be applied equally in all parts of the country. Not long ago, we had in Scotland four toll bridges on the Forth, Tay, Erskine and Skye bridges. First, in order to appease the Liberal Democrats in the Highlands and Islands, the Executive removed the tolls on the Skye bridge. Then, Labour members in the west of Scotland started to rattle their cages, so the tolls were scrapped on the Erskine bridge, which left only the tolls on the Tay and Forth bridges. It is difficult to see the justification for that.

I notice that Mr Ballard did not refer to the Erskine or Tay bridges in his intervention. As someone who regularly uses the Forth bridge, I cannot imagine that having queues of traffic sitting idling their engines and churning out emissions is good for the environment. How can it be fair that people in Skye and Renfrewshire get a free bridge while those in Dundee and Fife have to pay? There is a simple argument for scrapping the tolls on the ground of equity, and that argument's time has come.  The Scottish Conservatives see a clear parallel between the Erskine bridge and the Tay bridge, both of which carry predominantly local traffic. Once the tolls had gone from the Erskine bridge, we called for them to be scrapped on the Tay bridge as well. We did not previously call for the scrapping of the tolls on the Forth bridge because there were financial implications for future budgets and, as a responsible opposition party, we wanted to consider the matter closely before we jumped to any conclusions. We have done that work and believe that the money can be found to fund the removal of tolls. When we publish our manifesto in a few weeks, the way in which we will fund that will become perfectly clear. Last week, we announced that the Scottish Tories would support the scrapping of tolls on the Forth bridge as well as on the Tay bridge in order let drivers to Fife and the east of Scotland enjoy the same rights as do people in other parts of the country. I listened with interest to what the minister had to say earlier. His attack on those who campaign for abolition would have a little bit more credibility had that campaign not been supported by people in his own party, such as Mr Smith and Mr Arbuckle who, in the past, have called for the abolition of tolls. It was noticeable that, when challenged, the minister did not rule out changing his stance in the run-up to the election. We will wait and see what the Liberal Democrats say in their manifesto and what their coalition partner says in its manifesto. We will see then whether the minister believes in the arguments that he has put today or whether he is simply grandstanding.

Yes—the minister is lining himself up for a massive U-turn. The real question this morning is not what the Tories and the SNP are going to do, but what the Labour and Liberal Democrat members who have expressed support for scrapping the tolls are going to do. What about Helen Eadie, Scott Barrie and Marilyn Livingstone? All have said in the past that the tolls should go. What about Andrew Arbuckle and Iain Smith who, in the past, have said the same but have, in typical Liberal fashion, weaseled out of their commitment when it came to voting in Parliament? Today is judgment day. An election is looming and they will be judged on their actions this afternoon. I hope that they have the guts, for once, to put their party allegiances to one side and do the right thing.

Mr Ballard is in favour of tolls. Will the Greens commit to reintroducing the tolls on the Skye and Erskine bridges?

This has been an interesting and, at times, entertaining debate. We have had well-informed contributions from across the chamber. It would be appropriate to start my speech by commending my colleague Jamie McGrigor for the effort that he put into producing his Scottish Register of Tartans Bill, which is what lies behind this debate and the process that we are engaged in. A lot of time and effort goes into the production of a member's bill. Members have to devote a lot of their time and their staff's time to ensuring that the bill progresses, and there are a lot of steps to go through with regard to consultation and so on. It is no small thing for any member to lodge a member's bill and see it make some progress. We should acknowledge the work that Jamie McGrigor has done on his bill and thank him for it. The intention behind the bill was the establishment of a publicly funded state register of tartans that, it was envisaged, would replace the existing private registers, which, in some ways, are in competition with each other and are, as the minister acknowledged earlier, incomplete. Although, as a Conservative, I always resist the idea of the state taking over successful private enterprises, there is an argument for a gap in the marketplace to be filled in order to address concerns that exist about the incompleteness of the registers and to counter the concern, which Jamie McGrigor expressed, that another country, such as Canada, could set up a register and take away what should be our birthright in Scotland. There has been general support for the principles of the bill from the industry. I welcome the support that has been expressed by the Scottish Executive for the general approach that the bill takes. I understand that the Executive will consider ways of progressing the issue, including non-legislative options and the commissioning of an economic impact assessment. It has been acknowledged across the chamber the tartan is an internationally recognised symbol of Scotland. There will be some who dismiss tartan as a Victorian affectation and invention—Christine May acknowledged that in her contribution—but its roots go much further back. In his speech, Jamie Stone rather stole my thunder  by giving a history lesson, so I will cut short my history lesson. However, it is important to remember that tartan was banned in 1747 by the Act of Proscription. The only exception was for uniforms of the Government army, and anyone transgressing the law would "be liable to be transported to any of His Majesty's plantations beyond the seas, there to remain for the space of seven years." It was some years later—in 1782—that the wearing of tartan was permitted. That move was accompanied by a proclamation declaring: "This must bring great joy to every Highland Heart. You are no longer bound down to the unmanly dress of the Lowlander." As we have heard, tartan very quickly became fashionable. It was that great Scottish Tory, Walter Scott, who made tartan and Highland culture fashionable once again to the extent that, as we have heard, George IV wore a kilt when he came to Scotland in 1822. What had been the culture exclusively of the Highlands became identified as the culture of the whole of Scotland, which was quite a change. Previously, lowlanders would have disdained Highland culture or looked on highlanders as strange savages from north of the Highland line, but suddenly everything associated with the Highlands—tartan, kilts, bagpipes and claymores—became what we now recognise as part of Scottish culture. I will close following my abbreviated history lesson. I thank Jamie McGrigor again for introducing the Scottish Register of Tartans Bill and giving us the opportunity to debate the issue.

I wonder whether the member would like to take this opportunity to apologise on behalf of the Whig Government of the time for the Act of Proscription 1747.

It is the belief of many living in areas—such as Perthshire—that have been affected by flooding in recent weeks that the discontinuation of the traditional practice of gravel extraction from river-beds has exacerbated the problem by raising water levels. Given that the practice has effectively been outlawed by the Scottish Environment Protection Agency, will the minister instruct the agency to reconsider the issue and review the impact that river dredging would have on river levels and on the propensity to flood?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. This is all very entertaining, but there is a serious point. The minister has made no attempt whatever to answer the substantive points that were put to him in two questions. He has responded by making party-political points. Under the standing orders of the Parliament, can you do anything to compel ministers at least to attempt to address the questions that are put to them?

Will the member give way?

Will the minister take an intervention?

We started this morning with a consensual debate on procurement from the Greens. I am disappointed that this debate will not produce the same cross-party consensus, but I am pleased that the Greens have acknowledged in their motion the growing pressure for privatisation of the water industry—a cause that we have championed for many years. I am delighted that it has been acknowledged that the campaign on water that we have been leading is attracting support from other quarters. People such as Sir Ian Byatt, Sam Galbraith, the former Labour minister, and Jo Armstrong, the former adviser to the First Minister, are all queuing up to support our calls for the privatisation of Scottish Water. I am delighted that the Scottish Green Party has acknowledged the fact that we are winning friends. Mark Ruskell said that Scottish Water had made some improvements, which I acknowledge. Six years after its creation, we have seen one year of improvements in Scottish Water. I pay tribute to the chairman, the board and the staff of Scottish Water for making that possible, but Scottish Water is still not doing as well as it should be doing and for the past five years it has woefully let down too many people in Scotland. Businesses have been overcharged. In February 2005, the Executive admitted that Scottish Water had overcharged businesses in Scotland by £44 million a year. In comparison with many companies down south, businesses in Scotland are still paying far too much for their water and are being put at a competitive disadvantage.

I am sure that the private sector will make errors in many cases.  I was going to talk about the Welsh Water model, which of course has support from Mr Stevenson's colleagues. If I remember correctly, his colleague Mr Gibson, who is sitting beside him, lodged a motion in 2005 praising the performance of Welsh Water, which was and is the top-performing private water and sewerage company in England and Wales. Perhaps we need a bit of consistency from the Scottish National Party. The problem with Scottish Water is that there are still inefficiencies in the system. Mark Ruskell did not mention development constraints, perhaps because the Greens do not really care about development. Such constraints continue to be a major problem and hold up development of the Scottish economy. We need to get more capital investment from Scottish Water. The Office of Water Services—Ofwat—report from last March ranked Scottish Water behind every one of the 22 private water companies south of the border. Yes, its performance has improved in the past year, but it has not improved enough and it needs to do more. It is a pity that the conclusion that the Greens drew in their motion, that Scottish Water needs to remain in public ownership, is a complete non-sequitur in the situation that we face. As members know, our proposal is to follow the Welsh Water model. It is a not-for-dividend model, where profits are reinvested. Need I remind members that Welsh Water is the best performing water company in the United Kingdom? It is efficient, it delivers high water quality and it delivers high levels of investment, because it can borrow money on the money markets. We do not mutualise Scottish Water purely because of the blinkered ideology of the other parties in this chamber. It is time to put the needs of the Scottish economy and the needs of water customers before dogma and to move ahead to mutualise Scottish Water. I move S2M-5510.1, to leave out from "further notes" to end and insert: "believes that Scottish Water is failing its customers because it is inefficient, misallocates resources, overcharges customers, particularly businesses which were overcharged by £44 million every year, and holds back much-needed development; further believes that Scottish Water must be removed from state control and transferred into a 'not-for-dividend' organisation in line with Welsh Water, and considers that this would enable Scottish customers to benefit from the lower costs and higher levels of service enjoyed by their counterparts south of the Border."

I congratulate the Greens on devoting some of their debating time to the important issue of public procurement. I do not want to disturb Patrick Harvie too much, but there is a worrying degree of consensus in the Parliament on the importance of the issue and on the practical solutions that we want to be put in place. The issue is one for the business sector, particularly small and medium-sized enterprises, and for environmentalists, because many of the measures that we want to take to change procurement are driven by an environmental agenda. The procurement problem has two distinct elements. The first is the difficulties that businesses, especially small businesses or social enterprises, face in tendering for contracts as a result of the volume of bureaucracy that is involved. Many small companies simply do not have sufficient time or resources to go through a different application procedure with each and  every public body with which they tender. One local authority will have a different set of procedures from the next, and the health boards, the Scottish Prison Service and the Executive will all have different procedures again. That creates a huge bureaucratic burden, particularly on small businesses, as larger enterprises can afford to employ dedicated procurement staff. Therefore, many small businesses simply opt out of bidding for procurement contracts, because it is not worth their while, which is a desperate pity. I recently spoke to somebody in business who said that the best message that he can give to government is, "Don't give us a grant; give us an order." If the huge public sector spend could be divvied up a bit more fairly so that it reached more small businesses, the benefit to the Scottish economy would be tremendous, particularly through the support for the smaller business sector. I acknowledge that the Executive is taking steps to address the problem through, for example, the introduction last January of the Public Contracts (Scotland) Regulations 2006 and the Utilities Contracts (Scotland) Regulations 2006, and the work that John McClelland has done in his review. However, John McClelland identified problems throughout the public sector. He called the approach to procurement policy "fragmented" and said: "Collaboration within organisations and across the sector ... has not been completely effective and must be improved." He also said that the best examples of procurement policy had become mere "islands of excellence". The second problem with procurement concerns the difficulties that some public agencies face. They often have the interests of small businesses at heart, but they are trying to administer contracts within the awkward straitjacket of European law and regulation.

There are different ways of approaching the issue. The problem is essentially that many public sector bodies are prepared to hide behind their interpretation of the European  rules instead of trying to work their way round them. If Mark Ballard looks at our amendment, he will see that it calls for a dedicated procurement unit in the Executive, which would be tasked with finding ways round some of the European regulations. As Mr Ballard said, an examination of the detail of European regulations often reveals that there are ways to get round them, such as by raising environmental issues. I will say a little bit abut how the Conservatives would address the problem. I mentioned our proposal for a new, dedicated procurement unit within the Executive. Such a unit would act as a single point of entry for the whole public sector and would process all the statutory requirements that a firm needed to fulfil before it was able to tender in a single step. The unit would also be charged with examining some of the more contentious aspects of procurement, such as aiding and encouraging social enterprises or small businesses in tendering and, of course, the promotion of local food, about which my colleague John Scott will talk more in a moment. There is a general consensus on the issue and all parties are heading in the same direction. I am grateful to the Greens for allowing us the opportunity to debate these important subjects and I hope that the Executive will make more concrete proposals for improving the situation. I move amendment S2M-5494.2, to leave out from "and calls on" to end and insert: "further regrets that, whilst there are some good examples of local food procurement in Scotland, as the Environment and Rural Development Committee's 8th Report (2006) notes, 'there is no sense that the Executive has a robust strategy for rolling this out'; further regrets the bureaucratic hurdles faced, especially by small and social firms, in tendering for public contracts, and therefore calls on the Scottish Executive to establish a dedicated procurement unit to act as a single point of entry for the public sector and to be tasked with taking forward ways of procuring local produce without contravening European law."

I thank the many members from different parties who have signed my motion and I thank those members who have stayed behind in the chamber for the debate. I take the liberty of expressing thanks, on behalf of the Parliament, to the local authorities and communities of Passchendaele, Wytschaete and Messines, and to the Memorial Museum Passchendaele 1917, for their work and planning of year-long events in 2007 to commemorate the 90 th anniversary of the battle of Passchendaele. I am sure that, during the debate, other members will join me in expressing our thanks to them. It is appropriate also to record my thanks to Dr Jean Turner, who lodged a motion in the summer of 2006 that praised the work and effort of the people of the municipality of Zonnebeke, in Flanders, for raising funds to build a Celtic cross there to commemorate Scottish and Scotland-related soldiers who fought in the great war. The battle of Passchendaele—also known as the third battle of Ypres—was launched on 31 July  1917 and continued until the fall of Passchendaele village on 10 November in the same year. The battle saw the greatest loss of life of any battle in the first world war. Almost 500,000 British, Commonwealth and German troops were killed, wounded or went missing. The whole of my allotted time this evening could be taken up describing the importance of the battle and the treacherous conditions in which the soldiers fought. It is hard for us, today, to explain or imagine what those men had to go through during the great war. However, I will concentrate on what is happening in Flanders in 2007 to mark the events of 90 years ago. The Memorial Museum Passchendaele 1917, in conjunction with a number of local communities, organisations and Governments, is planning events to commemorate the 90 th anniversary of the battle. As part of the commemorations, a monument will be erected as a memorial to all Scottish soldiers who took part in the battle—and, indeed, in the great war. As my motion sets out, several Scottish regiments played a pivotal role in the battle: they include the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders, based in Stirling, and the Black Watch, based in Perth. The Celtic cross is to commemorate not only Scottish soldiers, but also Commonwealth regiments and units that are linked to Scotland. For example, it will also be a memorial to the Canadian Seaforth Highlanders, who were based near Passchendaele, and the Nova Scotia Highlanders, who were on Passchendaele ridge. It is entirely fitting that the memorial is not just for Scots, but for soldiers of other nations, as it will symbolise the struggle that those men of different nations had to face together. The unveiling of the Celtic cross at Passchendaele will be the climax of the Scottish memorial weekend of 25 and 26 August. A weekend of events and activities is planned specifically to commemorate the Scottish soldiers, such as a highland games, a tattoo and visits to the battlefields on which Scottish soldiers fought. The cross will be of Scottish granite and set on a plinth of original bunker stones. It is intended to be an impressive monument: it will be roughly 3m high and on a plinth that will also be roughly 3m high. It will be located at Frezenberg, which is strongly connected to the role that Scottish soldiers played during the battle. It was there that the Scottish 15 th division launched an attack on 17 August 1917. Only weeks later, the Scottish 9 th division took over that sector. It is estimated that the cost of the memorial will be £21,000 and that the cost of the plinth will be £7,000. By September, around £14,000 had already been raised, primarily through the local communities where the memorial will stand. The  Flemish Government has also contributed to the cost of the cross, through a structural grant. In the motion that I lodged at the end of last year, I asked the Scottish Executive to mark the 90 th anniversary of the battle of Passchendaele and to contribute to the commemorations. It is envisaged that the memorial will be a landmark for the 400,000 visitors who come to the front each year to view the battlefields of the great war. I would be interested to learn whether the Executive intends to be represented at the Scottish memorial weekend and whether it will consider contributing to the commemorations. I am sure that the minister will agree that it is an excellent opportunity to emphasise the bond between Scotland and Flanders and to share in the links of our past. I understand that the Executive's office in Brussels has recently been in contact with the campaign. I would be interested to learn whether the Executive is aware of that contact and the outcome of that dialogue. I hope that the Parliament will agree that it is time to express our gratitude to the people of Flanders for the work they are doing to commemorate Scotland's fallen. It is certainly a worthwhile project and I am honoured to have the opportunity this evening to congratulate them in this chamber. I have particularly to record my thanks to Erwin Ureel, the co-ordinator of the Scottish memorial in Flanders campaign. Even during members' business, this Parliament does not often debate motions that have support from Conservative, Labour, Liberal Democrat, Scottish National Party, Green and independent MSPs. I hope that the Executive will recognise the work that has been carried out in Flanders and will contribute to the commemorations because this was a battle in which Scottish soldiers played a central role. We should not forget them, nor should we forget the horrors that they had to endure during the battle of Passchendaele. I would like to end by repeating Lieutenant Colonel John McCrae's famous poem, "In Flanders Fields", which remains to this day one of the most memorable war poems ever written. It was written only a few kilometres from where the Scottish monument will stand. Although it was written some time before the battle of Passchendaele was fought, it encapsulates extremely well some of the horrors of the great war. "In Flanders fields the poppies blow Between the crosses, row on row, That mark our place; and in the sky The larks, still bravely singing, fly Scarce heard amid the guns below. We are the Dead. Short days ago We lived, felt dawn, saw sunset glow, Loved and were loved, and now we lie In Flanders fields.  Take up our quarrel with the foe: To you from failing hands we throw The torch; be yours to hold it high. If ye break faith with us who die We shall not sleep, though poppies grow In Flanders fields."

The minister spoke for five minutes at the start of the debate and has spoken for three and a half minutes in his wind-up speech, but in that entire time he has not mentioned the subject of skills academies. Does the Executive have a view on the matter?

We did not say that.

Will the minister give way?

I am pleased that we have got here, Presiding Officer. We in the Scottish Conservative party have for many years championed the principle of extending to youngsters of school age the opportunity for vocational education. We believe that a system in which all children must concentrate fully on academic subjects after the age of 14 is increasingly out of date and that such an approach fails to meet the needs of our economy, given that employers tell us continually that school leavers often do not have the skills that employers seek. The current system fails too many youngsters, who are simply turned off by academic subjects and would welcome the opportunity for more vocational learning, which might help to motivate them to engage more fully with the school environment. We all know about the horrific statistics on the increase in school indiscipline and levels of truancy in the past eight years, which I do not need to repeat today. In promoting those ideas, it has, as always, been the Scottish Conservatives' ambition to promote a consensus and to seek to win friends for our approach. I am delighted that we seem to be winning converts to our cause. Other parties in the Parliament have in the past expressed their support for extending vocational education to those who are aged 14 and above although, to be fair, different approaches have been suggested as to how that might be implemented in practice. The latest convert is no less a person than the First Minister. Speaking at Labour's conference in Manchester in September, Jack McConnell acknowledged the problem of underachievement in our schools: "we can no longer tolerate the tail of underachievement. The bottom 20% for whom standards have failed to rise significantly since 1999—their achievements, opportunities and aspirations are a national priority. We must inspire those who are turned off by school. We must help those young Scots who leave school to do nothing. We will drive up standards in maths and English, specifically to give every young person the opportunity to pass a tough literacy and numeracy test before they leave school. And I want centres of excellence in schools and colleges—to provide all young Scots with proper vocational options from the age of 14. So today conference, I can announce that the 2007 Labour manifesto for Scotland will commit to new Skills Academies creating new opportunities in every part of Scotland." I would struggle to put it better myself.  The idea of skills academies is welcome, and is one on which I hope a new consensus will emerge. We therefore lodged our motion in the expectation that it would have broad support from throughout the Parliament, particularly from Labour members. We are thus rather disappointed that the Executive's amendment does not even mention skills academies, never mind give the idea the fulsome support that we might have expected from the language that Mr McConnell used just a few months ago. What can be behind the situation? Surely it cannot be another example of the Labour Party letting its junior partner in the coalition run roughshod over it. [ Applause. ] I welcome the Minister for Education and Young People to the chamber. He has made a rather belated appearance, but he is welcome nonetheless. Surely we have another example of the Liberal Democrat tail wagging the Labour dog. The irony is that, in the past, the Liberal Democrats expressed support for more vocational education. One might think that Liberal Democrat members would have a special interest in upskilling the workforce at this time. According to a YouGov poll that was reported yesterday, Liberal Democrat representation in the Parliament after the election in May will fall to a mere 14 members. I might have thought that the three Liberal Democrat MSPs who are facing redundancy and who will have to seek employment in the real world after May would be keen to acquire the skills that are necessary for the workforce. However, the Liberal Democrats are putting their party-political ideology ahead of the greater good and the interests of Scotland's youngsters. What might skills academies look like? The pronouncements from the First Minister have not contained a great deal of detail, so perhaps Labour members can further enlighten us today. A figure of 100 skills academies has been mentioned. I cannot imagine that they will all be new stand-alone schools, so I imagine that some at least will be within existing school campuses. Work is already being done on that. On Monday, I visited Forfar academy, where part of the school building is being converted into a vocational training centre, as part of a partnership between the school and Angus College. The development will give youngsters access to vocational training in various trades in the school environment. That is a welcome initiative, and I am sure that it can be replicated elsewhere in the country.

If one of the candidates for redundancy wants to intervene, I am happy to give way.

I shall happily expand on that point in due course, but perhaps Mr Rumbles might want to address the question to his Executive colleagues, who of course are the ones who have raised the issue. Perhaps the Minister for Education and Young People, in responding to the debate, might want to address the issue, given that skills academies are, we believe, a Labour Party proposal. We should have stand-alone skills academies. The Conservatives have in the past argued for a city academy in Glasgow to provide vocational training as an alternative approach to education for the city's youngsters. I hope that the First Minister is inclined to support that sort of initiative. There is no doubt that Scotland's employers are concerned about the need to address skills gaps, particularly among school leavers. Gerard Eadie, who is the chairman of CR Smith and the vice-chair of the Prince's Trust Scotland, has spoken out on the issue, saying that the advantage of vocational education is that it helps to impart soft skills, such as those relating to teamwork and discipline, and even literacy and numeracy skills, as well as the acquisition of hard skills. Other employers groups, such as the Confederation of British Industry Scotland, have welcomed the idea of skills academies. Some people will say that the proposal is all about going back to a two-tier system of education. The dinosaur tendency among some of the teaching unions has taken just such an approach. Reacting to the idea of skills academies, a representative of the Scottish Secondary Teachers' Association said: "It is going back to the bad old days." In the past, I heard the same argument from Labour members in the Parliament. However, that is not what the idea is all about—it is about giving all youngsters the opportunity to access a different type of education. It is also about acknowledging that many young people in our school system simply are not engaged with academic work, and that providing vocational education will be of particular benefit to them. The First Minister was quoted in the Sunday Herald on 24 September as saying: "Vocational courses will motivate kids who are maybe heading off the rails and give them a subject that really interests them."  We know that we have a serious problem in Scotland with youngsters who are not in employment, education or training. The proposal is part of the answer to that problem. I am glad that the debate on Scottish education is starting to move on. I have never believed that we need a one-size-fits-all approach to education. Too many of Scotland's youngsters have not been well served by that approach in recent years. Opening up opportunities to vocational education and creating skills academies will be good for the education system, good for our economy and employers and, in particular, good for our nation's youngsters. I hope that there will be support throughout the chamber for our motion, which is about taking Scotland forward. I move, That the Parliament believes that our education system should provide children with opportunities to flourish along the lines of their own particular aptitudes and inclinations; notes that for many children over the age of 14 this could predominantly involve activity in a practical or vocational sphere, rather than in a traditional academic one, and welcomes the proposal to establish skills academies, be they stand-alone or attached to schools or colleges, depending on what is most appropriate for a local area, as centres of excellence to extend opportunities to access vocational education to students from the age of 14.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. No member of the Executive is here to respond to the debate. Is it competent for the debate to proceed without a member of the Executive to move the Executive's amendment and respond to the debate?

On a further point of order, Presiding Officer, the subject of this morning's debate is education, with specific reference to skills academies. The motion that we have lodged refers to skills academies, as does the amendment that Fiona Hyslop lodged on behalf of the Scottish National Party. However, the Executive's amendment, in the name of Robert Brown—who is absent from the chamber—does not refer to skills academies. Is that amendment competent, given that it does not address the subject of the debate?

Is it still Liberal Democrat policy to privatise the Post Office?

I welcome the debate. As we have heard, the future of the rural sub-post office network is a vital issue for much of Scotland. I appreciate that support for sub-post offices is reserved, but it impacts on the economy of rural Scotland. Accordingly, the Scottish Executive must take an interest. Even the Labour amendment acknowledges that point.

Christine Grahame makes a fair point. The motion and the Labour amendment refer to the Scottish Executive but no one is here to represent the Executive's view on the matter. Ministers require to reflect upon that. For people living in rural Scotland, local sub-post offices are part of the fabric of local life. Over a long period, many local communities have seen services being run down. We have seen the closure of local shops, primary schools and churches in many communities. In many of those  places, the local sub-post office remains the sole hub of community life. This is not just an economic issue but an important social one. Rural sub-post offices are particularly well used by the elderly, many of whom lack their own transport. The closure of those sub-post offices would increase the social exclusion and isolation of many in that group. I listened with interest to the warm words of Sylvia Jackson, on behalf of Labour, about the post office network. The fact is, however, that under the Labour Government at Westminster we have already lost a quarter of the United Kingdom's post office network. The impact of such closures has been felt throughout Scotland. Last week, Alistair Darling, the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, outlined the Government's approach to post offices, which included a prediction that 2,500 more post offices throughout the UK would close from the summer of next year. That is a depressing picture. It will have a serious impact throughout rural Scotland.

I would like to make some progress, if I may. The Labour Government uses as its excuse for those closures the fact that post office revenue has declined. The irony, to which I refer in my amendment, is that that decline in revenue comes largely as a result of conscious decisions by the Government to take business away from the post office network and make it uncompetitive. As Sylvia Jackson said, society has changed and people are behaving in different ways, but that should not be an excuse for the Government taking deliberate actions that have exacerbated the situation. For example, switching benefit payments from post offices to bank accounts effectively withdrew a major source of revenue from local post offices. They lost not just the transaction costs but the footfall—those who collected benefits often spent cash in the post office or the attached local shop.

I am afraid that I am in my last minute, Mr McNeil. The Government introduced the Post Office card account then pledged to discontinue it but, in the teeth of widespread opposition, supported by my Conservative colleagues at Westminster, I am pleased to say that it has performed a U-turn on that proposal. There are other examples, such as the television licence situation, which has been referred to, and the situation with road tax. We need a new approach. My Conservative colleagues at Westminster have already pledged that they would rewrite sub-postmasters' contracts  to allow them to provide a greater range of products and services, including private mail services. The long-term future of the network will be best secured if post offices open up to new markets and new customers. The Scottish Executive could be doing much more with new schemes to support the post office network directly. Last week, Alistair Darling announced a consultation exercise, which is due to end in March—a cynical exercise to try to park the issue until after the Scottish Parliament elections. If that is his intention, he will be sadly disappointed. Post offices will be a major issue in the Scottish Parliament elections. I move amendment S2M-5349.1, to insert, after first "Government": "notes that decisions taken by the UK Government have themselves contributed to the losses being made by the post office network and that it is therefore disingenuous for ministers to justify the extensive scaling down of the network on the basis that it is losing money; believes that the UK Government should seek to bring new business opportunities to the network rather than merely manage its decline".

We have a repeat offender.

For clarity, Presiding Officer, I should correct your pronunciation of "Scone".

Thank you. I thank all the members of different political parties who signed my motion, which calls for the return of the stone of destiny to Scone Palace. St Andrew's day two weeks ago was the 10 th anniversary of the return of the stone of destiny to Scotland. All students of Scottish history are aware of the stone's significance. It was the seat on which the ancient kings of Scotland were crowned in Scone, which was Scotland's ancient capital. The stone was located in Scone for hundreds of years until 1296, when it was stolen by Edward I of England and taken to Westminster abbey, where it was incorporated into the coronation chair. From then on, kings and queens of England and, after the union of the Crowns, kings and queens of the United Kingdom, were crowned on it. Legend has it that the stone's history goes back further. It is reputed to be Jacob's pillow, from the Holy Land. According to Genesis chapter 28, Jacob used the stone as a pillow on the night when he dreamed he saw a ladder from earth to heaven on which angels ascended and descended and he heard the voice of God telling him that the land would be his and his offspring's in perpetuity. It is worth acknowledging that there is some doubt as to whether the stone, which currently sits in Edinburgh Castle, is the real one. The legendary Jacob's pillow was reputedly a black stone covered with ancient carvings, quite unlike the piece of Perthshire sandstone that Edward I  took to Westminster 710 years ago. In fact, the suspicion is that the abbot of Scone at the time pulled a fast one on King Edward and hid the real stone and substituted a block of local rock. Perhaps Edward did not see the funny side, because he returned to Scone a year later and sacked the abbey. I do not know the truth of the matter, but it seems likely that, if the real stone had been concealed, it would have come to light after Scotland's independence was regained under Robert the Bruce. However, whether the current stone is actually the ancient stone of destiny, it is nevertheless an important historical artefact. The kings and queens of England and then Great Britain have been crowned upon it for the past 700 years, so unless or until the real stone comes to light, it will certainly remain an important symbol. In 1996, the then Secretary of State for Scotland, Michael Forsyth, arranged for the stone of destiny to be taken back to Scotland on the 700 th anniversary of its removal. At that time, it was placed in Edinburgh Castle, where it still sits along with the honours of Scotland. I understand the reasons for the decision to put the stone in Edinburgh at that time, although I do not agree with them. There was a concern that the stone was at risk from theft and it was felt that putting it in the security of Edinburgh Castle would safeguard it.

I agree with Mr Crawford. As he will recall, the then Conservative member of Parliament for North Tayside, Mr Bill Walker, argued that particular case. There is no historical, political, constitutional or economic reason why the stone of destiny should be located in Edinburgh. Indeed, I believe that the first time that the stone was ever in Edinburgh in its entire history was when it arrived there 10 years ago. Prior to its removal from Scotland by Edward I, it had been located in Scone for hundreds of years. It is now time for it to be returned to its rightful home. I understand that practical difficulties would have to be overcome: a new setting would have to be created for the stone at Scone Palace and adequate security safeguards would have to be put in place. However, none of the problems is insurmountable. I want to hear from the Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport that the Executive would consider the issue seriously if a proposal were  made to have the stone relocated, with its security safeguarded. Although there may be good historical and even romantic reasons for having the stone returned to its rightful home, there are good economic reasons, too. I do not believe that there is any economic benefit to Edinburgh from having the stone in its current location in Edinburgh Castle. Last week, I went to see the stone there, where it sits rather incongruously in a glass case alongside the honours of Scotland. I do not believe that anyone makes a special trip to Edinburgh Castle just to see it, as so many other attractions are available on site. However, there is an opportunity for economic benefit for Scone and Perthshire through the creation of a new visitor attraction based around the stone at Scone. That would also allow the stone to be presented in its appropriate historical context rather than mixed in with the crown, sceptre and sword of state, which date from much more recent times. Scone Palace is certainly keen to have the stone back. Viscount Stormont told me today that he accepts that there is an understandable objection to the stone being handed over to a private individual. He believes that it should be housed in a specially designed chapel, which would be appropriate, as the stone is a religious relic that is mentioned in the Bible and which was regarded in ancient times as holy. The chapel could be on the site of the stables at Scone Palace or perhaps beside them, with a design to be selected by committee, which would of course include the Mansfield family. An important point is that, under such a scheme, it is envisaged that there would be free admission for those who wish to view the stone, which would be an improvement on the current situation, whereby those who wish to see it have to pay the admission charge at Edinburgh Castle, which currently is £10.30 for an adult. The Mansfield family is keen for the stone to be returned and would work with others to create a suitable home for it, which I am sure would be a major tourist attraction. For the economic and historical reasons that I have outlined, I believe that it is time for the stone of destiny to be returned to Scone. I hope that the Scottish Executive will be prepared to set the wheels in motion this evening.

I wish to address not so much the substance of Roseanna Cunningham's amendments but the atmosphere of this morning's debate in the chamber and the wider debate that has taken place over the past week. Whatever we think of these amendments, there is no doubt that Roseanna Cunningham has raised genuine concerns that are shared by many people. Many believe that children need male and female role models and they are concerned that adoption by same-sex couples excludes such a possibility and is simply not in children's best interests. People who express such views are not homophobes, extremists or—as some suggest—religious nutters. They have genuine concerns that should not be dismissed with name calling and abuse. The point is that although such views might well be unpopular in the chamber, they reflect wider concerns throughout Scotland. We in the Parliament should take seriously and reflect on the views of people outside the chamber, even if we disagree with and subsequently dismiss them.

I am sorry; I do not have time.  I believe that we all want to live in a liberal and tolerant society; indeed, we have heard as much from different parts of the chamber. However, one old definition of a liberal is someone who allows all opinions to be heard, except those with which he disagrees. We are in danger of falling into that trap in this debate. The Parliament needs to be a bigger and better place than that and I commend Roseanna Cunningham for at least giving us the opportunity to debate these issues.

I congratulate John Swinney on securing a debate on what is an important matter for the whole of rural Scotland. I appreciate that support for sub-post offices is reserved to Westminster but, given its impact on the economy of rural Scotland, I believe that the Scottish Executive must take an interest in the issue. I raised the matter with the Deputy Minister for Communities at question time last week, and I am sure that it will be a live issue over the coming months. Only yesterday, the DTI indicated that there will be a phased reduction of post offices, which means that hundreds of rural post offices in Scotland are likely to close. Recently, the chief executive of Royal Mail, Adam Crozier, stated that he can meet his legal obligations with a network of just 4,000 post offices in the UK. These are worrying times for sub-postmasters and those who depend on sub-post offices. The DTI also announced yesterday that the consultation period will run until March, and any decisions will be taken after the Scottish Parliament elections in May. Even by the standards of this Labour Government, that appears to be a deeply cynical approach and an attempt to kick the issue into the long grass until after the election. The Government can be assured that it will not get away with trying to cover up the issue.  I will outline what is happening in some areas of my parliamentary region of Mid Scotland and Fife. In 1999, the parliamentary constituency of North Tayside had 50 post offices. Under the proposed plans, the number would be reduced to 27—a cut of almost half. In Perth constituency, the number would fall from 31 in 1999 to 20. In Stirling constituency, it would fall from 37 to 27. Those are depressing figures that do not give much hope to the post office network or the customers who use it. My Conservative colleagues at Westminster have already pledged to rewrite sub-postmasters' contracts to allow them to provide a much greater range of products and services, including private mail services. They have also called on the Government to review its decision to abolish the Post Office card account, which is hugely important to people who do not have bank accounts. Around 1 million of our most vulnerable people cannot or do not have bank accounts. The Post Office card account is a vital source of revenue for post offices. Part of the solution is to encourage new sources of income for post offices. We could encourage local councils to examine what services could be provided through the post office network. A council counter could be set up to offer advice on local services. The local post office could be used as a kind of Government general practitioner, with trained staff advising on a range of matters, including pension entitlements, benefits and how to apply for disabled parking badges. The problem is that those and other schemes that have been piloted, such as links between post offices and the police, will only ever be part of the solution; they will never replace in its entirety the existing post office support. I echo the calls that others have made for the Executive to make serious representations to the DTI about the detrimental impact that closures would have on Scotland's rural economy.

As a member of the Enterprise and Culture Committee, I record my thanks to the clerks for all their assistance in dealing with the bill. Many a happy hour was spent in committee addressing the issues and considering amendments at stage 2. I also record my thanks to Nicholas Grier, the committee adviser, who brought the, dare I say it, necessary level of expertise in helping committee members to address some of the legal issues that were presented to us.  The background to the bill is the serious and worsening situation with sequestrations in Scotland, the number of which rose from 2,700 in 1997-98 to 3,500 in 2004-05, while the number of protected trust deeds rose from 890 to more than 6,000 in the same period. That reflects a wider culture in society of growing personal debt. The level of personal debt in the United Kingdom is estimated to be £1.1 trillion, which is a staggering sum that is unprecedented in our country's history. A recent YouGov survey for The Scotsman found that one in five Scots have unsecured debts that are in excess of £10,000 and that 20 per cent of those people say that they are seriously considering declaring themselves bankrupt. We have a culture of spend now and worry later. The bill deals with timely and appropriate law reform and I believe much of it to be necessary and welcome. I record my appreciation of the minister's approach to the bill and of his willingness to engage with the various stakeholders and listen to interested parties who wanted certain amendments to be lodged. Further, I am grateful to him for accepting some of the points that I made about floating charges. Some of the reforms—specifically the abolition of sequestration for rent and the abolition of the landlord's hypothec, which commercial lawyers will have enjoyed using—will be regretted but, over the piece, the provisions in the bill make a lot of sense. There is an exception to that, which I will come to shortly. The central thrust of the bankruptcy part of the bill is to reduce the period of bankruptcy from three years to one year. That is the central policy change. The committee looked in vain for evidence of the good reasons behind the change. Originally, we were told that the bill would encourage enterprise. However, as the committee found out through figures that were provided by the Institute of Chartered Accountants, only a fraction of bankruptcies are business related—the great majority are personal bankruptcies. Frankly, therefore, there is little evidence that the bill will do anything to encourage an entrepreneurial culture. In fact, it seems that the change might be driven primarily by a desire to draw the law in Scotland into line with the law in England, where the bankruptcy period was reduced to one year in the Enterprise Act 2002, the consequence of which has been an even greater acceleration in the number of personal bankruptcies. Whatever the Executive's intention—and I do not for a second believe that the Executive intended to increase the number of bankruptcies—the change in the law will mean that bankruptcy is increasingly seen as being an easy option and an easier way of getting rid of debt and coming through the other side of a crisis. I cannot think  that that is in the interests of this country or this Parliament. I agree with much of what Kenny MacAskill said about land attachment, although the way in which he presented his case was unfortunate. Throughout the process, we never heard a convincing case from the stakeholders for the new attachment. No one was calling out for the new diligence to be created, yet the Executive seemed determined to press ahead with it. This is a flawed piece of legislation. I fear that it will normalise bankruptcy, making it the normal way in which people deal with debt. I fear that it will give rise to an even greater increase in personal bankruptcy.

I am over my time limit already, but I am happy to give way if the Presiding Officer will allow it.

I cannot believe that passing legislation that will result in increased levels of personal bankruptcy is in the interests of our country, given the background of rising personal debt. Therefore, we will not support the bill this evening.

I fear that this group, unlike the last, will be of limited interest, other than to commercial lawyers. As I have been a commercial lawyer myself—and, who knows, I might have to be one again—it is of considerable interest to me. [ Applause. ] I thank my fellow members for that vote of confidence. Amendment 70 originated with the Law Society of Scotland, and requires the sheriff, when considering whether to make an order under section 88(2), "to have regard to the desirability of securing that a person who, before the notice of land attachment was registered, has completed missives for the purchase of the property is able to acquire title to the property." The bill, as currently drafted, recognises that a warrant for sale following an effective land attachment may adversely affect the position of an innocent third party who, in good faith, contracted to purchase the property prior to the attachment. Following the recommendations of the Scottish Law Commission report on diligence in 2001, the bill includes a dual mechanism to protect such purchasers, first by providing that a warrant for sale cannot be granted until six months have elapsed since the registration of the attachment, and secondly by allowing purchasers to make representation to the sheriff, who may sist the application to allow the purchase under contract to be completed. In most standard conveyancing transactions, as members will be aware, six months is sufficient for completion, and that mechanism will provide adequate protection for purchasers under the prior missives. However, a significant minority of transactions cannot be completed within a six-month timescale, usually because the transaction is dependent on the granting of planning permission, which can often be a lengthy process, particularly if an appeal is involved. Although it is still open to the sheriff to sist the application in such cases, there is a legitimate concern that the legislation offers no further guidance in that decision-making process, and that it leaves open the possibility that an application will not be sisted and a warrant for sale granted. The effect of transactions of that kind, which often involve the investment of large sums of money, may be  greatly prejudiced if the purchaser has little in the way of guarantee that the transaction will be safeguarded against the intervention of a land attachment, possibly for as little as £3,000. At stage 2, I introduced a similar amendment, which the committee voted on and disagreed to, as it would have obliged the sheriff to sist the application for a warrant for sale and required the prospective purchaser to pay the price under the contract to the creditor, where missives for the purchase of the land had been entered into, before the land attachment was registered. During debate on that amendment, the minister said that the best way forward in such a case was to allow the contract to be completed, but he raised concerns that the amendment would not allow the sheriff discretion not to sist, particularly when there was likely to be a sizeable delay before the purchase price would be payable. Amendment 70 is designed to accommodate those concerns by placing no obligation on the sheriff to sist. It would simply require the sheriff "to have regard to the desirability of securing that a person who, before the notice of land attachment was registered, has completed missives for the purchase of the property is able to acquire title to the property." It would not remove the sheriff's discretion; it would simply offer guidance on the outcome that should be aimed for. It would allow the sheriff to proceed with the application for land attachment when they felt that it was appropriate, for example when the delay involved would be excessive. I hope that that is sufficient explanation. I move amendment 70.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I do not think that I will take two minutes. I listened to the minister with great interest. Amendment 70 deals with an important point. We are seeking to create certainty in the purchase process to aid future investment and development. Without the amendment, the bill will create a degree of uncertainty that will not be helpful for future purchases. I intend to press the amendment.

I appreciate that the issue is reserved, but there would be serious implications for the economy and quality of life in rural Scotland if there were widespread closures of rural sub-post offices. Will the minister ensure that the Department of Trade and Industry is made aware of the high level of concern throughout rural Scotland about the impact of the removal of sub-post offices? Will the Executive commit to working with the DTI to see what solutions might be put in place to safeguard those vital local services?

I referred earlier to my concerns about land attachment, which have been echoed around the chamber. I do not intend to repeat all the points that have been made. It is worth commenting that, when the committee considered the bill at stage 1, there was no evidence whatsoever of any demand from any quarter for the introduction of the new diligence. The credit industry and debt recovery agencies did not say that it must be introduced, so it is difficult to see what justification there is for it. Having said that, I understand what the minister has said about the bill requiring to be a balance. The difficulty is that if we make diligence too hard for the creditor, it will go straight for bankruptcy, under which the family home is not protected. Therefore, there is a balance to be drawn. It is not quite as simple as saying that we cannot have any form of diligence against property.

The point is that I do not believe that the bill protects the family home, because any creditor owed a debt of more than £3,000 can petition for sequestration, which has the result that the family home becomes available. I am trying to make the point that there is no protection for the family home in the bill. There is another point worth making. Sometimes the debate is presented along the lines of those who seek to recover money being large companies and credit agencies that attack the poor. We must remember that the great majority of diligences—more than 80 per cent in Scotland—are instructed by the public sector. By far the largest users of debt recovery are local authorities seeking to recover council tax and business rates. We need to remember that when we debate the issue. There is a balance to be struck. I welcome the Executive amendments, although I feel that they have not gone far enough. There are some attractions in Alex Neil's amendment 150, but the difficulty is that if we exempt the dwelling-house completely from land attachment, it will encourage creditors to go straight for bankruptcy. I do not believe that that is in the wider interest of either the debtor or society, so I oppose amendment 150.  Amendment 154, in the name of Alex Neil, is a sensible amendment to ask the sheriff to have regard to all the circumstances in the case. We will support both that and the amendments in Gordon Jackson's name. They build in a review process, which is a sensible additional approach.

I will try to be equally brief. The part of the bill on land attachment is one of the most contentious parts, and the committee considered it in some detail at stage 1. We recognise that concerns have been expressed about it throughout civic Scotland. Many members will have been lobbied by Citizens Advice Scotland and other bodies that have concerns. A range of amendments have been lodged on the matter. I can see what Christine May is trying to achieve with amendment 148, but I am not attracted to it. In practice, it would be difficult to implement and enforce a hierarchy of diligence. For that reason, we are not inclined to support amendment 148, but we will support some of the other amendments on the matter when they are considered later.

Mr MacAskill has a fair case, but he does himself and his case no favours in overstating it. Frankly, the use of terms such as "vultures" does nothing to persuade other members to support him. The Enterprise and Culture Committee considered the issue at stage 1. Those who have ownership of a firm of sheriff officers or judicial officers need not themselves be qualified—an argument has not been made for that. We already have firms of sheriff officers that are owned externally and I am not aware of any problems or difficulties that have arisen as a result. There is therefore no evidence to suggest that a problem is likely to be created. We should oppose unnecessary restraints on trade if we are in favour of promoting business. Therefore, we will oppose amendments 206 and 52.

Will the minister give way on that point?

I notice that the minister did not mention amendment 24 in his remarks. I ask him to clarify his intentions in that amendment because I find it to be completely incomprehensible. I am not sure whether it is badly drafted or its intention is mistaken. Although I will not oppose amendment 21, I draw the minister's attention to concerns that have been expressed by the Law Society of Scotland, of which I am a member, although not a practising member. The Law Society is concerned that a continuation of sequestration proceedings could have a number of negative effects. First, it would allow the debtor to continue trading and dealing with others, which would give them the potential to run up more debts. Secondly, it would delay the vesting in the trustee of the estate the assets of the debtor for the benefit of all creditors. Thirdly, it ignores the many interconnected time limits that are set down in bankruptcy legislation and would therefore jeopardise the proper operation of the sequestration process. The Law Society says that if the measure is to be passed, there must be proper analysis of the impact on sequestration and a proper review of time limits. I ask the minister to address those points when he winds up.

I want to thank the minister for addressing the concerns that I expressed at stage 2 on the impact of floating charges.  Amendment 38 agreed to.  Amendment 39 moved—[Allan Wilson]—and agreed to.

I thank the minister for his explanation. It took me back to halcyon days spent in conveyancing tutorials when I was a law student. However, to be serious, amendments 64, 86 and 88 deal with important issues. I welcome the fact that the legal anomaly that has existed for some years will be addressed by the Executive's amendments. They will receive our support.

The issue of credit unions was raised by the Enterprise and Culture Committee and debated at stage 2. The minister has lodged amendment 65 to address some of the committee's concerns, which we welcome, but there is a wider concern about protected trust  deeds. The committee considered the way in which the bill deals with them, and there is a concern that the Executive has not properly joined up its thinking on the future of protected trust deeds with the other reforms in the bill. Protected trust deeds are valuable, not least because they are administered by the private sector, not by the Accountant in Bankruptcy. We need to address the future of protected trust deeds in a comprehensive manner, working with the insolvency profession. That approach is required, and it is regrettable that it is not happening in tandem with the bill. However, we are happy to support amendment 65.

As the minister said, amendment 12 will remove the ministerial power to vary the bankruptcy period, which the bill will reduce from three years to one year. It would be unusual for Conservative members to oppose measures to restrict ministerial powers, but we make an exception in this case. The central policy intent behind the bankruptcy part of the bill is to reduce the bankruptcy period from three years to one year, but the case for doing so has not yet been proven. The Enterprise and Culture Committee received no convincing  evidence as to why that policy intent should be followed through in legislation. Indeed, the only reason that seems to have been given for the proposal is that it will bring the legislation into line with the legislation down south. That is an insufficient policy reason to convince us that the proposal is the right way to proceed. Since a similar change was introduced south of the border, the number of personal bankruptcies has surged. I do not know whether one year is the correct bankruptcy period, but it might be useful to have available to ministers a subordinate legislation power to increase the period from one year to two years, three years or whatever, in the light of experience, without members having to come back to the chamber to pass primary legislation. We oppose amendment 12.

What?

I was, of course, referring to the United Kingdom economy. Does Mr Neil appreciate that the competition, in European terms, is not significant?

I did not think that I would live to see the day when I would hear Mr Maxwell calling for people to drink more—

Of course, Mr Maxwell. The Scottish Conservatives have supported the bill since stage 1 and we will be happy to support it at decision time today.  I commend Dennis Canavan for the way in which he has pursued the issue and for all the work that he has put into winning support for his bill. He did a tremendous job in consulting interested parties and rallying support for his proposal. As Mr Maxwell said, for a back bencher to achieve the passage of a bill on to the statute book is no mean feat, especially if the back bencher is, like Dennis Canavan, not a member of an Executive party. Then again, if today's edition of The Herald is to be believed, that may not be the case for much longer. It is rather regrettable that it has taken us so long to get to where we are today. We had the opportunity to pass the bill last year, but the Executive decided at that time that it would not support the bill and that more work required to be done. It is a pity that time was wasted when we could have made some progress. We have always accepted that the bill will not of itself create a public holiday. As Mr Canavan admitted, it is not legislatively competent for this Parliament to create or enforce a new holiday. The bill is simply permissive.

I hate to think how many holidays we would have if Mr Neil had his way. We must take a responsible attitude. Members from different parties made the case that we are at the bottom of the league table in Europe for holidays, but we must remember that we have one of the most competitive economies in Europe—perhaps the two matters are not unlinked. The Scottish Executive's support was crucial to the bill, because if the Executive were not prepared to take the lead in encouraging public sector employees to take St Andrew's day as a holiday, it would be a pointless piece of legislation. It was vital that the Executive showed support for the bill. Our position all along was that we did not wish an additional holiday to be granted. The Enterprise and Culture Committee heard strong evidence to that effect from employers organisations. An extra day of no trading or production, for which staff would still have to be paid, would place a burden on the business community, especially small businesses. We are pleased that the Executive has come round to our way of thinking—that a St Andrew's day holiday should be granted, but as a substitute for a holiday at a different time of year. It is just a pity that the Executive did not come round to that view earlier. However, we now have the best of both worlds.  I am pleased that we will have a holiday celebrating St Andrew, who is our patron saint. St Andrew was our Lord's first apostle, a fisherman from Galilee who was executed by the Romans. Legend has it that his bones were taken by St Rule or St Regulus to St Andrews, which led to that town's foundation. We share St Andrew as a patron saint with other countries, such as Russia and Greece, so he is by no means exclusive to Scotland. The bill will not create a holiday, because we do not have the power to do that, but it gives us the opportunity to use St Andrew's day to promote Scottish identity in the same way that the Irish have built up St Patrick's day. Just as St Patrick's day is now internationally recognised and delivers substantial economic benefit, so St Andrew's day can be of benefit to the Scottish economy. St Patrick's day is now worth about €80 million to the Dublin economy alone. We have a great opportunity to make St Andrew's day worth an equivalent sum, if not more, to the Scottish economy, and I look forward to St Andrew's day being celebrated throughout Scotland in future years.

The minister will know that I have written to him about the problems for tourism businesses in remote, rural areas that cannot access broadband, which are at a competitive disadvantage because so many bookings are now made over the internet. Therefore, I was interested in and pleased to hear what he said. Will he give comfort to those businesses on when the broadband programme might be rolled out, so that their competitive disadvantage can come to an end?

Oh, for goodness' sake.

I am grateful to the minister. Does she believe that it is helpful to the debate to have a Labour member dismissing the concerns of the tourism industry as "rubbish"?

I begin by praising my colleague David Davidson, who is the convener of the Justice 2 Committee, and, to be fair, Jeremy Purvis for adopting a consistent approach throughout the bill's consideration. That is in contrast to the position of the SNP, which has flip-flopped on the issue. The arguments of Stewart Maxwell—who I note has learned from Jim Mather how to keep a diplomatic absence from the  chamber—seemed to be ignored by his party. I listened with interest to the SNP speakers in the debate and not a word of explanation was given as to why their view differed from that of Mr Maxwell, who is a member of the committee that considered the bill. In addition to the arguments that I used earlier, there are two further reasons why I believe that the bill is flawed. First, although Karen Whitefield's intention is that the bill should protect workers' rights, it would do nothing of the sort. Tommy Sheridan made a point about that with which I agree. All that the bill would do is prevent shops above a certain size from opening their doors to the public, but as has been mentioned during the debate, a shop does not have to be open for it to employ staff, for example to replenish the shelves. Over Christmas and new year, when the so-called January sales are about to begin or are in full swing, there is a particular need for people to work to set up the sales. The bill would do nothing to prevent people from having to work even though the shop may not be open. I have sympathy for the argument of Jeremy Purvis, who said that the debate should be about employees' rights. I have sympathy with the idea that we should protect the rights of employees on these days and others, but that is a matter for Westminster.

The answer to the question is no. We are debating important subjects and should not turn every debate in the chamber into a debate on constitutional issues, as the SNP tries to do. The second serious flaw in the bill is that it creates an inconsistency. It will prevent large shops from opening and attempts to give some protection to workers in the retail sector. However, what is the rationale for protecting those who work in large shops and not those who work in the hospitality industry, for which Christmas day and new year's day are probably the two busiest days of the year? Why should those who work in the retail sector have protection that those who work in other sectors do not have? That inconsistency ran throughout the speeches that we heard from Labour members. When I challenged Karen Whitefield on the issue, she did not have an answer for me. In her speech, Mary Mulligan said that it was great to have an expansion in tourism and to have more people working in hotels, bars, restaurants and places of entertainment, but that it was bad to have them working in large shops. I cannot see the logic of the argument. Surely what is sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander.  We have heard a lot of emotive language, especially from Labour members. Once again, depressingly and unsurprisingly, the Labour Party has dismissed out of hand the genuine concerns of the business community. The honourable exception was Susan Deacon, who made some fair points. Cathie Craigie described the concerns of the tourism sector as "rubbish". The true colours of the Labour Party are again on show.

I am sorry, but I am in my last minute. We have already heard what Cathie Craigie's views of the business community are. Conservative members welcome the establishment of the ad hoc ministerial group to examine the issues relating to new year's day. There are serious questions to be considered. We will seek an amendment at stage 2 to exclude new year's day from the ambit of the bill. I am afraid that if there is no such amendment, the bill will be another bad piece of legislation to add to the pile that the Parliament has passed over the past seven and a half years.

Let me try to address the bill before us. The bill is designed to prohibit large shops from opening their doors to the public on Christmas day and new year's day. The issues around the two days are separate, and it is unfortunate that we are being presented with one bill that deals with both days together as if the issues were identical. I will deal first with the question of Christmas day. I am sure that no member, and few people across Scotland, would want Christmas day to become another normal shopping day. We have got used to shops being shut on Christmas day and to it being a day for families and for most people to have a holiday and, if they wish, to engage in Christian worship. That is worth preserving. It is worth mentioning that the celebration of Christmas as a holiday is a relatively recent development in Scotland. For some of my parents' generation and certainly for my grandparents' generation, Christmas day was a normal working day. It is only in the past 50 years that Christmas day has become established as the holiday that we now recognise. Indeed, the celebration of Christmas as we know it, with Christmas trees, holly branches, decorations and all the rest, is largely an importation to Scottish culture from south of the border and has happened over the  past 50 years. It is as good an example of the anglicisation of Scottish culture as one can find. Nobody passed a law to say that shops and other businesses should not open on Christmas day. Society changed, and as a result there was pressure on commerce to change too. We now have an established position in which Christmas day is a holiday for many people, and many Christians value the status that Christmas has as a religious holiday. That is not something that anyone would want to change. Karen Whitefield's bill is weak in that regard, as there is precious little evidence of there being any demand from retailers to open on Christmas day. Paragraph 18 of the Justice 2 Committee stage 1 report on the bill quotes the Union of Shop, Distributive and Allied Workers, which admitted that there was no "hard evidence" to support the idea that larger stores wanted to open on Christmas day at the moment. In any parliamentary democracy, it should be a basic rule that we pass legislation only when it is necessary to do so as a last resort and when all other non-legislative routes have been exhausted. In this case, it is hard to see where there is the demand for legislation affecting Christmas day. If the member in charge of the bill were able to make that case for protecting Christmas day, we would consider it sympathetically. The position with new year's day is different. There is a clear demand, particularly from the tourism sector, for certain shops to open on new year's day. We have seen Edinburgh and Glasgow develop their tourism market over the Hogmanay and new year holiday period. As part of that, the city authorities, backed up by bodies such as the chambers of commerce, the Scottish Retail Consortium and the Scottish Tourism Forum, wish retailers to have the opportunity to open on new year's day, at least for part of the time. I remember a few years ago there being no more depressing place in the land than Princes Street in Edinburgh on the afternoon of new year's day. It was full of bored tourists wandering up and down, looking forlornly in the windows of shops with "closed" signs on their doors. I cannot believe that that is good for our economy or our expanding tourism market. We therefore cannot support the proposal to compel large shops to close on new year's day.

I am sure that Ms MacDonald could offer personal tours of Edinburgh to bored tourists on new year's day. The simple fact is that  many tourists gravitate to the city centre and in the past they have found many of the shops closed, which does not present them with a happy experience.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. We on the Conservative benches are sympathetic to the protection for Christmas day, although we remain to be convinced of the necessity for legislation. As far as new year's day goes, we are concerned about the adverse impact on the economy if the bill is passed. Accordingly, to be consistent with the view that our member on the Justice 2 Committee took, we cannot support the bill as it stands.

Does the member not see the inconsistency in her argument? If the tourism sector has grown over hogmanay, does it not mean more people have to work in hotels, restaurants, cinemas and places of entertainment during that period?

Such foresight, Presiding Officer. As someone who supported the campaigns to save Stracathro hospital, I welcome the investment in its future. What discussions have been held between Tayside NHS Board and the private sector health care provider about the recruitment of staff in Angus and the impact that that might have on the NHS workforce?

I congratulate Alex Neil on what must be a record: he spoke for 10 minutes and 46 seconds but did not mention independence once. I hope that he will keep that up in future debates. I welcome the opportunity that the Executive has provided to debate an important subject, and I welcome the Deputy First Minister's announcement of the appointment of secondees from the private and voluntary sectors to assist in encouraging businesses to bring into the workplace more youngsters who are struggling with the transition from school to employment. That is an interesting initiative. The debate originally started life as a debate on the NEET problem, but has now translated itself into a debate on supporting positive transitions from school to work. Whatever it is called, it is an opportunity to discuss a serious and significant problem. As with so much else in Scotland, there is good news and bad news. Many of our school leavers are achieving employment more easily than was the case in the past and wage levels are generally rising, but there are still problems for too many people. Yesterday, a Lloyds TSB survey of more than 2,200 United Kingdom businesses identified the problem of skills shortages. The survey showed that 56 per cent of Scottish businesses are struggling to recruit skilled workers, compared to 47 per cent in England, and it showed that 45 per cent of Scottish firms cite the skills gap as being the number 1 threat, compared to 31 per cent in England. According to Lloyds TSB, the skills gap is worsening, which is putting additional strains on management in Scottish businesses as they try to attract talent ahead of overseas competition.

That is an interesting question. We still have a problem in that many high-level graduates are leaving Scotland to seek employment elsewhere; for example, Mr Salmond's having sought employment at Westminster. Many employers struggle with the standard of school leavers' education—in particular, their basic literacy and numeracy skills. Our amendment refers to comments that the Confederation of British Industry Scotland made a month or two ago when it drew attention to the problem of employers having to spend large sums on remedial work, in effect to pick up the pieces from the education system.

If Fiona Hyslop will forgive me, I will not give way at this point, as I need to make progress. Recently, there has been a large influx of workers from eastern Europe to Scotland, particularly from Poland. We should have no hesitation in saying that that has been a positive development that has been to Scotland's benefit. Employers to whom I speak say that eastern European workers are highly skilled and well motivated, but the sad aspect of the situation is that many employers would take on people from eastern Europe rather than take on native Scots. The long-term implications of that represent serious cause for worry. Alex Neil referred to the 280,000 Scots who could be working, but I am sad to say that, for many employers, it is easier to take on eastern European workers than it is to try to bring those Scots into the employment market. I do not blame the employers—that challenge is for the Government to address. The most significant problem we have is with young people who are not in education, employment or training. We believe that about 35,000 16 to 19-year-olds can be classified as NEET—the highest level in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. That is a significant problem for Scotland and it is a significant issue for the people who fall into that category. The Executive's NEET working group has identified that, by the age of 21, a young man in the NEET category is more than four times more likely to be unemployed, three times more likely to have depression or mental-health problems and five times more likely to have a criminal record than one who is not in that category. The lives and life opportunities of far too many young people are being wasted.  To its credit, the Executive has recognised the problem and has established a NEET working group and strategy. The formation of the Smith group to progress that agenda is a crucial step. That approach is absolutely right and I commend the members of the Smith group, in particular its chairman, for their commitment and for the resources that they are devoting to tackling this appalling problem. It is only fair also to commend Duncan McNeil for bringing together and convening a cross-party group on young people in Scotland not in education, employment or training and for bringing the issue to the heart of parliamentary business. Our amendment identifies the important role of the voluntary sector in addressing some of the concerns that I have highlighted—good work deserves to be supported by the Executive. The Deputy First Minister referred to support for groups such as the Prince's Trust. I am aware of the work that is being done in my parliamentary region by the YMCA in Perth, for example, which is reaching out to youngsters who are disengaged from education and employment. That sort of voluntary initiative should be supported. Voluntary organisations often face hurdles: they regularly complain that they are drowning in bureaucracy and red tape and that they are spending hours on form-filling exercises. Every tranche of money that can be accessed is hedged around by a myriad of conditions. Often, organisations end up supplying the same information over and over again to the different arms of government with which they deal and from which they are trying to access funds. We need a streamlined approach that aims to reduce the bureaucratic burden on voluntary groups. We must also avoid excessive interference in their activities by the Government at the centre. Members will be aware of the good work that is being done by the Hunter Foundation. It has done a lot of work on international comparisons on the NEET problem. There is nothing new about this under the sun—other countries have had and are tackling the NEET problem, so the Hunter Foundation is examining what has been done in other countries in order to find out what we can learn. The Hunter Foundation accepts that it is a long-term problem and that decisions that we take today might not have their full effect for 10 or 20 years. Alex Neil said that many youngsters will be members of the second or third generation to face exactly the same problem. We must accept and be patient about the fact that a long-term solution is required. It might be another generation before the full effects of work that is done now come to fruition.  The provision of vocational opportunities for youngsters is an issue that my party has raised on numerous occasions. I believe that for youngsters who have an aptitude for technical subjects, there should be more opportunity than is currently offered to allow them to go down the vocational training route, through developing school-college partnerships or—dare I say it?—science academies. I do not believe, and I never have, that we should have a one-size-fits-all education system. If we can have specialist schools that deal with music or sports, as we do, why not have such schools for science or engineering? It is a pity that the Deputy First Minister was reluctant to endorse the initiative that was announced by the First Minister at the Labour conference a few weeks ago because we could have built a consensus across the political parties that that is the way forward. Perhaps he will come round to that in due course. Our further education colleges have a key role to play in tackling the NEET problem. They are already involved in a wide range of work with young people and the varied programmes and support that they offer suit the different and changing needs of individuals. One ambition for the merger of the Scottish Higher Education Funding Council and the Scottish Further Education Funding Council, which the Enterprise and Culture Committee dealt with, was that we should have parity of esteem between the university sector and the further education colleges. I do not know whether we are there yet, but that should certainly be our ambition. Our youngsters need to know, and their careers advisers need to be telling them, that it is as valid to go down the route of vocational training or an apprenticeship as it is to aspire to attend university. There is much good work going on and I applaud all that is being done. At the core is a partnership with the voluntary sector, so I urge the Executive to consider what more it might do to assist that sector in tackling the serious NEET problem. I move amendment S2M-5098.1, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: "is therefore deeply concerned that so many young people in Scotland remain disengaged from education, employment or training; is further concerned by recent remarks from CBI Scotland that companies are having 'to invest an unacceptably high proportion of the £2 billion they commit to training annually on what is effectively remedial education'; acknowledges, however, that voluntary agencies across Scotland are working hard to engage young people who are NEET; congratulates the Smith Group, which is dedicated to empowering such agencies already involved in this work; welcomes the Scottish Executive's financial support provided to many of these agencies but, in light of the extreme difficulties voluntary organisations routinely face in terms of accessing secure  funding, calls on it to reduce the bureaucracy involved in applying for funds and to ensure that long-term funding is available for successful and proven projects."

Given what the Deputy First Minister has said about schools, can he say whether he supports the First Minister's proposals for science academies?

Does the minister accept that damage is already being done to the Fife economy due to the uncertainty that is being created about the Forth crossing? Although I appreciate that work on the detail needs to continue, businesses throughout Fife and the east of Scotland are looking for a commitment in principle to replace the Forth crossing to ensure that we do not see a meltdown in the east of Scotland economy.

On the question of the conflict between developers and local communities, does Christine Grahame not think it rather bizarre that the so-called Green party is lining up with the multinational developers against the interests of local communities and their democratically elected representatives?

Will Mr Ruskell give way?

I commend Roseanna Cunningham for her motion and congratulate her on securing this evening's debate. As someone who has given evidence at four public inquiries in relation to four wind farm proposals in Perth and Kinross—at one of which, at least, I crossed swords with Mr Ruskell—I welcome Roseanna Cunningham's interest in the subject. I agree with virtually everything that Roseanna Cunningham said in her speech. Her motion mentions an oral parliamentary answer that Rhona Brankin, the Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development, gave on 8 June in response to a question from me. I must say that I was subject to some criticism from Roseanna Cunningham's colleague Alasdair Morgan in a supplementary question that followed my question. If the Scottish National Party now supports my call, that is welcome, but perhaps Roseanna Cunningham needs to have a word with some of her colleagues. I raised the matter in the chamber after meeting local action groups in Stirling, Perthshire and Clackmannanshire about the expense of providing representation and evidence at public inquiries. In her answer, the Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development admitted that the Scottish Executive was satisfied that SNH and SEPA had the resources to provide evidence. Therefore, it is simply the case that those agencies are choosing not to make representations. The Minister for Communities needs to be aware that there is real frustration in the communities in the Ochils and Perthshire that are involved in public inquiries because they oppose planning applications for large onshore wind farms. They face a hugely unequal struggle. They have to find, sometimes, tens of thousands of pounds from their own pockets to employ legal representation and expert witnesses so that they have a level playing field with the wealthy developers. Recently, I gave evidence at the inquiry into the proposed Drumderg wind farm. That scheme is promoted by Scottish and Southern Energy, which is a substantial multinational company—albeit one that is headquartered in Perth, I am pleased to say. The company has hugely deep pockets and it can afford to employ the top legal teams and top expert witnesses. Despite the fundraising that has been done by the community group that is fighting the proposal, it simply cannot match the developer's resources. We can understand people's frustration. Such things are happening while statutory consultees such as SEPA, SNH and Historic Scotland, which object to the planning applications in writing, will  not be represented. They are getting a free ride from the local communities in the Ochils and Perthshire. SNH has a budget of £64 million per year and SEPA has a budget of £36 million per year, so it is not as if the money is not there. They should be doing their jobs properly. I hope that the Scottish Executive will agree that those public agencies have a duty to protect and preserve our environment and historic monuments. The Executive must understand that the issue of whether public agencies provide evidence at public inquiries is important to the communities that are affected by planning applications, including those in the Ochils, where, as Roseanna Cunningham said, four such planning inquiries will take place between now and March 2007. It is unfair that the agencies, which are statutory consultees, are not playing a full role in the public inquiry process by backing up their written evidence. Instead, the burden of paying for representation at public inquiries is falling on the community groups that oppose the planning applications. That is unfair and undemocratic. The Scottish Executive should ensure that the statutory consultees are in a position to back up at the public inquiry the evidence that they give in writing. At present, it seems that no one is prepared to help the communities. Action is required to make the system fairer. We must lift the burden that is placed on the community groups. I hope that the minister and the Executive will take seriously the concerns that are aired tonight and pass them on to the quangos that report to them.

I echo the support that has been expressed around the chamber for Scotland's tourism industry—our number 1 industry. Like many other members, I engage regularly with the tourism industry in my parliamentary region, and although I accept that there has been growth and that there are many good news stories, we should also accept that not everything in the garden is rosy and that there are problem areas and concerns in the sector about some of the changes that the bill will entrench. I would like to make two specific points about the bill. The first is about a subject that Enterprise and Culture Committee members will remember my raising at stage 1 and, again, with an amendment at stage 2: the change of name. I see no possible reason for legislating to change the formal name of what was the Scottish Tourist Board. That name is perfectly adequate and entirely descriptive, and it is obvious to anybody who looks at it what the organisation does. That is not the case with the name "VisitScotland", which is, I concede, perfectly fine as a trading name. However, if one puts the name VisitScotland on paper, one has then to explain what the organisation is. No doubt it is a trendy name that has been dreamed up by consultants at great public expense. That is fine for trading, but it seems to me that the legal registered name should be something that describes what the organisation does. Of course, there is no requirement for the legal name and the trading name to be the same; they have been different for the past five years, since VisitScotland started trading. There is no earthly reason for the bill and it is, frankly, a waste of parliamentary time. It is unnecessary and pointless. The more serious point that I want to make is about restructuring. My colleague, Jamie McGrigor, made serious points about industry concerns about the changes that have taken place. The area tourist boards were, I accept, a mixed bag—some were good and others did not work so well. In my parliamentary region, I have experienced the tourist boards in Perthshire, Dundee and Angus, and in Fife. All three worked extremely well and were well regarded by the tourism industry. Under the old structure, tourism operatives were members of the tourist board and had ownership of the body to which they paid their subs, so they had a direct say in what went on and a vote in the  election of the local board members. The new model moves away from that altogether: it is all about a centralised national structure—albeit, one with satellite offices—that will sell services and packages to the industry. The crucial change is that the industry and the private sector will no longer have a direct say such as they once had. People in the industry will no longer be members of their tourist board; they will now simply buy services from it and will be clients rather than partners. That centralised structure is not necessarily best for the industry. The jury is still out on whether the new structure is the right one. Like Jamie McGrigor, I have picked up on the great deal of concern from the industry in my area about what is seen as a lack of engagement with the industry in the new structure. Local tourism forums are being established, but at the moment they are not filling the gap and are not performing the role that the area tourist boards previously performed. Edinburgh is now the only European capital without its own tourist body, and we could see more sectoral marketing organisations being established because people are not satisfied with the new structure of VisitScotland. Jamie McGrigor attended a recent event that was organised by the Scottish Tourism Forum. There is no doubt that that body is growing—in numbers and in influence—in response to what the industry sees as a lack of engagement under the new structure, which is unfortunate. There are concerns about the new structure so, for that reason, the Conservatives will not support the bill.

Thank you, Presiding Officer—you took me a little bit by surprise. The debate has been wide ranging and a number of points have been raised about the committee's recommendations. It is perhaps not surprising that most of the debate has been about roads, given that 70 per cent of freight travels by road and that road haulage was very much the focus of the report. As my colleagues David McLetchie and David Davidson said, the fact is that in Scotland today we are still living with the legacy of the decision by the incoming Labour Government in 1997 to freeze the roads budget and put a moratorium on projects at that time. If one drives along the A90 to the Forth road bridge, one sees that work is now starting on the A8000. That road should have been completed many years ago, but the decision was taken not to proceed with the upgrade.  Scotland has paid the price for that decision over the past nine years.

I utterly disagree with the point. The A8000 upgrade was on the forward plan in 1997. The simple reality is that, due to the incoming Labour Government, it did not proceed. A growing economy needs good roads because we need to improve journey travel times, tackle congestion and improve road safety. I make no apology for putting the case for better roads. Indeed, members would be surprised if I did not take the opportunity, once again, to make a pitch for improvement of the A9, which needs dualling. The A9 is heavily used by freight. We have seen traffic levels on the A9 grow fivefold since the upgrades of the 70s and early 80s. The expansion in the economy at its north end, around Inverness and in the Highlands more generally, has generated much more freight traffic than existed in the past. The A9 also has a horrific safety record—it has the highest level of fatalities of any road in Scotland. The road is desperately in need of upgrading. The minister knows that; I have raised the issue with him on many previous occasions. I see no contradiction in saying that we should build new roads, tackle congestion and be environmentally friendly. The fact is that the most popular form of public transport is the bus, and buses need roads on which to travel. Over the past 20 years, there has also been an extraordinary growth in long-distance coach travel—another popular form of public transport that requires roads. Although we should continue to look at public transport alternatives for our cities that also suit other parts of the country, the reality is that we will always need roads. Industry needs roads if it is to transport its goods around the country to market. If we are not prepared to build more roads, we fail in our duty to grow the Scottish economy. All mainstream parties should be prepared to build more roads. We need to face down the anti-car fanatics. There is a lunatic fringe in bodies such as TRANSform Scotland—by taking an extreme viewpoint against all road building, they do their case no credit. I believe that all mainstream parties should have the courage to stand up to these Talibans of the transport debate and say, "You have simply got it wrong." In the  interest of building our economy, we should be prepared to make the case for more roads. I turn to the issue of the Forth road bridge, which has been raised throughout the debate—even by members on the Executive benches. We heard Andrew Arbuckle and Christine May voice their concerns. The report calls on the Executive to make clear what action it proposes to take on the matter. The Forth Estuary Transport Authority has warned that the existing bridge could close to HGVs by 2013—seven years from now—and that the bridge may have to be closed altogether by 2017. If the bridge had to close to HGVs, that would be an utter disaster for the economy not only of Fife, but the whole of the east of Scotland. The bridgemaster has said that it will take 11 years to plan and build a new bridge. We are potentially already out of time. We cannot afford any more feet dragging from the Executive on the issue. Mark Ballard's collision with a parked car may have affected his thought processes. It is incredible for him to suggest that, by moving traffic on to rail, we will not need a new bridge. Even if we were able to do that, the state of the current bridge means that we will need to build a replacement. There is no easy, cop-out option. We cannot walk away from the problem by simply choosing the environmental option, as he proposes. We need a new bridge. We must stop putting excuses in the way and get on with the job of building it.

I see that a new coalition is developing between the Executive and the Greens. We have also witnessed evidence of a potential coalition between the Scottish National Party and the Greens in this lively and interesting debate. We do not need to wait for more evidence on the bridge; we need to get on with the job of designing and building a new bridge. There has already been far too much dithering. We broadly support the report's recommendations on rail freight, which members have mentioned. We would like more freight to move on to rail, because such an approach would tackle congestion and be more environmentally friendly. On a number of occasions, I have asked the Minister for Transport about moving freight on to rail along the A9 corridor. I have discussed the  matter with the supermarket companies Safeway and Morrisons, which expressed willingness to consider it, and I understand from the minister that discussions are on-going—if I recall his most recent answer correctly. Safeway used to transfer goods to Inverness and further north by rail, but when Morrisons took over the company it reverted to road haulage, which was a retrograde step. We should encourage the use of the rail link as much as we can do, not least because of the pressure that would be taken off the A9, given the volume of traffic on and safety record of that road. I am probably over time. I could talk about many other issues, such as fuel duty and the regulation of foreign competition. The Local Government and Transport Committee produced a serious report and I hope that the Executive will provide a serious response that addresses the issues that the report raises.

Will the member give way on that point?

That is what he said to Phil Gallie.

Stewart Maxwell was doing so well until his final point. I join members in commending Dennis Canavan for the way in which he has pursued the issue and for lodging his member's bill. He has done a tremendous amount of work in consulting interested parties, rallying support and building a coalition of interests to back his proposal. The Scottish Conservatives support the general principles of the bill and will be happy to vote for it at decision time. It is almost a year since Parliament last debated the bill, back in October 2005. It is a great pity that it has taken the Executive a year to come round to the view that the bill should be supported. We have seen parliamentary time and expense squandered when we could have been making progress. From day 1, the Conservatives accepted that the bill would not, of itself, create a public holiday; in fact, it is not legislatively competent for the Scottish Parliament to create a new holiday or to have it enforced. The bill is simply permissive in that it will allow banks the opportunity to take a  holiday on St Andrew's day if they wish to do so. The support of the Executive was crucial to the bill because of that. Without the Executive's saying that it would take a lead in trying to encourage the taking of St Andrew's day as a holiday and doing that with its own employees in the public sector, the bill would be pointless. It was, therefore, vital that the Executive show its support. The Conservative position all along has been that we do not wish to see an additional holiday granted. The Enterprise and Culture Committee heard strong evidence from employers that they do not want there to be an additional day's holiday. With respect to what Dennis Canavan and Stewart Maxwell have said, that was the weight of the evidence that the committee heard. Why do employers not want an extra holiday? It is because it would lead to extra costs; small businesses in particular would struggle to compete with larger rivals that would have the staff to cover the additional public holiday. The Department of Trade and Industry has estimated that there would, at 2000 prices, be a cost to Scotland of about £160 million for that additional day's holiday, which is probably equivalent to £200 million today. I am, therefore, pleased that the Executive has come round to our view that we should have a holiday on St Andrew's day but in substitution for a holiday at a different time of year.

Susan Deacon has made a fair point. However, I point out that the statement from the First Minister and Dennis Canavan says that if the bill is passed it will "encourage employers and employees to substitute an existing local holiday in favour of a National St Andrew's Day holiday". That is the point that I have just made. It is a pity that that principle could not have been agreed to a year ago; instead, time and resources were wasted waiting for the Executive to come round to that view. Last October, in the previous stage 1 debate on the bill, the Deputy Minister for Finance, Public Service Reform and Parliamentary Business, George Lyon, said: "The principle that he"— meaning me— "and the other Tories adopt is that St Andrew's day should  be a substitute for an existing bank holiday. If that happened, which bank holiday would we choose? If the holiday was a substitute not for a bank holiday but for a local holiday, how would that be achieved? How would we ensure in practice that workers had the day off?"— [ Official Report , 6 October 2005; c 19899.]  Those might be valid questions, but they are questions to which the minister must now find the answers. It is a pity that, instead of being prepared to listen to the arguments at the time, he asked such spurious questions. At least we have been consistent from day one. I very much welcome the fact that other parties have come round to our way of thinking; once again, the Conservatives are setting the agenda. We are delighted to support the bill's general principles and look forward to celebrating St Andrew's day with a holiday from this year onwards.

As the minister will be aware, I have raised with him on previous occasions the need to move freight from road to rail along the A9 corridor to reduce traffic levels on Scotland's deadliest road. Has the minister's department made any progress in its discussions with the relevant companies?

It is to the credit of the minister that he almost managed to keep a straight face as he talked proudly about the reduction of business rates, when it was his First Minister who increased them. I am grateful to the SNP for giving us the opportunity to discuss the future of the small business sector. We should remember that the great majority of businesses in Scotland are small ones. Recent figures suggest that about 93 per cent of Scots companies employ fewer than 10 people. Those firms are the bedrock of the economy and have a crucial role in growing the economy, providing jobs and boosting town centres and local economies. Despite their importance to the economy, it is obvious that small businesses are among the most vulnerable of enterprises. They are far more likely than larger  firms are to suffer the ill effects of Government regulation or an excessive tax burden. It is therefore essential that the state does all that it can to make the business environment for small companies as competitive as possible and steers clear of policies that will stunt their development. The record over the past 10 years has been poor. We have a much lower level of business start-ups than in the United Kingdom as a whole and the lowest three-year business survival rates in the UK. According to the labour force survey, the number of self-employed people in Scotland is now 7,000 less than in 1997. The picture has not been a rosy one. I agree with Mr Mather that we should consider reducing the rates burden for small businesses. Comparatively speaking, they feel the burden of rates more than larger enterprises. Up and down Scotland, in small towns and villages, we see the depressing sight of empty shops because the rates burden often makes it uneconomic for a small or growing business to take them on. Some alleviation of the burden of rates on those properties would be welcome and would provide a boost for town-centre economies.

Mr Neil will find that out when we publish our manifesto. [ Interruption. ] We will announce our policy in due course. I could have asked Mr Neil that same question a month ago and he would not have been able to tell us. The problem with the SNP's proposal is that it lacks credibility. The SNP says that it has costed the scheme at £150 million, but from recent parliamentary answers it is clear that it would cost £150 million to abolish rates just for companies with a rateable value of less than £8,000. As the SNP's scheme is much more generous than that, I wonder whether it has a problem with the arithmetic somewhere. Another problem with the SNP's plan is that there is no indication of how it is to be funded. For the second time in two weeks, the SNP front bench is showing remarkable generosity. Two weeks ago, it promised to spend billions wiping out student debt and replacing student loans with grants for all. Today, we have another pledge: to spend at least £150 million reducing the rates burden on small businesses. Perhaps next week we will hear another pledge: to double the state pension, or to build 100 new schools or 10 new hospitals. However, we have not heard one word from the SNP on how that largesse will be funded. Where is the money coming from? When I put that  question to Mr Mather earlier, he did not have an answer. Now he does.

I look forward to seeing the huge tax increases that will have to be proposed to pay for all those commitments. I was mocked by Mr Neil a moment ago for saying that he would have to wait until he sees our manifesto. Now the SNP is using the same defence. Where the SNP's credibility really runs into the sand is on its proposals for a local income tax. The great majority of small businesses are unincorporated and pay income tax rather than corporation tax. A total of 240,000 Scots are registered as self-employed in Scotland and all pay income tax. Every one of them will be hit hard by the introduction of a local income tax. Every penny of their profits is deemed as earnings and will be taxed at the local income tax rate. A reduction in business rates would directly benefit small businesses that occupy premises, while doing nothing for small businesses that operate in people's homes, for example. However, all small businesses would be hit by local income tax rises. What the SNP gives with one hand it would take away with the other. It may pretend to be supporting small businesses, but when we consider the full picture, what it is proposing is quite different. The overall effect of the SNP's proposal is no more than a smash-and-grab raid against hard working people in small businesses up and down the land. Small businesses are suffering from the high level of rates that they are paying and would undoubtedly benefit from a reduction in their bills. Any proposal that is not properly costed, for which we have no idea where the money is coming from, and that will be coupled with a local income tax that will claw back any savings, is not the way forward. I move amendment S2M-4863.1, to leave out from "confirms" to end and insert: "believes that there is a need for government to create a business environment which will improve the competitiveness of Scottish small businesses; further believes that any detailed proposals to reduce the business rate burden for small businesses should be properly costed and the source of such monies identified; notes the impact of excessive regulation and poor levels of investment in infrastructure on the capacity of small businesses to grow; calls on the Scottish Executive to bring forward policies to create a more business-friendly environment in Scotland, and notes that the introduction of a local income tax as proposed by the SNP and the Liberal Democrats would  directly penalise hundreds of thousands of unincorporated small businesses throughout Scotland."

Will the member take an intervention?

If I understand Mr Mather correctly, he is saying that there would be further economic growth. However, that is predicated on further constitutional change. Is he telling us that if a new, SNP Administration came into office after next May, it would have to delay implementation of its scheme until we had further constitutional change?

Does the First Minister accept that it does nothing for the credibility of the Executive to announce with great fanfare a policy such as the cut in business rates for companies that invest in R and  D without first checking whether that policy could be implemented? Can he tell us who is to blame for that incompetence? Is it the civil servants or the ministers?

This has been a wide-ranging debate, and in the time available to me I would like to respond to some of the key themes that have been referred to in the past two hours or so. It is fair to say that all political parties now recognise the threat of climate change and the danger that it presents to mankind. The Scottish Conservatives deliberately chose the environment for our debating time today because we feel that it is such an important subject. We are proud of our record in addressing the issues. As we have heard from numerous members, it was under a Conservative Government that the UK started to support international action to tackle climate change. Although the current UK Government has pronounced regularly on the importance of the issue, the rhetoric of ministers is failing to translate into Government action in a way that matches up to the scale of the challenge. We believe that it is the responsibility of Government, business, individuals and families to meet the climate change challenge. It should not just be about dictating to individuals and businesses how they need to change their behaviour. Government should be giving a lead, and it should also be responding to the genuine and growing public demand for action. We want to encourage and incentivise people to do the right thing rather than force them down a road that they do not wish to go down. That is a difference between us and some of the other parties in the chamber. We want to go with the grain of public opinion. Undoubtedly, energy policy will be a major component in developing an environmentally friendly approach. We in this party understand that  we must reduce our reliance on CO 2 -producing energy production. We are keen to see an enhanced role for renewables, but that does not mean covering every hillside in Scotland with 400ft-high wind turbines, which is the road that some people want to go down. We must have a balanced approach to energy production, and there is scope for all sorts of renewable energy. However, we have to ensure that we are not putting at risk our precious landscape and our vital tourism industry by building wind farms in inappropriate sites. On Tuesday night, I attended a celebration at the Fulford Inn, just outside Crieff, to mark the rejection of the Abercairny wind farm application. If ever a wind farm was being proposed for the wrong place, surely that was it. I am delighted that ministers rejected the application on the advice of the planning reporter.

Mr Harvie has clearly not read our policy. We have said that we will support a moratorium on onshore wind farms where there is substantial local opposition until we have a new planning strategy from the Executive that properly balances the interests of tackling climate change with those of the tourism industry and local communities. We do not have that at the moment, which is why we support a limited moratorium. We should be investing in other renewable technologies, such as biomass, wave and tidal power. The point that I have made continually in the chamber for many years is that current Government policy incentivises wind power to the detriment of those other technologies. As I pointed out to Alasdair Morrison, that exact point was made by the Enterprise and Culture Committee in its report on renewable energy two years ago, yet we still see a headlong rush to build huge onshore wind factories across the land. Surely it is time to bring a halt to that madness and ensure that our efforts go into investment in newer technologies.

I did not object to the application for the wind farm at Fintry in Stirlingshire. If the minister had checked the Business Bulletin , she would have found motion S2M-2365 in my name supporting the construction of a wind farm on Salisbury Crags in Edinburgh—for me, that is the perfect site to put a wind farm. We should encourage microgeneration. The  public and small businesses are greatly interested in microrenewable schemes such as rooftop turbines, solar panels and ground-heat systems. The Conservative eco-bonus scheme, which we announced this week and to which several members have referred, would provide much greater incentives than exist at the moment for individuals, small businesses and community groups to go down that road. We know that the demand exists, and the Government's role should be to stimulate and support that. If demand for the technologies increased, the entry costs would reduce in time. Our eco-bonus scheme would also cover energy efficiency. We need to tackle the problem of poorly insulated homes that waste heat, which adds to CO 2 emissions and, given the rising cost of energy, increases fuel poverty. A package of measures to encourage energy efficiency should be an essential part of any environmental strategy for the Government. Several members have drawn attention to the impact of transport. One quarter of carbon emissions comes from the transport sector and concerns centre on road traffic and aviation. I do not accept that the only way to tackle vehicle emissions is simply to stop building new roads. Many necessary road projects need to be completed and we should remember that tackling bottlenecks and reducing congestion may in many cases help to reduce pollution. An important point is that as technology and time move on, vehicle emissions will reduce. The cars of today are much less polluting than those of 20 years ago. The development of biofuels and hybrid vehicles means that it might not be long before vehicles produce much less pollution than the cars of today do. Public pressure is forcing change. As people become more environmentally conscious, car manufacturers must respond to demands for vehicles that run on fuels that are not as polluting. It is not inconceivable that, 20 years from now, we could have private cars that have little negative impact on the environment. Frankly, it would be ridiculous to find ourselves in that situation and realise that, 20 years before, we had scrapped all road-building projects—as some members would have us do—and left ourselves with a thoroughly inadequate road network.

After this week's party conference, I do not trust anything that the Liberal Democrats say about tax. The problem is that what Mr Purvis proposes is an extremely blunt  instrument. We cannot take the simplistic approach of trying to price people out of their cars. For hundreds of thousands of people who live in rural areas, the car is the only viable means of transport. To adopt the attitude that someone who drives a four-by-four must pay more tax completely disregards the interests of rural areas, where many people must have a four-by-four to get around because of the nature of the roads.

I am sorry—I am running out of time and I need to make more points. People who live in rural areas must have cars, because public transport alternatives do not exist and are unlikely to be created. Of course, we will continue to support public transport projects, such as the Edinburgh trams and new rail links, whenever there is a sensible business and economic case for them. We should remember—it is an important point that should not be missed—that by far the most popular form of public transport is the bus. Bus travel has grown exponentially since the previous Conservative Government decided to deregulate it. We now see ventures such as Megabus, which provides extremely low-cost travel between cities, helps to reduce congestion on the roads and moves commuters around at affordable rates. In case anybody has missed it, I point out that buses need roads on which to travel, so just to say that we will stop building roads is a neanderthal reaction to the environmental problem that does not address wider issues. I will briefly mention farming and food. Last week, my colleague John Scott spoke in the chamber on the local food is miles better campaign, which is about reducing food miles, on which public concern is growing. As with the growth in organic produce and fair trade produce, if there is public demand, large companies must respond to protect their profits. That is exactly what Tesco has done by introducing an incentive scheme to reduce plastic bag usage, which is a better way forward than the plastic bag tax that was proposed by Mr Pringle, whom we may not see for a few days. There is much public interest in environmental issues. The Government's role should be to give leadership and, yes, to set targets. It should encourage people to do the right thing and reward them for doing so. The eco-bonus scheme that we have talked about this week would do just that. Only the first step is being taken, as the Government, individuals and businesses in partnership have much more to do if Scotland is to be the world leader in tackling climate change that I am sure we all want it to be. The Scottish Conservatives will play a full part in shaping the debate in the months and years ahead.

I doubt that very much.

We have never said that we have a blanket opposition to onshore wind. If Mr Ruskell had done his research, he would have found out that on 2 February 2005 I lodged motion S2M-2365, which welcomed a wind farm proposal. Why did he not bother to look that one up?

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the member accept that the Parliament's Enterprise and Culture Committee's unanimous, cross-party report on renewable energy—published more than two years ago, I believe—made the point that the concentration on onshore wind was damaging the development of other renewables?

Throughout the debate, various costings of the SNP policy have been postulated: £1 billion, £1.7 billion and £3 billion from Wendy Alexander. How much does the SNP think the policy will cost and where will the money come from?

Nothing.

I have two thank yous to say to the SNP this morning. The first thank you is to Fiona Hyslop for giving us the opportunity to discuss the important issue of student debt. In so doing, I draw attention to my entry in the register of members' interests, which states that I am a member of the board of management of Dundee University Students Association. The SNP is right to say that we have a difficulty with growing levels of student debt. I do not intend, in the short time available, to rehearse all the statistics, but we just need to look at the level of bankruptcies to see the extent of the problem. In 1997, only 31 graduates declared themselves bankrupt. In 2004, that figure was 1,541—a huge increase—despite the fact that student loans are exempt from bankruptcy, so those students must have acquired debts in other ways. No one would sensibly advise students to go down the bankruptcy road, but the sad fact is that some see it as the easiest way out of their problems. It is clear that the current arrangements are not  working. Our party has previously set out proposals to address the situation. We have to realise that the problem is not students borrowing under the student loans scheme, but rather students borrowing in more expensive ways by using, for example, unsecured bank overdrafts or, worse still, credit cards. Our solution is to extend the current student loans scheme and allow much larger sums to be borrowed, but at commercial rates of interest. That would still be cheaper for students than unsecured bank overdrafts and credit card borrowing, which are the areas of real concern as far as student debt is concerned.

The problem is that there are many students for whom the student loan is insufficient, so they have to borrow money elsewhere. Under such a scheme as we propose, they would pay a lower rate of interest than the rate that they pay to those other lenders. I want to say a second thank you to Fiona Hyslop and her party for their extraordinary generosity this morning. The SNP proposes to scrap the student loans scheme and replace it with a scheme of grants, which it claims would cost £100 million a year, but we have not yet heard justification for those figures. Have we heard from the SNP where the extra £100 million—or however much it will be—will come from? No, we have not. However, Fiona Hyslop's generosity does not end there, because the SNP proposes to go further than that and write off the existing debt to the Student Loans Company of all Scottish-domiciled students, of whom there are 300,000. The latest figures from the Student Loans Company, which are for 2004, show the value of those outstanding loans as £1.47 billion. Even what is called the fair value—what the company thinks it can recover—has been assessed at £990 million, and that is going up year on year. So there we have another spending commitment, another splendid act of generosity, on the part of the SNP on behalf of the Scottish taxpayer, requiring a cool £1 billion-plus to write off all student debt.

I could say that such generosity is unprecedented but, given some of the other spending commitments that we have had from the SNP over the past three weeks, that would not be  a fair comment. I am surprised that Mr Mather has not fallen off his chair at the thought of all the tax increases he will have to put through to fund that largesse. Fiona Hyslop's generosity does not stop even there, because she proposes to go still further. The SNP is also going to pay the fees of all English students studying in Scotland. Has the SNP even costed that pledge? Has it thought about the implications of a flood of English students coming north to Scotland to study here, displacing Scottish students? Has it thought of the millions that that would cost? No. The issue of student debt and the future of higher education is serious, and the questions about it require serious answers. Our party has put forward a serious package of proposals to help to address the problems. What is on offer from the SNP is not serious, credible or affordable.

It is an attempt to play to the student gallery, with no prospect of delivery. From a party that aspired to—

But the Executive has banned fox hunting.

What would be the annual cost of replacing the current student loans scheme with grants for all?

For many years, I have raised with the minister the need for the A9 to be upgraded to dual carriageway status. In relation to the studies that are being done, what factors will determine the decision whether to proceed with dualling? In particular, will the road safety record on what we know is the deadliest road in Scotland be taken into account?

I congratulate Andrew Welsh on a generally well informed and thought-provoking speech, although when he came out against schools developing specialisms, I wondered whether he was up to date with SNP policy. I would like to address two specific points. The first is on the question what makes a good school. At the end of last term, I had the privilege of being asked to be the guest speaker at the prizegiving at Webster's high school in Kirriemuir, in Angus Council's area. It was a real pleasure to join the happy, bright and well turned out youngsters who were receiving prizes in front of an audience full of proud parents and the wider school community—members of the school board, the school chaplains and others. If anyone went round the area and asked people whether they think the high school is a good school, the chances are that they would say, "Yes it is," because people have a favourable impression of the school. Webster's high school is not one of the largest schools in Scotland; it has a roll of 793 and it draws its pupils from a wide and diverse catchment area—a small town with a mixed society and a large rural hinterland. Pupils at the school have achieved good exam results. In higher results for 2004-05—the most recent year for which figures are available—the school came 33 rd equal in Scotland and came top of all secondary schools in Angus.  However, there is more to a good school than academic results. An interesting thing about Webster's high school is that nearly 10 per cent of its total roll are pupils who live outwith the catchment area—pupils whose parents have exercised choice through placing requests in order to get their youngsters into the school. Why do parents choose to do that? Why do they choose to have their children travel that little bit further? It is not just about academic results—although they are important—but about the whole package that the school offers; its ethos, the standards that apply and the levels of discipline. At the core of that is leadership: the stamp that the head teacher puts on the school, which sets the tone for standards and discipline, and sets out what is expected of pupils and members of staff. If we are trying to improve our schools so that we have more good schools, we should seek to empower head teachers and extend their remit. It is not local authority officials sitting in council headquarters who make good schools or not-so-good schools; it is what happens within the schools and the leadership that is provided in them. If there is a lesson to be learned, it is that extending devolved school management further is the right thing to do.

Fiona Hyslop makes a very fair point. In every sphere of activity in the public sector, people are ever more burdened by bureaucracy and paperwork. I suspect that that might be a factor in discouraging some talented people from applying for management roles. We should do anything we can to make such positions more attractive, given their great importance to school leadership and to the quality of schools. It is not just about head teachers. Good schools are partnerships, and the best schools are those in which the head teacher is supported by an active school board, with parents engaging with the school. For that reason, I believe that it is wrong for the Executive to scrap school boards: it is wrong for it to be replacing them with weaker parent councils, which will simply not have the same range of powers.

Parliament might have spoken on the issue, but it said the wrong thing. When the Executive consulted on the matter, out of 1,023 responses only 13 per cent were in favour of abolishing school boards. The Executive simply did not listen. It got it wrong, so we will continue to make our case.

No, I will not take another intervention because time is getting short. I want to move on to talk about another subject in the time that is available to me: the question of city academies. In the past eight years or so, city academies have been developed throughout England. They provide a different style of education and a new start for those who are often challenged by traditional methods of education. We currently have 27 such academies in England. Performance in city academies is lower than the national average. That is perhaps not surprising, however, because the youngsters who tend to be attracted to city academies are those who are not achieving particularly well in traditional schools. The important point is that the rate of improvement among pupils in city academies is higher than the national average for England. The reaction from parents and pupils in England to the academies has been extremely positive. Moreover, academies bring the opportunity for pupils to develop one or more specialisms, for example in science, arts, computing or engineering. They are attractive to pupils and to parents, and they are working to raise standards. Scotland is, of course, a different country from England, with a different education system, but that does not mean to say that we should close our eyes to examples of good practice that work elsewhere. I urge the Scottish Executive to consider—even just as a pilot—establishing such an academy in Scotland. A city academy in Glasgow, for example, would provide a different style of state education, perhaps for pupils who struggle to perform under the current system. It would allow them to develop specialities, and would help deal with the problems of NEETs—youngsters not in employment, education or training—to whom Andrew Welsh referred. We in Scotland have the worst record among Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries for people aged between 16 and 19. Too many of those youngsters are being left behind at the moment. Surely we should be prepared to put dogma aside, to find out what  works elsewhere and to consider going down that road.

The minister will be aware that there is a serious concern among probationer teachers that, although they are guaranteed a probationary place, when they complete that placement many of them have great difficulty in finding teaching vacancies for the year that they are after. Is the minister doing anything to address that problem?

It is nice to hear Wendy Alexander back in action and on song, although with regard to the content of her speech I think that we would have got more sense out of the twins. The First Minister opened the debate by trumpeting the success of his Administration. At one point, I thought that he was even going to claim credit for the sunshine that we have had over the summer. The First Minister's view of Scotland is almost unrecognisable from the experience of millions of Scots. He talked up education on the same day that CBI Scotland produced its own report on the future of Scotland, which states: "The quality of performance of local authorities, schools and teachers varies across the country and we desperately need to achieve consistency, based on the standards set by the best, not the average. Schools are failing to engage meaningfully with too many young people, leaving them far short of being 'work-ready', often with few or no qualifications at all and little to show for the years spent in classrooms. As a consequence, Scottish businesses have to invest an unacceptably high proportion of the £2bn they commit to training annually, on what is effectively remedial education". That is what our employers and wealth creators are saying and—with respect—I am more inclined to believe them than Scottish ministers. The First Minister said that our health service had been turned around. I concede that it is increasingly unrecognisable from the national health service that we had 10 years ago. I accept—as did Dr Nanette Milne—that huge sums of money have been invested in the health service, but in many cases the changes that have  been made have been for the worse, not for the better. I will give three examples. Ten years ago, if someone felt ill in the middle of the night and needed medical help, they could phone up their local GP practice and their local doctor or a member of his practice or a joint practice would come out and see them. Now, they would have to phone up NHS 24, with all the problems that surround that organisation.

The Minister for Health and Community Care is seeking to defend the producers' interest. I would have thought that he should seek to defend the interests of patients and negotiate a contract in the interests of patients instead of giving into the GPs, no matter what they have to say. But, no, we have a health minister who does not seem to want to do that. My second example concerns dentistry. Ten years ago, most people in Scotland had access to an NHS dentist. Today, across the country such dentists are as rare as hen's teeth.

I will not give way at the moment. Whereas, 10 years ago, Scotland had a network of hospitals that were fit for purpose, with hospitals being opened or expanded, we now see—year by year, month by month, week by week—only a list of hospital closures and downgrades. The long list includes Perth royal infirmary; Forth Park hospital, Kirkcaldy; Queen Margaret hospital, Dunfermline; Stirling royal infirmary; Falkirk royal infirmary; St John's hospital, Livingston; Monklands hospital; Stobhill hospital; Victoria infirmary; Hairmyres hospital, East Kilbride; Ayr hospital; the Royal Victoria hospital, Edinburgh; and Jedburgh and Coldstream cottage hospitals. All of those have been either downgraded or closed by the Executive.

I cannot believe that those who voted Labour in 1997, 1999 or 2003 thought that they were voting for the downgrading or closure of hospitals and the running down of the NHS. Whisper it in the streets of Coatbridge and on the roads of Airdrie: Scotland's health service was  better off under the Tories. People's experience of the health service was better. I will give way to Jeremy Purvis.

For hospital operations, we believe in trusting the profession, but that does not mean that the health minister should give into the demands of professionals on every matter of contract and on every single issue. However, let me move on. On infrastructure, we have heard many promises over the past 10 years but seen precious little delivery. What a contrast that makes to the billions that were invested under the previous Conservative Government. That Government built hospitals, whereas the Executive is running them down or closing them down. We expanded public transport, opened new roads and built new motorways to allow our economy to expand, whereas the Executive has a huge queue of projects that includes the A8000—which is still waiting to be upgraded from single carriageway—an A9 that is still to be dualled and the desperately needed commitment to a new Forth crossing.

By next year, we will have had 10 wasted years in which there has been no infrastructural investment and no forward movement. Under the current Administration, Scotland is going backwards not forwards. Scotland is crying out for a change. People are fed up with the stagnation and decline under Labour and the Liberal Democrats. The SNP does not offer a real alternative. It might offer a change of passport, but it offers no change of policy. The SNP presents no ideological opposition to the current regime as it is part of the same tired old left-of-centre consensus that has failed Scotland for too long. The SNP's approach is summed up and encapsulated in the bald statistic that the SNP has opposed just six of the 84 Executive bills that have been passed in the past seven years. Shona Robison told us that the SNP does not believe in opposition for opposition's sake. On those figures, the SNP hardly believes in opposition at all.

By contrast, the Scottish Conservatives offer a real alternative for an  enterprising dynamic Scotland in which people have access to the high-quality public services that they deserve. Over the next eight months, more and more Scots will see it our way.

Is the First Minister aware of today's criticism of the education system by CBI Scotland? It says that many school leavers do not fit the bill in terms of the skills that they require for the workplace and that employers have to pick up the bill for remedial education.

I apologise, as I will have to leave the debate before the closing speeches. I tend not to do that if I can avoid it, but I will speak later this afternoon at the school prize giving at Webster's high school in Kirriemuir. The school has asked me to talk about developing links with schools in Malawi. I was part of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association group that went to Malawi in February. The number of schools, church groups and other community groups that have been in contact and asked me to give them more information about building links with similar groups in Malawi has been enlightening. There is clearly a great deal of interest among the public in restoring the historic relationship. I commend the work that the Scottish Executive is doing to encourage development links with Malawi. I do not always commend what the  Scottish Executive does, but I make an exception on this occasion. When I visited Malawi I was struck by the affection that there is for Scotland among the people there. I have been to Africa on several occasions in the past. I had expected that when we engaged with people in public life in Africa there would be a degree of resentment towards us westerners because of the period of colonisation, but the reverse is true. It is striking that the Malawi that the early Scottish missionaries such as David Livingstone visited was not a land of happiness and peace; it was a land ravaged by the tyranny of the Arab slave trade. The early Scots pioneers who came to Malawi were seen as liberators because they were coming to protect the people of Malawi from the slave traders. That was David Livingstone's great vocation. In addition, of course, he and others brought Christianity with them. Malawi is now one of the most Christian countries in Africa, if not the world, and its people value their religion. While I was there I had the privilege of attending two services of the Church of Central Africa Presbyterian, which has close links with our Church of Scotland. The style of service and worship would be familiar to anyone who has been at a Church of Scotland service. Clearly, there are historic links that are much to be valued. Malawi's problems are significant. There is hunger; although there is not at the moment famine in Malawi, many people do not get basic meals every day. There is a lack of clean water for drinking and washing, and a lack of water to support crops. A drought can cause serious problems for the maize harvest. Education is basic. There is universal free primary education and the teachers we met were excellent and dedicated. However, they work in school structures that have leaking roofs and mud floors and there are no desks, so the children must sit on the floor. The children have very few or no schoolbooks, and there is little in the way of equipment, other than a blackboard and chalk. The standards are basic and teachers struggle to do their best. However, the children put a great value on education, which is refreshing for those who have encountered youngsters in this country. Finally, and perhaps most serious of all, there is a huge problem with a lack of basic health services. That is epitomised in the heartbreaking problem of HIV/AIDS that affects one in seven of the adult population of Malawi—according to official figures—although I suspect that the actual figure is higher than that. We see households headed by children as young as seven, who are bringing up younger siblings because the parents, and sometimes also the grandparents, have died  and there is simply nobody else to look after them. Frankly, the scale of the problem is immense. What can we do to help? Well, as the minister said, we can support fair trade. As the minister mentioned, when we were in Malawi, Mark Ruskell and I visited the Kasinthula sugar producers, who are part of a fair trade project. The difference that the fair trade premium made to that project and the work that it was able to do in the community was obvious to us on the ground. However, we cannot just stop at supporting fair trade. That is growing and there is greater consumer demand, but we must consider tariff reform. I think that that will raise serious issues for many of us here in the West, particularly for the way in which we protect some of our industries from imports from the third world. Those are difficult questions for us to address. Of course, we can help Malawi directly. A huge amount of work is taking place on the ground in Malawi through charities and non-governmental organisations. It is clear that there is a great desire there to get volunteers from Scotland and other parts of the UK to go and help, particularly if they have a background or experience in medicine and education. I very much welcome what the Executive has been doing to encourage people with experience in those fields to go out to Malawi. I know that that scheme has been a great success and I hope to see it expanded. There are many in Scotland who may have had a career in teaching, teacher training or medicine, and who have taken early retirement, who could, in fact, make a huge contribution towards life in Malawi. Perhaps, with a little bit of assistance, they could be encouraged to go out there and help the society along. We need to encourage school links, too. A great many schools in Scotland want to link with schools in Malawi. It is clear that what to us are worthless items, such as old schoolbooks and old pieces of equipment, would make a huge difference to schools in Malawi—as would, indeed, very small sums of money—and would be gratefully received. In addition, we must help develop a political culture in Malawi—the minister referred to that in her speech—that underpins and stimulates everything else that we are trying to do. It is sometimes easy to forget that Malawi has been a multiparty democracy only since 1994. We in this country have had a multiparty democracy for hundreds of years and we can sometimes feel impatient and say, "Why haven't they improved their system? Why are they not enforcing the rule of law more rigorously?" However, we can help Malawi develop institutions. We are developing parliamentary links; as the minister said, we have collaboration between the ombudsmen of our different countries.  We must help Malawi to build strong institutions because people want to invest in it. There are huge opportunities to invest in economic development and tourism, but Malawi will get foreign investors only if there is a secure system in which the rule of law is enforced and the investors know that their investment will be safe; government institutions must be in place to make that work. As a Parliament, we can provide practical help to achieve that. The scale of the problem in Malawi can sometimes daunt us, so great is the need in that country. However, the fact that we cannot do everything does not mean that we should not try to do something. I think that the Scottish Executive would accept that it provides a tiny sum of money in comparison with the DFID budget for Malawi, but it is still worth providing that money. The Presiding Officer is scowling at me, so I will make my final point. I remember listening to a radio interview a few years ago with the late Jackie Ross. He was a Highland minister who set up Blythswood Care, a charity that assists people in eastern Europe and throughout the third world. The interviewer said, "All that you do is just a drop in the bucket. What is the point?" Jackie Ross replied, "Yes, it is a drop in the bucket, but by doing a little we can make a real difference to people's lives. Are you telling me that that isn't worth doing?" We are making a difference to people's lives in Malawi and I encourage the Scottish Executive to carry on with its work.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it values the contribution of T in the park to Scotland and its economy. (S2O-10261)

The minister will be aware of the fact that T in the park brings £18 million a year to the country's economy. She should also be aware that the venue for T in the park—Balado activity centre at Kinross—is used throughout the year for other activities that generate income for the economy, and that the integrity of the site is essential to that. Given all that, will the minister explain why the Scottish Executive did not support Perth and Kinross councillors' unanimous view that the site at Balado should be exempted from the access rights provisions of the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003 for the entire year and why the Scottish ministers are instead restricting the exemption to a mere 28 days? Does she appreciate that that decision will cause problems for the site's owners and may jeopardise future investment in it?

Will the member give way?

I begin by drawing members' attention to my registered interest as a member of the board of management of the University of Dundee students association, which may be relevant to the debate. The background to today's debate is the introduction of top-up fees in English universities by the Labour Government, which has created a problem for the Scottish Executive—although I appreciate that it is not a problem of its making. The Executive should be concerned about the possibility of fee refugees squeezing Scotland-domiciled students out of places at Scottish universities. I believe that the Executive is right to take action to level the playing field for England- domiciled students, whether they apply to English universities or Scottish universities, so there is much in the principle of the order that I and my party do not oppose. What we have a problem with is the specific proposal to charge medical students increased fees from September—just three months from now. The Executive proposal has been brought forward to try to address concerns that Scotland-domiciled students will be squeezed out of places at Scottish medical schools. Unfortunately for the Executive, there is not a shred of evidence that there is a problem. The most recent figures from the Universities and Colleges Admissions Service show a 6.5 per cent drop in applications from England to medical schools in Scotland, while applications for the same courses from around Scotland have risen by 12 per cent in the same period. Where is the problem that the Executive proposal seeks to address? It simply does not exist. The new fees for medical students will come into place in time for the new academic year, starting in September.

That may well be the case, Mr Rumbles, but there is not a single piece of evidence that that is what is happening. The best that can be said about the proposal is that it is premature. As I was saying, the new fees will come into place for the current academic year, starting in September. When people applied for places, they were not expecting increased fees to be in place. There is a simple principle of fairness.

No, I cannot give way; I have already taken one intervention. All the places in the current academic year will have been awarded, so where is the requirement to introduce additional fees now, affecting the new academic year? It simply does not exist. The very least that the Executive should do is to defer the introduction of additional medical fees for one more year, to allow further garnering of evidence and further monitoring of the situation. If a problem seems likely, of course additional fees can be charged. However, we have yet to see any evidence of a problem.  In the run-up to this debate, we have seen some pretty outrageous sabre rattling by the Executive. We have heard suggestions that, if the order is voted down, fees will be deregulated in Scotland and universities will be allowed to charge whatever they want in tuition fees. That is absolute nonsense. It is inconceivable that the principals of Scottish universities would charge whatever they wanted in tuition fees and expect to get away with it. Surely even this Executive could not be so useless and incompetent as to allow that to happen, even if this flawed order is defeated. The real issue today is the betrayal by a Liberal Democrat Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning of Scotland's students. In elections, Liberal Democrats always try to portray themselves as the students' friend, and always say that they are against top-up fees. However, here today we have the Liberal Democrat minister supporting methods to bring top-up fees into Scotland by the back door. It is typical Lib Dem duplicity, with which we are all too familiar. We will remind voters in Edinburgh South, North East Fife, Aberdeen South and everywhere else that this kind of thing is all that we can expect from Liberal Democrats. They will be the ones who brought in the top-up fees.

When the minister talked about engaging in reform that will put people at the centre of the design and delivery of public services, did he mean that citizens will be empowered and given real choice and control in relation to public services or will we continue to have the Government-knows-best approach that has been adopted over the past seven years?

The minister said that we are already ahead of the Executive targets for renewables. As people in too many rural communities know, however, that has been because of the rush to develop onshore wind farms. There are still a huge number of planning applications and public inquiries in the pipeline that remain to be determined. Does the minister agree that it is long past the time for us to start diverting resources and incentives away from onshore wind technology and into marine technology?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether Scottish Natural Heritage and the Scottish Environment Protection Agency have adequate resources in order for them to make representations to public inquiries on planning applications for large renewables projects. (S2O-10092)

If the minister is satisfied that SNH and SEPA have the resources, it must be that they are simply not making those representations. I do not know whether the minister is aware of the frustration that exists among communities in Perthshire and the Ochils that are involved in public inquiries, opposing planning applications for large-scale onshore wind farms. They are having to find tens of thousands of pounds out of their own pockets to employ representation and expert witnesses to level the playing field with wealthy developers, while statutory consultees such as SEPA and SNH—which have objected to the proposals in writing—refuse to provide representation because of a supposed lack of resources. Surely the Scottish  Executive should ensure that statutory consultees are in a position to back up at a public inquiry the evidence that they have given in writing.

The debate calls to mind the halcyon days that I spent discussing statutory instruments in the Subordinate Legislation Committee on Tuesday mornings during the previous parliamentary session in committee rooms on the Mound. I have a sense of nostalgia when I remember those days when we few, we happy few, we band of brothers and sisters joined together to discuss interesting subjects. [ Interruption. ] Murray Tosh suggests from a sedentary position that I want my old job back, but I think that I will leave that until later in my career, if I can. Members who sit on the Conservative side of the chamber have a clear view of the public gallery—it has been interesting during the debate to watch people take their seats and leave quickly thereafter. It is clear that the debate has not attracted the level of public interest that some recent debates have. The debate has been important, though. In the brief time that is available, I will highlight a few matters by drawing on the report and on my experience on the Subordinate Legislation Committee. One important point to which the report refers is that many errors appear in statutory instruments. Stewart Maxwell referred to the fact that the report says that 20 to 30 per cent of instruments that go before the committee have errors. It is interesting that the equivalent figure at Westminster is only about 5 per cent. There are two possible explanations for that: one is that our Scottish Executive drafters are poorer than those at Westminster, which is possible, and the other—which I suspect is more likely—is that the Subordinate Legislation Committee's staff are better at picking up errors than are staff at Westminster. It is only right that we give credit to the committee's staff. Anybody who has served on the committee will know that, were it not for the assistance of the committee's staff and legal advisers, committee members would find their work much more difficult. The time pressures on staff are a serious problem. After instruments are laid, the legal advisers have only a short time in which to examine them in order to draw members' attention to any errors. That can be an issue, in particular towards the end of the parliamentary session or  the week before a recess when dozens of instruments—up to 40 or 50—might be laid. That puts a lot of pressure on the staff, so the timescales should be ironed out. I am pleased that the report comments on that. The Subordinate Legislation Committee is important to Parliament because it keeps technical issues separate from political judgments on instruments. There is nothing automatic about our having such a committee. I understand that the Northern Ireland Assembly does not have a committee that does such work; rather, it is done by a civil servant who reports to the lead committee. However, it is an advantage to have the Subordinate Legislation Committee; its decisions have more weight than if they were made by a civil servant. I will comment briefly on the recommendations in the report. It makes sense to have a simplified procedure. I spent two years on the committee, but am none the wiser about the differences between affirmative and negative instruments—

Or Henry VIII provisions. I am sure that members who have not served on the committee are even more confused than I am. It would make sense to simplify the procedure. We should also reconsider timescales, which would be good for the staff who serve the Subordinate Legislation Committee. As Murray Tosh said, let us consider giving the committee the power to recommend amendments to instruments rather than simply to report to the lead committee, and let us also consider having it report in parallel with the lead committee, which would save time. This has not been the liveliest debate for the people in the public gallery, but it has nevertheless dealt with some important points. I commend the committee's report.

This has been a wide-ranging and instructive debate. When my colleague James Douglas-Hamilton opened the debate, he set out 10 principles that he felt should underlie education policies and on which we hoped we might find common ground with other parties. What has been striking about the debate is that, far from finding common ground, we have seen a fundamental divide between the Conservatives, who believe that the core of education policy should be what parents want for their children, and those in other parties who think that it is right for the state to decide what sort of education children should have. We believe in greater local decision making and in more power being devolved to head teachers.  James Douglas-Hamilton talked about our support for devolved school management and quoted in support of his views Fred Forrester, formerly of the EIS—not a natural Conservative supporter—who said: "the blunt truth is that DSM is a tawdry and threadbare substitute for real devolution of education decision making to school level." People who have experience of education who are not Conservatives share the general thrust of our policy. We support greater parental involvement and greater powers being given to school boards. It is disgraceful that the Executive is considering reducing the role of parents in schools and taking away school boards' statutory rights. We reject the Executive's nanny-knows-best approach, which is all about ministers handing down directives from the centre and local authority officials telling schools how to run themselves. We want maximum power for schools and those who are involved in contributing to the running of them, whether they are head teachers or parents.

I cannot speak for Mr Blair's education system in England; the member will have to raise that point with his Labour colleagues. Every head teacher to whom I have spoken wants more control over budgets because they are interested in having more power. Good head teachers would welcome more responsibility and less interference from the centre. Robert Brown said in his opening speech that he and the Executive were interested in education for all and not for some. The problem with the Executive's approach, however, is that it defends a system that means that the least well-off—those from the most disadvantaged communities—have the poorest access to the best education. The minister and Executive members perpetuate the myth that all schools can be just as good as each other. That seems to be the holy grail of the Executive's education policy, but no number of Da Vinci codes will help the minister find it. The simple fact is that some schools are and always will be better than others. The problem with our current one-size-fits-all comprehensive system is that better schools are available only to those from better-off backgrounds. The example of Jordanhill school has been quoted in the chamber and referred to in our motion and by Bill Butler.

The houses in the Jordanhill catchment area in the west end of Glasgow command a premium compared with identical houses a couple of streets away that do not fall within that catchment area. That is because people appreciate the value of living in the Jordanhill catchment area and are prepared to pay for it. The consequence of that is that people are being priced out of accessing education at Jordanhill. Our system of educational apartheid, which is being supported by the current Executive, disadvantages those from less well-off backgrounds. The minister needs to get his blinkers off and realise what is going wrong.

If the member will forgive me, I will allow the minister to intervene first.

I accept absolutely that schools in different social areas are doing well, but Jordanhill makes my point exactly. It is a magnet school, it is doing well and we need more like it. However, most important is the need to ensure that there is access for all to our best schools and not just for those who can afford to live in those catchment areas. That is the problem with the current system. We reject a one-size-fits-all approach. We believe in greater diversity in the state sector. Why should we not have in our towns and cities schools with different specialities? I welcome the fact that the SNP is moving towards a more diverse system. The pity is that for reasons of blinkered ideology, the SNP cannot take its policy to its natural conclusion, which is choice for parents. Fiona Hyslop said that we cannot have choice because there is only one viable option in many rural areas. Although that is true to an extent, in European terms, Scotland has a heavily urbanised population. Even the small town of Elgin, with which Fiona Hyslop will be familiar after the recent by-election, has two secondary schools. Every candidate in the by-election supported the retention of those two schools. Why can we not have one secondary school with a science bias and the other with an arts bias? Just because we cannot do that everywhere does not mean that we should not try to do it in many places. Fiona Hyslop tied herself in knots trying to explain the SNP policy. She said that all pupils should have the opportunity to know excellence. However, if a local school had a speciality in, say,  music, and I, who am tone deaf and completely unmusical were to attend that school, does she mean to tell me that I would benefit from attending a school with excellence in music? It is sensible to give someone the opportunity to go to a school with excellence in arts, science, mathematics, sport or whatever, but it is an absolute nonsense to say that there can be excellence in only one subject, whether or not a child has aptitude for that subject.

I agree absolutely; Mr Welsh makes my point exactly. The problem is that such schools are exclusive when they should be open to all. We should allow everybody to access the best education, not just those who can afford it. In the very brief time that remains, I want to touch on the important issue of mainstreaming, which was the subject of some very informed speeches by David McLetchie, Rosemary Byrne, Alex Fergusson and others. There is widespread concern about the presumption in favour of mainstreaming, which is causing huge problems in the classroom not only for teachers but, equally important, for children, not least those with special needs, who are simply not getting the care and quality of education that they need. Indeed, it has been a particular problem for children on the autistic spectrum. Instead of pursuing an ideologically blinkered approach based on the presumption that mainstreaming is best in all circumstances, we need to think about what is right for the child and consider each child on his or her merits. Our current comprehensive system leaves too many children behind. There is no point in being ostriches and pretending that there are no problems with it. We accept that school education has improved since devolution, but the glowing picture that was painted by the minister will be unfamiliar to far too many people in our classrooms who are struggling with indiscipline and disruptive pupils. The Conservatives are happy to find common ground with other parties to pursue common goals and to drive up standards; however, we will not hesitate to say what is right—even if we are, for the moment, the only ones who are doing so.

But it has been like that for 10 years.

Is Elaine Murray suggesting that pupils and teachers in other schools in Scotland are not hard-working?

Will Fiona Hyslop expand on SNP policy? I understand that it is to allow comprehensive schools to develop specialisms—in sports or music, for example. How can that system work if we do not allow a degree of choice? If I have a child who is gifted in music and their local school specialises not in music but in sports, do they have to go to a school that specialises in sports? Why can they not go across town to a school that specialises in music? Is the member's policy not somewhat confused?

Will the minister take an intervention?

As we are currently making comparisons between the past and the record of this Government, is the minister proud of the fact that, since 1997, we have seen a ninefold increase in violent and disruptive incidents in the classroom?

Given the figures published yesterday that showed that foreign investment in Scotland has fallen by 95 per cent since Labour came to power, does the  First Minister believe that that is his fault or the fault of his Liberal Democrat deputy?

I congratulate Bill Butler on securing this evening's debate on an important subject. A number of excellent points have been made about the impact of sectarianism. Like Patrick Harvie, I am disappointed that the debate is not better subscribed, given the importance of the issue. I do not wish to rehearse all the points that members have made, the great majority of which I agree with. I will use the time that is available to me to dispel what I believe are two myths about sectarianism. The first myth is that sectarianism has anything whatsoever to do with religion. I know good Christian people of all denominations, some of whom are Protestants like myself and some of whom are staunch Roman Catholics. I have yet to meet anyone who has a strong religious faith who could be accused of being guilty of sectarianism, or indeed bigotry in any form. In fact, the more pronounced the Christian  faith of individuals, regardless of their denomination, the less likely they would be to indulge in the sectarian behaviour that we hear about and of which we have seen evidence at old firm football matches and elsewhere. I suspect that the vast majority of those who indulge in sectarian abuse or behaviour or sing the songs that we know so much about have rarely, if ever, graced the inside of a church or chapel. They might consider themselves to be followers of Jesus Christ, but little in their behaviour is Christian. That persuades me that sectarianism has nothing to do with religion but is purely a form of tribalism. Those who are truly religious, have true faith and believe in Christ's instruction to us to love one another have no truck with such behaviour. Neither do I believe the claim that is sometimes made that the system of separate schooling in parts of our country is a root cause of sectarianism. We have only to consider that in most of northern Europe, where church schooling is the norm and Protestant and Roman Catholic children attend different schools, sectarianism is almost unknown. The phenomenon is almost unique to Scotland and Northern Ireland. Given that, there must be cultural reasons other than separate education for sectarianism in Scotland. To say that our system of Roman Catholic schools is to blame for sectarianism is a cheap and lazy accusation to hurl. I regret to say that the second myth to which I will draw attention appears in Bill Butler's motion. I will make my point as gently as I can, because I agreed with almost everything in his speech. His motion says: "sectarianism is a problem throughout Scotland". If that is genuinely Bill Butler's view, he knows a different Scotland from that in which I grew up.

I am afraid that I do not know those figures. I was born in Inverness, I have lived in Aberdeen and Edinburgh and I now live in Perthshire. All that I can say is that I have never experienced sectarianism in any community in which I have lived or encountered anyone in those communities who has experienced sectarianism. I do not deny that there is a problem in some communities. In the west of Scotland and perhaps even in places such as West Lothian and parts of Fife, some communities are divided. However, if we went out and about in towns and cities such as Inverness, Aberdeen, Dundee, Perth, Stirling and Dumfries and asked people whether they  considered sectarianism to be a serious problem in their community, they would be surprised even to be asked the question. We need to be careful. We can accept that there is a problem of sectarianism, but we should not talk as if it were a problem throughout the country, which I do not believe it is. We need to retain a sense of proportion. I do not believe that the whole of Scotland is tainted by the curse of sectarianism. We should not exaggerate the problem, as that undermines the arguments and the genuine efforts that are being made to counter the social problem. With those important qualifications in mind, I am happy to support Bill Butler's motion.

If Mr Stone listened to my speech, he will have heard that we have serious concerns about several details in the bill. Without a commitment from the minister to lodge stage 2 amendments to address those concerns, we will have difficulty in supporting the bill. We therefore intend to abstain—I see no confusion about our stance.

I have been listening with interest to Christine Grahame's speech. However, the current law of inhibition and adjudication already allows what she has just described to happen, although I appreciate that land attachment takes things a step further.

As the first member of the Enterprise and Culture Committee to speak in the debate, I thank the committee clerks for all their assistance in preparing our stage 1 report and the many individuals and organisations that gave evidence to the committee. The Bankruptcy and Diligence etc (Scotland) Bill is a detailed and complex piece of proposed legislation. Given that most, if not all, committee members started with a limited background in bankruptcy, the guidance that was given to us by our adviser, Nicholas Grier, was invaluable. The Executive introduced the bill with the stated intention of helping to create a more entrepreneurial culture and encourage personal and business restart following bankruptcy. That  ambition certainly found favour with the committee. However, having taken evidence, the general view of committee members was that the bill would do little, if anything, to achieve those objectives. The key debate was about whether the period of bankruptcy should be reduced from three years to one year. The committee received little evidence to suggest that that measure would help to create a more entrepreneurial culture. The principal reason for reducing the period of bankruptcy to one year seemed to be that it would bring Scotland into line with England. As a unionist, I have no particular difficulty with that concept; indeed, in many ways it is desirable from the point of view of enterprise to have a level playing field on such issues throughout the United Kingdom. However, we should be clear that that, rather than consideration of the impact on enterprise, seems to be the main justification for that part of the bill. The evidence from down south is that there has been a rise in personal bankruptcies following the introduction of similar legislation a number of years ago. We must be careful that we do not accelerate an already fast-rising level of personal bankruptcy in Scotland.

The point that I was trying to make was that we heard little evidence that the bill would create an entrepreneurial culture. I appreciate that the minister's motives are altruistic, but he needs to work a little harder to persuade us of his case. The Scottish Conservatives have a number of key concerns about aspects of the bill. Although there is much in it that we support, we will reserve judgment on its totality until we see whether changes will be made that deal with our principal concerns. Our first concern relates to protected trust deeds, which are, in effect, a private sector administered scheme and an alternative to bankruptcy. The fundamental difficulty for the committee was that while we were considering the bill, a parallel consultation was being held on the future of protected trust deeds. It would have been helpful to the committee if we had had a conclusion from the Executive on protected trust deeds before we prepared our report.  My view is that protected trust deeds are a valuable and generally cost-effective tool, which should have a future. The Executive has proposed setting a minimum dividend of 30p in the pound, but other members of the committee shared my view that the case for that had not been made. Certainly there will be circumstances in which 30p in the pound would seem to be a fair minimum, but for many estates such an arbitrary figure would be completely inappropriate. I believe that the Executive needs to think again about the issue. My second principal concern relates to the creation of the new Scottish civil enforcement commission, which is a quango that will be set up to regulate all matters relating to enforcement. The commission would, for example, decide on a person's competence to be an enforcement officer and would investigate complaints. In our report, we drew attention to the fact that the Finance Committee questioned seriously whether the creation of a new quango was the most cost-effective way of addressing the issue, which could have been dealt with in-house by the Executive's Justice Department or in a number of other ways. Other routes certainly require consideration. I turn to diligence. Mr MacAskill—and other members in interventions—raised the issue of the proposed land attachment, which would, in effect, allow an unsecured creditor with a debt of £1,500 or more to obtain security over a debtor's house and in due course to sell it to realise the debt. The committee had serious difficulties with that concept. We currently allow a creditor to attach property by means of inhibition, but the sale of a property by adjudication is a tortuous process—members can take my word for it, because I instructed one at one stage—and takes 10 years. The new diligence is much quicker, but we were not convinced that such a fundamental change would strike the right balance between the interests of the debtor and the interests of the creditor. The committee's recommendation was that land attachment should proceed, but with a significant amendment to exclude the debtor's main dwelling. That would be coupled with a right of appeal to the sheriff for creditors, which would apply in exceptional circumstances.

I am not sure that I heard Mr MacAskill make that point. However, the  committee's view was that the main dwelling-house should be exempted.

Mr MacAskill has his point on the record. The committee proposed that people's second properties, land or commercial properties could be attached, but that the principal dwelling-house would be exempt. From the point of view of public policy, that would get round the problem of diligence possibly creating homelessness, which cannot be in the wider interest. The new land attachment issue was one of the most controversial areas of the bill and attracted a great deal of correspondence and written and oral evidence. The committee would want the Executive to consider amending the bill at stage 2 to ensure that it does not proceed in its current, somewhat draconian, form. I wish to highlight a fourth point in relation to the question of diligence against earnings. Diligence against earnings is relatively straightforward for the creditor, as he simply serves a notice on the debtor's employer. However, that creates all sorts of administrative difficulties for the employer, who has to calculate how much money to deduct from a weekly or monthly salary. That can be particularly complex if, as is often the case, there is more than one creditor. I understand that the fee that is payable to creditors for earnings attachment is currently 50p per payment and will soon rise to £1 per payment. For a person who is paid monthly, that amounts to the princely sum of £12 a year. For many small businesses, the burden that is placed on them is in no way compensated for by that level of remuneration. We should consider having a more realistic level of return. The bill touches on wider issues, such as the availability of easy credit. There is no doubt that we have a problem in society with a huge amount of personal borrowing. We need to change our culture to ensure that we can strike the right balance between debtors and creditors. However, we cannot go too far, because we need to be wary of the law of unintended consequences. If we make credit too hard to obtain, we will simply drive the poorest members of society into the arms of loan sharks. Although the bill contains some sensible measures, it is seriously flawed and will need to be seriously amended at stage 2. For the reasons  that I have outlined, the Scottish Conservatives will not support the bill at stage 1.

One issue that the Enterprise and Culture Committee considered is the rising trend of personal bankruptcies. Reflecting on what has happened south of the border gives rise to the concern that the trend may accelerate if it is perceived that the bill makes bankruptcy easier for those who are in debt. Will the minister comment on the Executive's policy thinking on that issue and say whether he anticipates an increase in the number of bankruptcies as a result of the bill?

I wonder whether we could do a deal with Jim Mather: we will promise not to mention third-party rights of appeal if he promises to write a new speech.  I thank the Enterprise and Culture Committee clerks and the Scottish Parliament information centre researchers for all their hard work in helping us put the report together. I thank the many people who gave us written and oral evidence for what turned out to be a substantial and, I hope, influential, piece of work. I put on record our special thanks to the committee adviser, Wolfgang Michalski, who was formerly the head economic adviser to the OECD in Paris, for all his guidance and input. Wolfgang Michalski's contribution was particularly valuable. He helped to distil all the information and different points of view that we received into key areas so that we could reach conclusions on them. Those committee members who made the trip to Hamburg will remember the splendid hospitality that we received courtesy of Mrs Michalski, at their gracious home on the riverside. Throughout our trip to Germany, in both Hamburg and Bremen, we were treated extremely well, and we gained a very useful insight into city region policy. One incident that sticks in my mind took place when we were being shown round the Airbus factory in Hamburg by one of the production managers there. Airbus is a major employer even by European terms, with a huge base in Hamburg employing tens of thousands of people. By coincidence, the Airbus A380, the world's largest passenger jet, which we saw in production, landed in London for the first time this morning. When we were discussing efficiency with the production manager in Hamburg, he told us that the Airbus efficiency target was 5 per cent—that means 5 per cent this year, 5 per cent next year and 5 per cent every year thereafter. Airbus goes on making planes to the same standard and quality, but it looks for that scale of reduction in overhead costs every year. Of course, we immediately offered to take the production manager to Scotland to meet Tom McCabe to teach him a thing or two about efficient government. If Airbus can make those efficiencies and still build planes of the same quality, why can the Scottish Executive not do the same with our money? The background to our inquiry was the relatively poor performance of the Scottish economy in recent years compared with the performance of the wider United Kingdom economy and, in particular, the widely perceived lack of entrepreneurial culture in Scotland. I do not want to go over all the statistics, but we know that the rate of business start-ups is poorer here than it is in the UK as a whole. We have higher levels of business failure and a lower level of entrepreneurial activity. The Enterprise and Culture Committee was trying to identify some initiatives that the Executive could develop to deal with the problem.  As Alex Neil said, a key finding of the committee's report concerned the investment gap in Scotland compared with the situation in more successful economies. We have a shortfall in both public sector and private sector investment. That is particularly evident in the low level of business research and development spending. The committee made a plea, as has been well reported and mentioned in the debate already, for an additional £8.5 billion of private and public investment in the economy. That figure attracted a great deal of press interest and was widely criticised by apologists for the Executive, prominent among whom was the Executive's apostle on earth, Mr Alf Young of The Herald . The difficulty for such critics is that the statistics that they use to try to debunk the £8.5 billion figure date from as far back as 2000, six years ago. We could have a long statistical battle over the figures—I think that we have already done so this afternoon—but that would rather cloud the central issue of the committee report, which is simply that we need more investment. I hope that we can all agree on that. We spent a great deal of time in preparing the report and in our evidence sessions discussing the level and quality of public sector expenditure. Inevitably, the committee could not agree on what the overall size of the public sector in Scotland should be—we all had our different perspectives on that. However, we agreed that the right balance had to be struck between investment in the future and the obligation to spend on the current needs of society. We felt that investment in areas that would deliver long-term economic benefit had to increase. We identified physical infrastructure, specifically in transport and education, as being the area in which we need a proportional increase in spending if the long-term rate of business growth is to go up. By implication, we were making a criticism of the current spending balance. I was interested to read the Executive's comments on that recommendation in its response to the report. The Executive referred to "the perception that over the 30 years prior to devolution long-term investment had been neglected", which rather made me smile because, if such a perception exists, it is largely because people in the Executive keep repeating it. The sad fact for the Executive is that, post-devolution, far from an increase in investment in infrastructure, levels of spending, for example on transport infrastructure, have been slashed. In fact, it was four or five years into devolution before levels of transport spending recovered to the levels that they had been under the Conservative Government. I could bore members with a long list of all the transport improvements and other infrastructure investments that were made under that  Conservative Government. I have the list here, in case any member wishes to challenge me, but I will refrain from reading it.

If the member wants to hear the list, I will be delighted to read it.

I was not on the trip to Finland, so I am not sure to which cuts the member is referring. Would he like to elaborate?

I am still not entirely sure that I understand Jamie Stone's point, although I understand that Finland's circumstances are entirely different from ours. Clearly, costs were involved in disengaging after the collapse of the Soviet Union. Perhaps the lesson is that we should not engage in political divorce from our neighbouring countries—I do not know.

If the member had asked the question more clearly, I might have understood the point that he was trying to make. Another of the committee's recommendations on transport was that the Executive should agree an order of priority for proposed transport projects that refers to their economic benefit. When I asked the Minister for Transport and Telecommunications to do that, he gave a less than clear answer. It surely makes sense to ensure that we spend on the most important infrastructure projects that will deliver the most economic benefits. For example, we should know whether the M74 extension could deliver more economic benefit than the Borders railway or the Edinburgh or Glasgow airport rail links could deliver.

That is a good question to which we do not know the answer, because nobody has  told us and the Executive has not done that work. It is good that Highlands and Islands Enterprise has a priority list of future transport projects, but it is a shame that the Scottish Executive or Scottish Enterprise has nothing similar for the rest of Scotland.

I do not disagree on that priority, because I am in favour of the M74 extension. However, the member makes my point for me, which is that we do not have a priority list but we should have one so that we know how projects rank. I could say much more about social enterprises and procurement, but I must close soon. The committee's report suggests the creation of a national economic forum. Some people are critical of that idea, but the important point is that we need a national consensus about the importance of the economy. In Ireland, such a consensus was the precursor to turning round economic decline and building the Celtic tiger. I hope that we can go Ireland's way and start building a consensus. I hope that the committee's report, into which a lot of effort has gone, will help to build a new consensus that economic growth should be our top priority.

I wonder whether the minister is now in a position to tell us—he could not tell us last week—from where in his budget the additional £45 million for Scottish Enterprise is coming. In other words, which other budgets will be cut?

Will the member take an intervention?

How can Christine May, having read our amendment, consider that we are calling for micromanagement?

The motion in Jim Mather's name highlights mounting concern about the shortfall in Scottish Enterprise's budget. I am sure that, like me, all  members have been contacted by local groups and businesses in their constituencies that have expressed concern at projects being put on hold due to Scottish Enterprise's uncertain budgetary position. I know that a great deal of distress has been caused, particularly amongst those who had anticipated funding in the current year for projects that have now been put in doubt. The fact is that the handling of Scottish Enterprise's finances has been a credit neither to that organisation nor to the minister and his department. Two key concerns exist about how Scottish Enterprise responded to the impending overspend. First, as the KPMG report makes clear, Scottish Enterprise "were slow to act when it became clear that the new budget and resource allocation system had stimulated expenditure well ahead of budgeted income. In November 2005 SEn became aware of a significant overspend but action taken at that time was not sufficiently robust. This was not helped by poor and slow financial reporting and unclear budget accountability." Clearly, a serious error was made. When I challenged Jack Perry and his colleagues on that point at the Enterprise and Culture Committee meeting on 25 April, Jack Perry accepted that a mistake had been made. We should be grateful to him for at least admitting that. The second problem is that, apparently, Scottish Enterprise was told by the Executive as from May 2005 that there was no scope for additional funding in the current year but, notwithstanding, Scottish Enterprise still believed that additional resources might be made available. When I asked Jack Perry whether he had believed that the door was still open, he said: "We felt that it was still ajar."—[ Official Report, Enterprise and Culture Committee , 25 April 2006; c 2946.] However, the minister told the committee: "I certainly never suggested that the door was open for additional spend."—[ Official Report, Enterprise and Culture Committee , 2 May 2006; c 3009.] At best, a serious breakdown in communication took place between the minister's department and Scotland's largest public agency. The overspend issue has been poorly handled by Scottish Enterprise, but I do not believe that it should be a resignation matter for the organisation's senior officials. In that respect, I disagree with Alex Neil's stance. For me, the more interesting question concerns the position of the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning in all this. Why did he allow the situation to develop within a department that comes within his brief? By his own admission, the minister was made aware of the seriousness of the emerging problems at Scottish Enterprise by "press reports". Thereafter, a meeting was requested between the  Executive and Scottish Enterprise officials so that the situation could be fully understood. Only subsequently was the minister advised of a likely overspend. It is simply extraordinary that the minister had to rely on information from the press to tell him what was happening in a public agency under his own brief. Perhaps we should not be too surprised, because the minister's stock is not high in the business community. Peter Hughes, chief executive of Scottish Engineering, was quoted in The Scotsman on 28 April as saying: "The SE board has lacked political support all along ... My impression is that they are an unhappy bunch because the minister has lacked the balls to support them. As they were appointed by politicians, I firmly believe that politicians should get behind them. The fence-sitting and failure to support has been appalling." That may not be parliamentary language, but nothing can disguise the seriousness of that attack on the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning by a senior business figure. I cannot recall any previous minister with responsibility for enterprise being attacked in such a way by a business leader. What a mess the minister has allowed his department to get into. Calling him a hands-off minister is putting it mildly. It is impossible to imagine Wendy Alexander getting into such a situation. What is to be done? Scottish Enterprise must sort out its finances. We need more clarity from the minister as to where that £50 million is coming from. What budget will be cut? Will it be the green jobs strategy, the skills and training budget or transport? The minister needs to get a grip on his department and tell us what programmes are being cut. I move amendment S2M-4367.1, to leave out from "calls" to end and insert: "believes that the time has come for Scottish Enterprise to be restructured, refocused and slimmed down, with the savings made being invested in transport infrastructure improvements and reductions in the business rate which would deliver real benefits to all businesses across Scotland."

Does the minister agree that the dispute is unfair to students, particularly those who are in their final year, who hope to graduate this summer and who at best are looking at a delay in the issuing of their awards? Does he agree that those students are the innocent third parties in the dispute? Will he urge the parties involved to have regard to the interests of the innocent students?

If the Scottish Executive can conjure up £60 million out of thin air at the drop of a hat to bail out Scottish Enterprise, can the First Minister give us an assurance that, the next time that we in this party ask for additional money for vital road upgrades or to save threatened hospitals, for example, we will not be accused of making rash spending commitments and we will not be told that there is no money to spare?

Will the member give way on that point?

I am grateful to Mr Ruskell for giving way. On the question of subsidy, does he appreciate that the only reason that people invest in renewables is because high levels of Government subsidy encourage that investment?

I speak in support of the amendment in the name of my colleague Alex Johnstone. I think that it was the Roman politician Cato who famously ended every speech in the senate with the words, "and Carthage must be destroyed", regardless of the context. We have almost reached that position in the Parliament because hardly a week goes by without our debating nuclear power and hardly a Business Bulletin appears that does not include the words, "and we must have no new nuclear power stations in Scotland." I am not sure how educational, instructive or useful such an approach is. The positions of the parties—with one exception—are quite well fixed.

Let me make some progress. We know that the Greens and the Scottish nationalists oppose the building of new nuclear power stations—the Greens' motion and the SNP's amendment make that clear. The Liberal Democrats say that they are against new nuclear power. The motion quotes Nicol Stephen as saying: "The Liberal Democrats have a tough, clear and consistent position across the UK", but, bizarrely and rather confusingly, the Liberal Democrat amendment, which is in the name of Ross Finnie, who is an Executive minister, says that the party  "will not support the further development of nuclear power stations while waste management issues remain unresolved." There seems to be some confusion about whether the Liberal Democrats would be in favour of new nuclear power stations if we resolved the waste management issues. Their position is not tough, clear or consistent.

The Conservatives believe in Scottish solutions to Scottish problems. At least we are not in the situation in which the Liberal Democrats find themselves, whereby Mr Finnie—an Executive minister—and the party's Scottish leader—also an Executive minister—are saying quite contradictory things. That is for the Liberal Democrats to explain away. We are generally in favour of new nuclear power stations in Scotland, as we have said on many previous occasions. To be fair to the Scottish Labour Party, it is generally in favour of new nuclear power stations in Scotland. We know that the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, who is posted absent this morning, favours that policy. I repeat what we have said to the Labour Party on previous occasions. If it has the courage to decide to go ahead with the planning of new nuclear installations in Scotland, it will have our support, which will ensure that there is a majority in the Parliament in favour of proceeding with that work. That is what Scotland requires. I congratulate Richard Lochhead on what was almost a maiden speech. He has a new constituency, but his message and tone are the same. In referring to Scotland as a waste dump, he somewhat overegged the pudding. Such language does not assist the debate. We have produced our fair share of nuclear waste. I am by no means proposing that a new waste dump should be located in Scotland, but to expect that the waste that we have created should be exported elsewhere seems an unreasonable position to take. Our amendment says that decisions need to be made now. In its report, CORWM said that its recommendations must be acted on urgently. I do not believe that we can afford to wait. There is  potentially a major gap in energy production in Scotland, which must be filled. We must undertake a parallel exercise of commissioning new nuclear power stations and dealing with existing waste. Each year, the use of nuclear energy prevents the UK from emitting around 8 million tonnes of CO 2 . In 2003, the production of energy in Scottish nuclear power stations resulted in an avoidance of CO 2 emissions that was equivalent to removing all the traffic from Scotland's roads. We cannot afford to do without nuclear power.

I seek clarity on the Liberal Democrat position. If the waste management issues are resolved, will the Liberal Democrats still oppose new nuclear power stations?

Does the minister consider it acceptable that Scottish and Southern Energy has not given any consideration to health issues when considering the route of the proposed new power line? Given that there is, at best, a reasonable doubt about the impact of electricity lines on health, should that not be a material factor in the determination of the application?

To ask the First Minister what plans the Scottish Executive has to commemorate the 300 th anniversary of the 1707 union of the Parliaments. (S2F-2247)

I thank the First Minister for that positive response; there seems to be an outbreak of cross-party consensus on the issue. I am sure that the First Minister will agree that, whatever one's political persuasion, the union of the Parliaments was a significant event in Scotland's history. Whether or not one takes the view, as I do, that the union has benefited Scotland, I hope that we all agree that the anniversary is important and should be commemorated. I hope that the Scottish Executive will work closely with Her Majesty's Government to put in place a programme of events that will bring the nation together in celebration of the union of the Parliaments.

The debate has been interesting and informative. I am a little disappointed to see the Minister for Education and Young People here. That is not in any way a reflection on his speech, which was excellent. I just thought that he might be joining the exodus to Moray—like so many other members—as the former Labour candidate for that constituency. It is clear that, on this occasion, he decided that discretion is the better part of valour. However, when he is opening his mail in the next few weeks, he had better be careful that no packets of white feathers fall out. I should declare an interest in that my wife is going through teacher training. The minister will be pleased to hear that she is a success in the Executive's campaign to recruit people to the profession. The curriculum review is timely. Teachers often complain that there is a lack of flexibility, that they cannot tailor their lessons to pupils' needs and that the curriculum is too cluttered. The Conservatives certainly favour choice and flexibility at local level; we would dislike a top-down approach whereby the Executive sought to dictate to schools what subjects they should teach. We favour a localised approach. The buzzword of our party—and now, I  believe, the buzzword of the Liberal Democrats—is "localism". Everybody seems to be talking about it.

I will ignore that sedentary intervention. We should recognise that there is a balance to be struck between flexibility and accountability. Most parents want assurances that their children are learning core subjects such as maths, English, science and history in a formal manner that will stand them in good stead in later life. However, we recognise that, within that, schools should have flexibility. There is an issue about the crowded curriculum. In many debates in Parliament in the past few years, members have asked for more time for particular subjects. In debates on the arts, members say, "We must have more arts in schools." In debates on music, members say, "We must have more music in schools." In debates on sport, members say, "We must have more sport in schools." The following week, the same members are standing up asking the minister what he is going to do about the crowded curriculum. We need to take a joined-up approach. There is only so much that can be done within the school day, so we need balance. The key is to allow local decision making so that head teachers and schools can work out the best balance for themselves. Obviously, they should take account of the legitimate desires of ministers and politicians to, for example, encourage more sport so that youngsters are more active and so that we can deal with the problems of obesity and lack of exercise.

Fiona Hyslop makes a good point and I share her concern. If we are to encourage more youngsters to take up physical sport, we need people who can teach them. We will do that only if we have more PE teachers, especially in primary schools. Stewart Maxwell, Margo MacDonald and others mentioned the teaching of history in schools. As a student of Scottish history, I think that we should make sure that youngsters have access to history, particularly Scottish and British history. That does not mean that every school must teach history in a particular way. In this, too, we should encourage schools to develop their own approaches. We should not have a set national curriculum and I do  not agree with those who say that ministers should decide centrally how schools should order their curricula. Brian Adam spoke passionately about science. We need to have science taught in our schools—that is in the interests of our economy. We know that there is concern about the lack of science and engineering graduates and that the needs of our economy are not necessarily being met. Perhaps too many of our youngsters are doing arts courses in our universities. The way to deal with that is not to set quotas but to engender in young people an interest in science. I endorse many of Brian Adam's comments about that. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton referred to foreign languages with reference to the economic needs of our country. Surely it makes sense to teach foreign languages. I do not mean just French; when I was at school everyone was taught French and, if they were lucky, some were taught German or Italian. Other than English of course, the languages of modern commerce are Spanish and Mandarin. Perhaps we should think about being a bit more adventurous in our teaching. We believe that schools need more autonomy. We believe in devolving more power to head teachers, teachers and school boards, and we believe that giving schools more control over their curriculum will drive up standards in education.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. It has always been the convention in the Parliament that, after a ministerial statement is given, the Opposition spokespeople get the opportunity to ask questions first of all.

Thank you, Presiding Officer.

I am grateful to the minister for his statement, and for the advance copy of it. We have had weeks of press speculation, leaks and concerns being expressed to members. Eventually, the minister has given us an update—not before time, I have to say. I have four quick questions for the minister. First, how will the £30 million overspend in the current year's budget impact on the budget for the next financial year? Secondly, the minister has given us an assurance that the business gateway funding will be protected. What guarantees can he give us about funding for other key projects, such as the new business growth fund, the intermediary technology institutes and R and D Plus? Thirdly, there is no mention in the statement of redundancies. We have heard speculation about redundancy levels in Scottish Enterprise of 100, 130 and 200 jobs. How many jobs are going to go? Is that a result of the overspend? Finally, is not this a missed opportunity to take a long, hard look at Scottish Enterprise to see whether it is fulfilling its objectives with its £0.5 billion budget of taxpayers' money? Surely the minister should seize the chance to turn Scottish Enterprise into a leaner, more focused and more effective organisation.

The Executive is wasting taxpayers' money.

If the tolled bridges review was so important, why is there to be another review? [ Interruption. ]

Oh, dear—if what we have just heard represents the quality of debate in the Parliament, we have a long way to go. I welcome the opportunity that the Scottish National Party has afforded us this morning to discuss the future of tolls on the Tay bridge. I am pleased to support the SNP motion and to speak to the amendment in my name. The retention of tolls on the Tay bridge is unjustified, given the removal of tolls from both the Skye bridge and the Erskine bridge. What we are  seeing is no more than a political fix. The Liberal Democrats in the north agitated and had the tolls removed from the Skye bridge. The Labour members in the west took umbrage at that and we saw the tolls removed from the Erskine bridge. However, with tolls remaining on the Tay and Forth road bridges, the people of Tayside and Fife are left out in the cold. Try as he might to provide some logical rationale for his decision to retain the Tay bridge tolls, the Minister for Transport and Telecommunications has been unable to do so. In fact, he has been tying himself in knots trying to justify the decision, which has been more than a little entertaining. He has told us that tolls must be kept on the Tay bridge because there is still debt attached to it, yet the fact that there was plenty of debt attached to the Skye bridge did not seem to be a barrier to removing the tolls there. The minister said that tolls should be abolished on the Erskine bridge to cut congestion, but we know—Shona Robison referred to this—that the Tay bridge tolls cause congestion in Dundee city centre because of the existence of the toll booths on the north side of the bridge. Traffic at peak times queues back into the city centre and causes congestion. The minister's position is utterly inconsistent and is no more than a political fix to satisfy both Liberal Democrat and Labour camps, leaving the east of Scotland out in the cold. The Executive amendment calls for a review of tolls on the Tay and Forth bridges, but we have just had such a review. What does that say about the competence of the minister and his department? Why were the issues not previously considered? Who is to carry out the proposed review and how much will it cost? Who will pay for it and when will we hear its determinations? Let us be in no doubt: there is no need for another review. If there were, it would only be because the minister had not been doing his job properly. This is no more than a shoddy attempt at the eleventh hour to save the minister's face and kick the issue into the long grass until after the 2007 election. Well, we are not so easily fooled and neither will the voters of Tayside and Fife be. Our amendment deals with the toll plaza. As members will be aware, it has been proposed that, in order to reduce the congestion in Dundee city centre, the toll plaza should be relocated from the north end of the bridge to the south end. A substantial capital cost would be involved in such a relocation. Even if that went ahead, would we then not just see the congestion problems that currently affect Dundee city centre transferred to the road network in north-east Fife? Surely the sensible thing to do is to address the removal of tolls from the Tay bridge now and thus save the capital sum that would be involved in relocating the toll plaza and use it to help to reduce the debt.  That would solve the minister's problem for him. Our amendment refers to that proposal. I could say much more, but all that I will say is this. We have heard from Labour members over the past few weeks about their position on the Tay bridge tolls. I see from a report in that fine organ The Courier on 25 March that Labour's Kate Maclean, Marlyn Glen and Richard Baker have all urged Labour bosses to abolish the tolls on the Tay. I also note that, in a joint submission to Labour's Scottish policy forum, Scott Barrie, Helen Eadie, Marilyn Livingstone and Christine May have all called for an end to tolls on the Forth and Tay bridges. They did not say that we will need another review or that we need to wait for a year; they said that they wanted an end to the tolls. Well, they can vote for precisely that this afternoon. It was not just Labour members who made such calls. Iain Smith, the Liberal Democrat member for North East Fife, and Andrew Arbuckle, the Liberal Democrat member for Mid Scotland and Fife—

I am in my final minute.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Those Liberal Democrat members have said that the tolls should be removed. Iain Smith said on 1 March: "I think that the case has now been made for those tolls to be removed."— [ Official Report , 1 March 2006; c 23602.]  I am sure that, being decent men, they will do the decent thing today and vote for the motion. I move amendment S2M-4197.1, to insert at end: "and notes that in so doing the costs of relocating the toll plaza from the north end of the bridge to the south would be saved."

Will the minister give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it expects to appoint a new chairman of Scottish Water. (S2O-9361)

I thank the minister for her response. It is instructive that Ross Finnie seems to be ducking answering questions on Scottish Water by passing the responsibility for doing so to his deputy. Perhaps we should read something into that. I hope that the new chairman will tackle the crucial issue of development constraints, which are crippling economic growth in areas such as Perthshire, Stirling and Angus, in the region that I represent. Given that Scottish Water's forward investment programme is based on an annual requirement for 15,000 new housing units but housebuilders and others say that the true demand is for 25,000, what confidence can anyone have that the new chairman of Scottish Water will be any more successful than his predecessor was in addressing the key issue of development constraints?

Does the minister agree that it is completely unsatisfactory that members of the Parliament learn about Scottish Enterprise's overspend and potential job losses through the pages of the newspapers? Is it not time that we had a ministerial statement on the future of Scottish Enterprise so that we can ask the appropriate minister questions about the organisation's future?

I declare an interest: I am a member of the board of management of Dundee University Students Association—[ Laughter. ] Well, that is relevant to the debate. I echo Nicol Stephen's support for our universities and colleges. The further and higher education sectors make a valuable contribution to Scotland's economy. From public investment of less than £700 million, the higher education sector generated £2.8 billion in wealth and created more than 50,000 jobs. The sale of Scottish higher education services overseas earns £360 million per annum. It is clear that strong higher education and research sectors will bring investment and talent to Scotland. If Scotland is to continue to attract talented students and academic staff, she must maintain her excellent reputation for teaching and research. As industries turn to China or India, where there is a low cost base and high human capital, collaboration with our international partners in the supply and development of higher education will be increasingly important. That will help Scotland to co-exist with such economies in a fiercely competitive global environment. Scotland has had great success in attracting international students. Some 27,480 international students from more than 180 countries are studying at Scottish universities. The most recent figures show that personal expenditure by international students is some £434 million per year, which makes a significant economic contribution. The range of international talent at our universities means that we can contribute to and be involved in the development of the higher education sectors of our future economic partners overseas. Our hosting of international students will help to forge strong links between research, businesses and communities in Scotland and the students' home countries. The Deputy First Minister mentioned China. The Chinese market is extremely important and is growing rapidly. The University of Dundee attracts a large number of Chinese students.  The sector's economic contribution and the number of international students who come to Scotland are good news. There is also good news about research. The HE sector in Scotland consistently punches above its weight in patents and research citations. The Deputy First Minister mentioned the statistics: Scotland's population accounts for 8.5 per cent of the UK population, but last year Scottish institutions produced 19 per cent of UK patents and 17 per cent of UK licences. However, Scotland invests only 1.5 per cent of its gross domestic product in research and development, whereas Sweden invests 4 per cent of GDP. Indeed, only 0.56 per cent of Scotland's investment is successfully commercialised. We are not capitalising on our investment and research output and we are not translating into the economy the knowledge base that exists in our universities. Professor John Coggins, from the University of Glasgow, said that links between higher education and industry are not as good as they should be, despite a growing willingness in universities to encourage researchers to create spin-out companies. Applied research has suffered from a lack of recognition compared with pure research, despite its importance to the economy. I acknowledge that work is being done in that regard, for example through the establishment of the intermediary technology institutes. The jury is still out on whether the ITIs will be an unqualified success. It is too early to make that judgment, but progress is being made. The Executive's new interface initiative has identified the need for greater and more effective collaboration between the higher education sector and business, but unless Scotland can support a broad range of innovative commercial activity that goes beyond university research—spin-off companies—we will not be able to generate the critical mass of knowledge, skills and opportunity that we need to sustain growth. The Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry has also expressed that view, identifying three key factors that are critical to Scotland's attracting research and development investment: access to skills and knowledge; a competitive cost base for collaborative research; and a market that supports innovation. It is difficult to see how, without those factors, a knowledge economy can grow or be sustained. It is imperative that we support and develop our best assets—our people and our ideas. We must develop a high-skill, high-knowledge workforce that is flexible enough to respond to the changing demands of the economy, but I do not believe that increasing participation in higher education will, of itself, boost our knowledge economy. To truly unlock Scotland's full potential, the focus should be on quality, not quantity, in higher education.  The further education sector also has a key role to play in providing for businesses a workforce with the necessary technical skills to support research and knowledge transfer. To secure the status of Scotland's university sector, we must be able to attract and retain top staff, and to achieve that universities must have adequate capital funding to develop good facilities, including libraries, labs and accommodation. I recognise the steps that the Executive has taken to increase funding to the higher education sector, but there is concern about a level playing field with institutions down south. If staff salaries in England are raised as the result of extra funds from top-up fees, Scottish staff salaries will have to be raised in line with them to prevent a brain drain. If the Government reduces the amount and proportion of ring-fenced funding, universities will have greater flexibility to direct funds to where they will be most effective. The growth of our knowledge economy is being impeded by the fact that GDP growth in Scotland has consistently lagged behind growth in the rest of the UK, by the falling number of business start-ups and by the fact that public sector growth has outstripped that of the private sector. We have debated those issues many times before—not in this room but in the chamber downstairs. If we are to see real success in the knowledge economy, we must put the debate in the context of a competitive environment and of stronger economic performance overall. Government can support the university sector in keeping pace with international competitors by developing a long-term strategy that does not simply react to successive spending reviews but is collaborative and brings together the further and higher education sectors, with genuine participation from business. Ultimately, to compete with other economies, we must foster a dynamic business environment that will attract talent and investment and will support entrepreneurial activity. In the long run, that is the way to support and grow our higher education sector and to maximise its contribution to the knowledge economy. I move amendment S2M-4163.1, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: "notes the valuable contribution made by the further and higher education sectors to the Scottish economy, particularly their success in attracting overseas students; notes, however, the poor levels of knowledge transfer in the economy and that, although Scotland secured 17% of all UK patents, only 1.5% of GDP was invested in research and development and only 0.59% of this was successfully commercialised, and believes that a more competitive economic environment would encourage higher levels of commercial activity and help secure additional external funding for the sector."

I commend Sylvia Jackson for securing the debate and for her motion on Commonwealth day. I have enjoyed listening to members' reflections on the visit to Malawi by the delegation from the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Scotland, of which I was glad to be part. As others have done, I thank Sylvia Jackson for leading the delegation and Roy Devon and Margaret Neal for shepherding us around. I also thank fellow members of the delegation for their generally genial company during the visit.  I offer a few reflections of my own. Malawi is a land of contrasts. On the one hand, we saw heartrending sights. We witnessed desperate poverty and saw people who do not have enough to eat. We saw people who live without basic amenities and have to walk for miles to obtain clean water. We saw people who lack basic health care and have access to only primitive opportunities for education. On the other hand, we witnessed many good things, many of which I am pleased to say are being supported by people in Scotland. I am not always a vocal supporter of the Scottish Executive, but the Executive is doing the right thing in giving effective support to Malawi that is delivering on the ground. The delegation could see for itself that a little of our money goes a very long way in Malawi. What are to us very small sums of money can make a huge difference to people. I encourage people in Scotland who contribute to Malawi to redouble their efforts and I encourage other people to join them, because we can make such a difference to people's lives. The tragedy of Malawi and sub-Saharan Africa is that there is no natural reason why the region should be poor. Malawi has suffered from drought in the past but the country has had rain this year and a good harvest is expected, as Mike Pringle said. Malawi has been blessed with peace, is generally stable, has reasonable natural resources and has people who are kind, friendly and hardworking. The failure of Malawi is a failure of politics and as the former colonial power in the country we must accept our share of responsibility for that. Malawi's Parliament has not met since October and might not meet again until April. All the things that need to be done in the country are difficult to achieve without a properly functioning democracy and the enforcement of the rule of law. The Scottish Parliament can and should help to strengthen the institutions of democracy in Malawi. Members mentioned the parliamentary reform programme that has been proposed, to which we should give our enthusiastic support. We should consider how this institution can help in kind, perhaps by sending members of staff such as parliamentary clerks to build links with people in Malawi. I suggest not that we tell Malawians how to run their country—we did enough of that in the past—but that we offer practical help. We should remember that there has been democracy in Malawi for only the past 12 years. We cannot expect Malawi immediately to become a country like ours, which has had a democratic system for 300 years. My final words—which are probably the final words on behalf of the delegation—are to reflect on Karen Gillon's comment that Malawi is the warm heart of Africa. We all found that when we were there. For me, the highlights of the trip were  our visits to churches, particularly during the second weekend, when we visited St Andrew's church in Mzuzu, which has a congregation of 2,500 people, the average age of which is probably about 25. Some people had walked miles to join in the worship. The faith and spirituality of people in Malawi puts us to shame. They may be poor in our terms—in material terms—but they have a richness that we seem to have lost. As we develop the relationship with Malawi, we can give people there a lot and they can learn a lot from us, but it is important that we remember that we can learn a lot from them.

The debate has been wide ranging, as members have said. Members have talked about poverty at home and in the international context. Dennis Canavan kicked off the debate by referring to the international situation and identifying three issues: trade, aid, and debt. A number of speakers offered statistics that underline the problem. Every year, 10 million children die of hunger or preventable disease—one child dies every three seconds. Some 25 million people in sub-Saharan Africa are infected with HIV/AIDS, according to the official figures. In Malawi, which I visited recently with other members, the official infection rate among adults is 14 per cent—in reality the rate is probably higher. HIV/AIDS is probably the most serious problem in sub-Saharan Africa. As Nanette Milne reminded us, in many countries life expectancy is falling. For example, in Malawi life expectancy has fallen by about 10 years. The situation is deeply worrying. What can be done? A number of members called for measures that could improve the situation. We should consider our trade rules, as Des McNulty and others said, because the rules militate against access to our markets by third-world traders. When we were in Malawi, Mark Ruskell and I visited sugarcane producers who access the fair trade market, which is of considerable benefit to them. However, the producers that we met were hampered by European Union quota rules, which prevent them from exporting to the EU as much of their crop at market rates as they should be able to export. If the markets were open to them they could create wealth and deliver prosperity to their country. They are not able to do so, simply because of the international trade rules.

I would not call for the wholesale dismantling of the CAP at this stage, but we must reform the policy. It is nonsense and an abuse of EU taxpayers' money that, for example, we subsidise farmers in Italy and Greece to grow tobacco. Members mentioned the valuable fair trade movement, which has grown in leaps and bounds. Consumers in this country exercise choice and decide to support producers in the third world. This  week I was interested to receive a letter from Marks and Spencer, which said that its shops stock more and more fair trade products as a result of consumer demand.

I apologise to Patrick Harvie, but I have only five minutes for my speech and I will not be able to make all the points that I want to make if I take more interventions. Foreign aid has grown exponentially in recent years. In particular, there has been an explosion in personal giving during the past two decades. Of course Governments are giving more, but often the direct aid that individuals give to charities and non-governmental organisations is more effective, because there is more control over how the money is spent. Governance is the key to many issues to do with poverty in the third world, as Linda Fabiani said. There must be democratic structures and the rule of law. There is nothing complicated about the elimination of poverty; countries that enjoy political stability and enforce the law prosper. The problem is that basic elements of good governance are not in place in many countries. Uganda, which I visited some years ago, provides an interesting example in that regard. For 10 years Uganda enjoyed political stability and had a legal system that was generally regarded as free and fair. During that period the country was able to deliver much higher levels of economic growth than could be delivered by many of its neighbouring countries. It is sad that the situation in Uganda has gone into reverse, but the example shows what can be done if the basic structures are in place. I do not have time to address many of the other issues that I would like to. However, I will comment briefly on poverty at home, which Christine Grahame and other members mentioned. Scotland has the worst life expectancy in the United Kingdom—in some parts of Glasgow, the figure for males is 53.9 years. Those utterly depressing figures are worse than those in many third world countries and they are getting even worse. The big-state approach has failed. Instead, we should create new community groups and aim to build up the voluntary sector through a new compact. That is the way to make poverty history, abroad and at home.

I thank the minister for the advance copy of his statement. Since 1999, we have heard many promises from the Executive about transport projects, but precious little has been delivered. We have had seven wasted years in which not enough has been done and, as a result, we are falling behind with our infrastructure, which is important if we are to grow our economy. The Enterprise and Culture Committee's report on business growth, which was published this week, called on the Executive to ensure that its expenditure is targeted on areas that will deliver maximum economic benefit. The statement seems to contain nothing about the relative priority of the various projects that were mentioned, or of others that were not, and no assessment of their impact on economic growth relative to that of trunk road and motorway improvements. What steps is the minister taking to assess the impact of each of the schemes on economic growth and to prioritise those that will provide the greatest benefit?

Sylvia Jackson referred to overcrowding at Dunblane station, but many of those spaces are taken by people from Strathearn and further north, for whom Dunblane is the closest station. The minister will be aware of the campaign to reopen Blackford station, which would relieve some of the pressure at Dunblane. Will he give us an update on where the Executive stands in its response to that campaign?

The minister should be aware that social development, as well as economic development, is being held up by development constraints. For example, affordable housing schemes cannot progress. I ask the minister to be definitive in her answer to my question. Has the resignation of Professor Alexander caused any delay in the programme that is being pursued by the Executive?

The debate has been lively and instructive. The sight of the morning—indeed, the sight of the week—has been Labour members' flip-flopping around on the issue and trying to square the circle. I enjoyed the minister's speech and I particularly enjoyed the speech by Dr Elaine Murray. It is difficult to disagree with a single word that she said. It seems to me that she made a speech in support of the motion rather than a speech in support of the Executive's amendment. There is a challenge for Labour members. Will they have the courage of their convictions and support the motion—we know that they agree with every word of it because it reflects the motion that the Labour conference in Aviemore supported less than 10 days ago—or will they vote for the Executive amendment, which they do not believe in? That is the question for Labour members, but we know that their hearts are in the right place. When I challenged the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning during his opening speech, he said that he supports Labour policy. We will see whether Labour members have the courage of their convictions at decision time, when they will vote either for Labour Party policy or with the Executive. If the minister wants to give an explanation for his conduct, I will be delighted to give way.

If the issue of nuclear waste is so important, it is strange that it did not feature in the motion that the Labour Party discussed at its recent conference in Aviemore. However, that is a matter for Labour members to explain to their constituency members at the weekend. If they vote against the motion today, they will have to explain why they voted against a motion that supports Labour policy. The irony is that the Liberal Democrats have no such compunction. As Alex Johnstone said, when Nicol Stephen appeared on prime-time television last night, he was billed as the Deputy First Minister but he expounded Liberal Democrat policy on energy rather than Executive policy on energy. Surely Labour ministers should display the same courage. For the avoidance of doubt, I point out that the Conservatives are not obsessed with new nuclear power stations. We support a mixed approach. Our motion refers to that—it mentions clean coal technology, oil and gas and renewables. We heard a little—although not enough—about clean coal technology and the opportunities that arise from it. To be fair, the minister mentioned it in both his contributions. There is tremendous potential to develop clean coal technology, which will involve both co-firing it with biomass and developing new technology to allow carbon capture and sequestration. Those of us who were in Perth on Monday to attend the presentation that was arranged by Scottish Enterprise and Scottish and Southern Energy heard Mitsui Babcock talking about technology that is being developed that will enable us to use our ample coal reserves in Scotland. We could still burn coal but do so in an environmentally friendly way. It is exciting that Scotland is potentially the world leader in that technology. With a bit of investment and encouragement from Government, we could build an industry that not only meets our energy needs but creates a new industry for Scotland in which we are world leaders. I was delighted to hear the minister say in his closing remarks that the Executive is considering supporting that technology. We also need to consider renewables. We welcome the developments in offshore technologies such as wave power and tidal power, but we must recognise that it will be many years before they can make a major contribution to energy production. That does not mean that we should not develop them, but we must have realistic expectations. I make no apology for saying that we have serious reservations about  large-scale onshore wind developments because of the problem of intermittency of supply. Jeremy Purvis talked about the cost of new nuclear power stations and said that they would have to be subsidised. However, the fact is that the most subsidised form of energy production is onshore wind. Nobody would be building a single wind farm anywhere in the country if it were not for the large subsidies that are put into that method of production. Let us not hear any lessons about the cost of nuclear power from those who are pro-renewables.

All I can do is refer Mr Ballance to the comments of Professor David Simpson of the David Hume Institute who, in a paper that he produced in April 2004, calculated that—even including the cost of decommissioning—nuclear power is two and a half times cheaper than wind power. I can do no better than refer to that expert. As we know, the problem with onshore wind power is the proliferation of planning applications all over Scotland. We have a ridiculous free-for-all that needs to be addressed through a review of our planning system. Communities up and down the country are under siege from planning applications. Unless we stop this madness and start considering realistic alternatives, we will be in danger of doing untold damage to our landscape and—more important—to our vital tourism industry. The SNP may want us to become Europe's giant wind farm, but we reject that ambition, as do many communities in Scotland. A new consensus is building on energy. The BBC poll to which many members referred did not just say that people oppose nuclear power; when people were asked whether they would support new nuclear power stations if they stopped Scotland depending on imported energy, 54 per cent said that they would. We know about all the caveats that apply to opinion polls, but even that poll showed that people would support new nuclear power stations in some circumstances. We can forgive the Greens their head-in-the-sand approach and we expect no better from the Scottish National Party. To be frank, the Lib Dems should know better, and we know that Labour knows better. There is a majority in the Parliament for more nuclear power—we and Labour members support it. Surely it is time for Labour MSPs to stop the Lib Dem tail wagging the Labour dog. They should ditch the sordid coalition fudge on energy and join us tonight in voting for what we know they believe in.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the minister give way?

Murdo Fraser, actually. [ Laughter. ]

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I have to say that we are not usually confused so easily. I am sure that the minister was present at last weekend's Labour Party conference in Aviemore. Will he tell the chamber whether he disagreed with any part of the energy motion that was passed at that conference?

Will the member take an intervention?

I suggest that Mr McNulty looks at the comments of the water industry commissioner, who said that the argument that there was underinvestment in Scotland during the period of the Conservative Government is without any basis in reality.

I welcome the opportunity that the SNP has presented to debate the future of Scottish Water. Rob Gibson's motion rightly highlights several problems with the organisation and the recent resignation of Professor Alan Alexander as chairman due to disagreements with ministers. My amendment details some other difficulties with the nationalised water company. Scotland's business community has consistently complained about overcharging by Scottish Water. Scottish businesses pay much more than their counterparts south of the border. Scottish Water is also inefficient. Today, The Scotsman draws attention to the latest report from the Office of Water Services, which ranks Scottish Water below every one of the 22 privatised water companies south of the border.

Perhaps we should have started earlier, but I will come to that in a moment. Scottish Water charges higher prices and provides a poorer service than its counterparts in England and Wales. Once again, there is independent confirmation of something that we in the Conservative party have been saying for years. Most worrying of all for Scotland's economy is Scottish Water's failure to invest in infrastructure, which has led to development constraints throughout the country. Scotland's economic progress is being stifled by that lack of investment. It is a problem throughout the country. It is a problem in my region—Mid Scotland and Fife—and in the area where I live. As Mr Swinney will know, it is a problem in towns such as Blairgowrie, Coupar Angus and Alyth.

I am sorry. I have only four minutes, so I do not have time to take another intervention.  In the towns that I mentioned, much needed commercial and housing developments—including the construction of affordable housing—cannot proceed due to lack of infrastructure. That is a major economic and social problem. There is much that is wrong with Scottish Water, and the SNP is right to raise concerns about it, but what is missing from the motion is the SNP's alternative. What does it intend to do about the problem, other than call on the Executive to set out promptly the impact that Alan Alexander's resignation will have on the delivery of ministerial objectives? We on this side of the chamber are not so coy. I will be helpful to Mr Gibson and tell him what his motion should have said about the future of Scottish Water. He does not have to look too far to find the solution. On 21 November last year, he lodged a parliamentary motion to congratulate Glas Cymru—the company that owns Welsh Water—on retaining the position of joint top-performing private water and sewerage company in Wales and England. Welsh Water is a private company, albeit one that operates as a mutual, rather than with shareholders who draw a dividend. It is precisely because Welsh Water is in the private sector—as are other water companies south of the border—that it is able to deliver high levels of investment, high-quality water and lower costs than Scottish Water. There is the solution: it is time to take Scottish Water out of the public sector and privatise it. That would solve Mr Gibson's problems for him. Scottish Water has to appoint a new chairman. It is difficult to imagine that there will be a long queue of applicants for the job, given the difficulties that it has faced. Whoever comes in will be hampered by the public sector status of the organisation and the constraints on it, and they will face the interference of ministers. It was too much for Alan Alexander to cope with, and he walked away from the job. I am sure that the Executive will find some other mug to take on the position, but that will not solve the fundamental problem. We need to open up Scottish Water to the market. We should not fear privatisation. It has delivered higher investment, better water quality and lower costs south of the border. It can do the same in Scotland. Mr Gibson and the SNP have simply been too timid this morning. They should join us in the growing consensus in favour of privatising Scottish Water, which would remove at a stroke the problems that hamper economic growth and social development throughout the country. I move amendment S2M-4036.1, to leave out from "and calls" to end and insert:  "further expresses concern that Scottish Water is failing to deliver an appropriate level of service to its customers; notes the concerns of the building community about Scottish Water's failure to allocate sufficient resources to remove development constraints; further notes the Executive's admission on 9 February 2005 that business customers have been overcharged £44 million a year for water; further notes that the introduction of surface water drainage charges based on the size of the property are to be introduced into the denationalised English water market on 1 April 2006 which will lead to significantly lower charges for small businesses in England than in Scotland, thereby reinforcing the present competitive disadvantage faced by Scots firms; further notes the comments of former Environment Minister, Sam Galbraith, that "We are slowly going broke and the only way to solve this is to reduce the public sector wage bill. Privatise water and, at a stroke, the bill is cut" ( The Scotsman , 10 February 2005); believes that as long as Scottish Water remains a bureaucratic, nationalised monopoly it will struggle to adopt the private sector disciplines expected by the Executive and the Water Industry Commission, and therefore calls on the Executive to take its commitment to make economic growth its top priority seriously by creating a genuine market in water and privatising Scottish Water or adopting a "not for dividend" model such as Welsh Water."

The debate has been interesting and wide ranging and we have heard well-informed speeches from members of different parties. I received my copy of the regeneration policy statement yesterday evening and I agree with Christine Grahame—probably for the only time in the debate—that it is ridiculous of the Executive to provide us with a 67-page document and expect us to be able to digest its contents in time for a well-informed debate the following afternoon. I hope that the Executive will reflect on that, because if it is to produce new strategy documents that contain such detail, it should give us a little more notice, so that we can have a better-informed debate. Members have had a busy afternoon dealing with other important business, in particular the statement on tolls on the Forth and Tay bridges, so some members' minds have been elsewhere. The Conservative amendment refers to the situation that we currently face. As Mary Scanlon said, poverty continues to blight the lives of far too many Scots, as research by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation demonstrates. The number of working-age adults who have no dependent children and who are in income poverty has increased from around 300,000 in the mid-1990s to almost 400,000 in recent years. The gap between the richest and poorest in society is increasing. Life expectancy in the poorest postcode areas of Scotland is 64.4 years, which is lower than life expectancy in Lebanon, North Korea or the Gaza strip. Indeed, life expectancy in the poorest areas of Scotland has fallen since 1992, so much needs to be done.

I am grateful to Christine Grahame for promoting me to a ministerial position. The statistic that she gives proves my point. Much needs to be done. New strategies from the Executive are always welcome. If nothing else, they demonstrate that the old strategies have not always worked. The key to regenerating communities is economic regeneration. The areas that are targeted in the regeneration policy statement—the Clyde corridor, Inverclyde and Ayrshire—are blighted by a lack of economic progress. If we are to turn those communities round, the fundamental need is for more investment, more jobs and a stronger economy. The Executive's record in that context is simply not good enough. Scotland's annual growth rate is dragging behind that of our competitors south of the border. The minister will probably tell  me that Scotland managed to match the UK growth rate in the most recent quarter. However, we managed to do so only because the UK growth rate fell towards the level of the Scottish rate. Very worrying for the minister, in an analysis that was published on Friday in that fine organ, The Scotsman , Professor David Bell made the point—backed up with evidence—that the level of economic growth in Scotland is artificially inflated by the high level of public sector expenditure. If we stripped out public sector expenditure which, as we know, is much higher in Scotland than it is in the rest of the UK, the pretty feeble economic growth figures for the past five or six years would be even worse and the gap between Scottish and UK growth would be even larger than it has been in the past few years. The Executive must tackle the lack of competitiveness in the Scottish economy. Rather than publish glossy brochures, the Executive should tackle the fundamentals, such as business rates and the cost of doing business—the Executive has taken a step in the right direction on that, but it needs to progress more quickly. The Executive should invest in infrastructure and tackle the problems with Scottish Water and business regulation. We support and welcome much of the detail in the strategy but, unless the general business environment improves, the strategy will achieve little. I do not want to steal anybody's thunder for tomorrow's debate on Scottish Water, but development constraints are a huge issue for economic regeneration throughout Scotland—they are a huge problem in the area in which I live and throughout my region and for communities elsewhere. Unless we sort out those problems and allow economic expansion, we will not even be able to start on the bottom rung of the ladder in dealing with the problems that have been mentioned. We need a joined-up approach from Government. We also need to deal with planning issues, although we welcome the start that has been made through the Executive's Planning etc (Scotland) Bill towards easing the problems that delays in the planning process create for major infrastructure projects. I accept that the problems in our communities are not only to do with physical infrastructure. Karen Whitefield made that point and was gracious enough to draw attention to initiatives of the former Conservative Government—like her, I always acknowledge the actions of political opponents with which we agree. The issue is not only about material poverty and material regeneration; we need to deal with all sorts of problems in our communities, such as family breakdown, alcohol and drug abuse, poor housing, crime and poor public services. Of course, the  poorest in society suffer the most when public services fail. We must be careful that more direct Government intervention does not simply entrench a culture of welfare dependency, which can be counterproductive. Donald Gorrie made exactly that point when he said that not everything should come from the top down and that we need to empower communities to start building from the bottom up. We need imaginative solutions for real community regeneration to build stronger communities. In that respect, the proposals on supporting the voluntary sector and the social economy are extremely welcome. Fundamentally, we will regenerate communities if we have a stronger economy. If the Executive is working towards that, it will have our support.

Given the uncertainty about the future of the Forth bridge crossing, I can just about understand the minister's logic in treating it as a different case, but as both the Erskine bridge and the Tay bridge carry predominantly local traffic, what possible justification can there be for scrapping tolls on one and not on the other? We are surely talking about a political fix, whereby the Liberal Democrats get the tolls on the Skye bridge lifted, Labour in the  west of Scotland gets the tolls on the Erskine bridge lifted, but the Executive treats with contempt the people of Tayside and Fife.

To ask the Scottish Executive what representations it has received in relation to the implementation of the water framework directive by the Scottish Environment Protection Agency. (S2O-8890)

The minister will doubtless be aware of the concerns that the farming sector has raised about the financial and administrative  burdens of the new regulations. SEPA has made concessions on the charges, but does she accept that there will still be an administrative burden? Does she recognise that farmers, who struggle with an ever-increasing mountain of red tape in their businesses, will not welcome the regulations, which will simply add to that administrative burden? Will she look at that issue with SEPA to see what can be done to simplify the paperwork that will be involved?

To be frank, although the debate has been worthy, it has been rather dull. I was even looking back with some nostalgia to this morning's lively exchanges until my good friend Ted Brocklebank injected some life into this debate, for which I am grateful. It is only fair to acknowledge that in this and previous budgets public spending has reached not high but record levels. Scotland is now attaining, if not surpassing, Scandinavian levels of public expenditure. Unfortunately, Scotland is not matching that with Scandinavian levels of service. Although I accept that health spending has risen by 70 per cent since devolution, the reality for people on the ground is different. We now have NHS 24 in place of GPs providing 24-hour cover. Throughout the country, local accident and emergency units have closed. Access to NHS dentists, which was available seven years ago, is now lacking. People's experience is that increases in public expenditure are simply not matched with improvements in service. Derek Brownlee acknowledged the imbalance between inputs and outputs. That is a serious issue for the Executive. We must ensure that public money is spent as appropriately and as wisely as it can be. However, from the evidence available, it seems that we are not seeing the benefits of the additional sums spent. That is important because, during the past few years, we have enjoyed very large budget increases and that will not go on for ever. Whoever the Chancellor of the Exchequer is in years to come, finances will start to contract. If we have not been able to improve the services for people in Scotland when we have had huge budget increases, how will we do it when the budget inevitably contracts? During the past six or seven years under devolution we have missed the opportunity to use the additional sums to invest in long-term infrastructure, particularly transport projects. Perhaps we missed the opportunity in the first three or four years of devolution to make such key decisions and investments. We will regret that. Ted Brocklebank referred to the growth in public sector employment. The Tories have no problem with employing people to fill important front-line jobs. We all want there to be more nurses, teachers and policemen. The sad thing is that too  many of those jobs are non-productive. Ted Brocklebank referred to the 40 per cent increase in staff working for quangos such as the Scottish Environment Protection Agency and other regulatory bodies. The fear is that such bodies have grown like Topsy; they are increasing the burden of bureaucracy and stifling the private sector. We hear farmers complaining about the SEPA regulations, as Mr Lyon will know, and private businesses complaining about the level of regulation coming from other quangos. We have to ensure that if we increase employment in the public sector, we do so in productive areas and we do not allow people just to fill in forms and become watchdogs, which is an additional and unnecessary burden on the private sector. I turn to the question of the local government grant settlement. We are all well aware of the concerns about the rise in the council tax and we could bandy statistics around endlessly. The fact is that council tax has gone up, is going up and will continue to go up by more than the rate of inflation. That will continue to be a burden on people whose incomes are not going up at the same rate.

No, I would not, although I dare say we could have a debate on that that would go on for the rest of the afternoon. Most western democracies have some kind of property-based taxation; there is nothing unusual in that. The problem with an income-based system is that it simply shifts the burden of taxation from those who are paying at the moment to hard-working families. I am not surprised that Mr Smith's Liberal Democrat colleagues down south are now revising their policy on local income tax, if they can find a leader to take that on after today's events. I think that they will find that a local income tax creates more problems than it solves. There is scope for more savings to be made in local government. South Ayrshire Council, where the Conservatives have just taken over the administration, has already been able to save £4 million by axing the enterprise and infrastructure department. The council has not cut services; it has simply ordered the delivery of services in a different way. Council chief executives are paid tremendous salaries. The average chief executive salary in the councils in Glasgow, Edinburgh, Fife, North Lanarkshire and South Lanarkshire—our five largest councils—is £138,000. That is more than the First Minister is paid. I do not deny that those people do important jobs, but should they be paid  more than the First Minister? That seems to be very strange. I could go on, Prime Minister—I am sorry, Presiding Officer; I was promoting you for a second there. I could go on, but time will not allow me to talk about efficiency savings. If the Executive is determined to use its money as efficiently as possible, it will have our support.

I have an important point of clarification. My proposal is predicated on the life of the existing bridge being able to be extended. The bridge might have to close for a period, but if it can be repaired and if its life can be extended, it would be toll free thereafter. If that were not possible, we would not wish there to be a privately tolled bridge on that crossing.

Will the member give way?

How many jobs does Mr Crawford think will be lost in the east of Scotland if a new Forth crossing is not completed?

Increase in tolls.

Will the minister give way?

The Scottish Executive is in a shambles over the future of the Forth crossing. There is a proposal from the Forth Estuary Transport Authority to increase the toll at peak times from £1 to £4—a proposal that was supported by Labour and Liberal Democrat members of the authority using powers that were conferred upon them by the Parliament. The proposal is opposed by the great majority of people in Fife, including, it seems, both the Labour and the Liberal Democrat candidates in the Dunfermline and West Fife by-election. However, the Executive has still to make up its mind on the matter. More seriously, it is now almost universally accepted that we will need a new Forth crossing, otherwise the economy of Fife and the east of Scotland will face meltdown within 10 years. Yet the Executive sits on its hands and refuses to commission work on a new bridge. In simple terms, the Executive is failing the people of Fife and the people of Scotland: it must take action now to resolve those two issues. We should not forget that the background to the variable tolling that is proposed by FETA for the bridge is the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001. Section 49 allows for local authorities to establish a road user charging scheme; and section 69 gives ministers power to establish by order a new joint board that would be able to use those powers for the management and maintenance of the bridge. The introduction of those powers was supported by Labour, the Liberal Democrats and the Scottish nationalists—they were opposed only by the Scottish Conservatives. Let us see no crocodile tears from members on other benches about increases in the toll that FETA proposes. It was always foreseen that that would happen. That is why the Scottish Conservatives opposed those measures in the  Transport (Scotland) Act 2001. All other parties are culpable in the latest proposed toll increase.

I accept that. However, Andrew Burns, Ian Murray and Lawrence Marshall—all Labour members of the board—voted in favour of the increase. Let us have a little consistency from the Labour Party. Let us consider the position of the Liberal Democrats, which is, frankly, bizarre. The Liberal Democrat candidate in the by-election is running around telling anyone who will listen that he opposes the introduction of variable tolling. Yet two Liberal Democrat members of the FETA board, George Grubb of Edinburgh and Bob Scott of Perth and Kinross Council, voted in favour of the increase. What is the Liberal Democrats' position? Are they up to their usual trick of saying one thing in one part of the country and another elsewhere? Are they saying one thing in Fife and something different in Edinburgh? Are they saying one thing at one end of the street and something different at the other? We all know the sordid political tactics that only the nasty party of British politics is capable of. The minister should come clean and tell us whether he agrees with his party's candidate in the by-election and with Gordon Brown that an increase in tolls should be opposed. Or does the minister agree with the First Minister, who said on Tuesday: "It would be utterly irresponsible for us to make a decision on the financing of the bridges across the Forth in advance of a decision on whatever we have to pay for another bridge." Which is it?

We do not support an increase in tolls at this time, as it would be entirely unjustified. We need some consistency from the Liberal Democrats. The Conservative party alone opposes the powers for differential charging that are contained in the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001. We have a consistent position against differential tolling. In many ways, tolls are a secondary issue. More important is the future of the bridge itself and whether a second bridge is required. There is a growing consensus on the need for a second bridge, as the existing bridge suffers from chronic overuse. FETA has warned that the bridge could  be closed to heavy goods vehicles by 2013 and it might have to close altogether by 2019. Either of those scenarios would be an utter disaster for the economy not just of Fife, but of the whole east of Scotland. A new bridge is essential if we are to avoid chaos in the Scottish economy. Moreover, it is essential to allow the economic expansion that is being hampered by traffic congestion on the existing bridge. Given that the bridge manager, Alastair Andrew, estimated that it would take 11 years to build a new bridge, work must start now. The Executive can no longer drag its feet. However, members should take not just my word for it. Scott Barrie, in a members' debate last year, said: "we need to start planning now. The Forth road bridge is one of Scotland's most important transport arteries, but it is no longer fit for purpose ... the time to get serious about planning a second crossing is now."— [ Official Report ; 2 November 2005; c 20246.]  Fife Labour members queued up to echo his comments: Christine May, Helen Eadie and Marilyn Livingstone all backed him. Even Alistair Darling, the Secretary of State for Scotland, said on Monday: "The key thing now is to campaign for a second bridge because of the fact that the existing bridge is not going to last as long as people thought." We have a consensus—or almost—because the First Minister said on Tuesday: "It would be utterly irresponsible to make a decision without knowing the technical evidence." They are all out of step but oor Jack. Everybody—Labour Party representatives in Fife, the Labour Party's candidate in the by-election, Alistair Darling—knows that we need a new bridge. Everybody apart from poor Jack, that is. It is time that the Executive bowed to the inevitable and started work on options for a new crossing. The Conservatives believe that the Executive should look at a number of funding models for the bridge. One of our proposals is that it should look at a privately funded second bridge on which tolls would be charged in much the same way as on the M6 express route. Let me explain. Under such circumstances, the existing bridge could be converted to a toll-free route. Bridge users would have the choice of using the free bridge or the new toll bridge, with the latter providing congestion-free access to the motorway network. That is exactly the model that is being used for the M6 expressway, which has been extremely successful. If the existing bridge had to close for repairs, the new bridge could have its tolls reduced for the period of closure.

That would be a matter for the private company. It would set its tolls at a market rate, which would be enough to attract customers to the new bridge but not enough to deter people from using it. I find the SNP's scepticism curious. If the system that I propose works on the M6 expressway, why could it not work on a new Forth crossing? We have come up with a proposal, but we have heard silence from the other parties on what they would do. The SNP supports the idea of a new bridge, but will they pay for it out of general taxation? If so, have SNP members checked with their finance spokesman to find out where in the budget the money would come from? The Labour Party and the Liberal Democrats and their candidates in the by-election say that we need a new bridge, but where in the budget will they find the money for it? Have they allocated the resources for it? We need to be told. The Conservatives are expressing options and setting out proposals that the Executive should explore. We accept that there may be other ways of funding a Forth crossing; the Executive should look at them all. The important thing is that there be no further delay. We are in this situation only because of the refusal of the Scottish Executive to face up to the real problems on the Forth crossing. The Executive has the power to prevent FETA from charging differential tolls. It has done nothing. The Executive has the power to start work on options for a new bridge, given the consensus that a new crossing is required. It has done nothing. The Executive is, once again, failing the people of Scotland. It must act now before it is too late. I have pleasure in moving the motion in my name. I move, That the Parliament opposes the dramatic increase in tolls on the Forth Road Bridge being proposed by the Forth Estuary Transport Authority (FETA); notes that the proposals flow directly from the powers to implement road user charging granted under the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001 which were opposed by the Conservatives and supported by Labour, the Liberal Democrats and the Scottish National Party; further notes with concern the view of FETA that the bridge could be closed to heavy goods vehicles by 2013 and to all traffic by 2019; believes that either of these scenarios would have extremely serious consequences for the economy of the east of Scotland; supports the Scottish Executive's decision to carry out a comprehensive assessment of the structure of the current bridge; further believes, however, that in light of the timescales involved, this must be conducted simultaneously with preliminary work on options for a new crossing and how this might be funded, and calls on the Executive to commence such work without delay.

On behalf of the Scottish Conservatives, I welcome the minister's statement, which is a long-awaited response to the Cultural Commission's report. I also thank her for the copy of the statement. Like Michael Matheson, we were also missing three pages, so he should not feel victimised. We particularly welcome the announcement of direct funding for the national companies, which is a measure for which the Scottish Conservatives have called for many years. I think that we did so in our manifesto for the 1999 elections, so I am delighted that the Executive has caught up. I seek to tease out a little more detail from the minister on that issue and on a secondary issue. What will be the status and structure of the five national companies that are to come under the Executive's control? Will they be classed as non-departmental public bodies or will they have some other designation? Will they be directly responsible to ministers, as is, for example, the Scottish Qualifications Authority? I also have four short specific questions on the new body that is to be established, creative Scotland. I appreciate that the minister may not have all the details today but, if she does not, perhaps she will answer my questions subsequently. First, will the body have an elected board? Secondly, will it be an audited body? Thirdly, what funds will it hold? Fourthly, for what purposes will it hold its budget?

I congratulate Fergus Ewing on burying, before it is even born, the new SNP-Green coalition that we have heard so much about. The debate has been largely consensual and members will be disappointed to hear that I do not intend to break that trend; we will have to wait for Mr Ruskell's speech for that. The Conservatives generally welcome the air route development fund and the success in developing direct air routes from Scottish airports to Europe, North America and within the UK. It is a common complaint from Scottish business that Scotland lacks connectivity. It is not much use saying to a businessperson in Scotland that they can go to a meeting in Barcelona or Milan by connecting through London or Amsterdam because, in effect, they have to spend a whole day travelling in each direction. Access to those destinations through one flight of one and a half to two hours is greatly to the benefit of Scotland's business community and makes such business practicable because return trips can be made in one day or two days at the most. New routes encourage inward investment. Not only are they good for Scottish businesspeople who go abroad, they are good for people from overseas; they are good not only for those who want to come to do business here, but for those who want to visit us. Our tourism industry has done well out of the development of many new routes. We hear plenty of anecdotal evidence about people who come to Scotland, particularly from Scandinavian countries, for shopping and entertainment because they find that the costs of our products, particularly alcohol, are highly satisfactory compared to what they pay at home. Our friends the nationalists are always parading the success of Norway and Sweden and the other Scandinavian countries, but they should remember that people from those countries come to Glasgow and Prestwick and Ayr to spend their money because the cost of living here is much more satisfactory than it is where they live. There is also an important social benefit to developing air travel at lower cost, which is that Scottish families now have greater opportunities than ever to take holidays abroad. I recently flew to Belgium to see friends for the grand price of 49p  plus tax. Without the development of low-cost travel, such opportunities would simply not be available. We on this side of the chamber have no hesitation in saying that we believe that the growth of air travel has been good economically and good socially. Parliament should also recognise—our amendment makes the point—that we would not have today's growth in air travel had it not been for decisions that were taken by previous Conservative Governments. Fergus Ewing acknowledged that there had been growth in air travel since the 1990s, but he seemed to think that that was just a coincidence. In fact, it happened because of decisions by previous Conservative Governments to liberalise air travel and to privatise the British Airports Authority and British Airways. I remind Parliament that those privatisations and the other measures that Conservative Governments introduced were opposed at every turn by the other parties in the chamber. They said that Conservative measures would lead to disaster in the air industry, but—as usual—they were wrong, and have been proved wrong. On 1 November 1987, the Labour Party's then city affairs spokesman, somebody called Tony Blair, criticised the privatisation of British Airways as being "legalised political corruption". How far we have come in 19 years. The fact is that the air sector would not be enjoying success today had Labour been in power at that time. The brave decisions of a Conservative Government led to the current unprecedented growth in the air industry. In the great scheme of things, that has been much more significant than the air route development fund.

The liberalisation of the air travel market has meant that airports have been successful regardless of who owns them. Although Edinburgh and Glasgow airports, which were privatised, have grown greatly, that does not mean that other airports have not grown; of course they have. The overall approach—the privatisation of BAA and the opening up of the markets to competition, which I dare say the SNP opposed at the time—has led to growth in air travel and has secured the success of airports such as Manchester, despite the fact that their ownership remains with a public authority.

I dare say that Mr Sheridan's regular trips to Cuba are increasing use of that airline. I have no expertise on Cubana Airlines, but I suspect that it is enjoying the benefits of the internationally liberalised air travel market, which did not exist previously. Let us not be churlish: in general, we welcome the air route development fund and we acknowledge that it has been a success. However not everything in the garden is rosy. We must ensure that public money is wisely spent and that we do not distort the market and put unsubsidised services at an unfair disadvantage through the fund. That issue came to the fore in August last year, when the Executive announced that easyJet would receive funding to upgrade a year-round service from Edinburgh to Geneva. In fact, that route was already being serviced unsubsidised by the Scotland-based company Globespan, which operated a winter-only service on the route. The Executive then said that the funding would apply only from April to December—when the Globespan service was not operating—thus bending its own rules, which said that the fund could be applied only to year-round routes, and missing the point that easyJet would not be operating the route at all were it not for subsidy from the taxpayer. It is little surprise that Globespan, a Scottish company—it is based in Edinburgh, I believe—reacted with fury.

It is interesting that the minister is prepared to bend the rules when it suits him. We agree with the objective of growth in travel, but we need to be careful. If the ministers are to set rules for particular funds, they should adhere to them rather than bend them when it suits. We should also ensure that the benefits of the fund are spread fairly throughout Scotland; in that respect, I agree with Fergus Ewing. The fund should be available to as many Scots travellers as possible and it should open up all of Scotland to overseas visitors. There was a report in the Evening Times last week about direct flights  between Glasgow and Brussels that were operated by SN Brussels Airlines being dropped. I hope that that is an isolated occurrence. I appreciate that Glasgow airport has attracted money from the fund for its daily flight to Dubai but, over the period, it has not done particularly well in attracting cash. We must remember that Glasgow—like Prestwick—has an important role to play in Scotland's links with the wider world. We also need to be conscious of the environmental impact of air travel. I note that the Executive mentions that in its motion and I agree that we cannot credibly tackle the problem at national level, but require international—indeed, global—co-operation to make it work. I enjoyed hearing the minister's robust defence of the Executive's approach in response to criticism from the Greens. I hope that that robust Executive stance survives future coalition talks with the Green party if such things should occur. The Scottish Conservatives welcome the air route development fund and look forward to greater international connections direct from Scotland in years to come. However, we must all remember that the current growth in air travel has come about because we had a Conservative Government that was prepared to make brave decisions which were, at that time, opposed by other parties that are now proclaiming the success of their policies in the Parliament. I move amendment S2M-3837.1, to insert at end: "notes, however, that the ARDF represents a comparatively modest contribution to the massive expansion of air services over recent decades, which is chiefly due to the substantial deregulation of the industry achieved by the liberalising policies of the last Conservative administration, such as the privatisation of the British Airports Authority (BAA), the privatisation of British Airways (BA), the Airports Act 1986, the Civil Aviation Act 1980 and the pursuit of a European single market in aviation."

Is it the Executive's view that the expenditure on the air route development fund has increased the overall domestic and international aviation market in Scotland? I ask because the minister's motion suggested instead that it was primarily about reducing the need for short-haul flights to hub airports.

We are all liberals now.

We welcome the opportunity to discuss the important subject of workforce development. We agree with the part of the Executive's motion that says: "developing the current and future workforce of Scotland is key to ending poverty and sustaining economic growth". I accept that there has been some good news on the development of skills and training. The modern apprenticeship scheme, which was introduced by the previous Conservative Government in 1994, has been a tremendous success, as it has enabled thousands of young people to access work-based training. We welcome the proposal that services that are currently provided by the new futures fund will be  devolved from Scottish Enterprise to local community planning partnerships. It makes sense for projects to be delivered at a local level with local input. Perhaps that approach could be mirrored elsewhere within Scottish Enterprise, which is currently pursuing a centralising agenda by seeking to scrap the existing local enterprise company boards. Notwithstanding that good news, we still face serious challenges. Scotland has a particular problem with its rate of young people who are not in education, employment or training, which is higher than the rate in any other country in Europe or in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. It is estimated that, between March 2004 and February 2005, the number of Scottish 16 to 19-year-olds who were classified as NEET was around 35,000. That accounts for 13.1 per cent of females and 13.9 per cent of males—approximately one in seven—in that age group. For Glasgow, the rate was as high as 23 per cent. Despite the substantial Executive investment that has been aimed at supporting young people, the sad fact is that that proportion has remained relatively static. The impact of being NEET can be devastating. An investigation by the NEET working group showed that, for a young man, the effect of being NEET is that, by the time he is 21, he is four times more likely to be unemployed, three times more likely to have depression or mental health problems, five times more likely to have a criminal record and six times less likely to have any qualifications.

How quickly the minister changes his tune, given that he said a few minutes ago that he did not want to bandy statistics. The figures that I quoted are recognised OECD statistics. We could have a battle of statistics if he wants, but let me move on. A more important issue is what can be done. The working group found evidence to suggest that the two principal factors that determine whether a young person becomes NEET are disadvantage—the person comes from a disadvantaged family or deprived community—and educational disaffection. Often, NEETs have been persistent truants or have had low attainment levels. Clearly, Scotland has a particular problem, which is having both a long-term effect on our economic  opportunities and a dismal impact on the life prospects and opportunities of tens of thousands of young Scots. The problem is not getting much better, so what is the Executive doing? To be fair, the Executive is developing an employability framework for Scotland to examine ways of helping people into work. In June last year, we were told that the recommendations from the working groups were being fed into a draft framework that would be completed by the autumn. Last month, we were told that the framework was still under development, but it has still not seen the light of day. Surely it is about time that such an important document was produced so that we might see how the Executive proposes to tackle those serious issues. In his opening remarks, the minister said that he wanted to have today's debate first, to allow input. I will take him at his word by giving him some positive ideas that I believe should be incorporated into his framework, which I look forward to seeing in due course. We think that policy should be developed in two areas. The first relates directly to education. We know that many youngsters are disengaged from academic study in schools throughout Scotland. If they had access to vocationally focused training in further education colleges, they might leave school with qualifications and skills that would equip them for the workforce. That would be good not only for the wider economy but for themselves as individuals.

I am aware of the work that has been done. As ever, it is those who are most motivated who benefit most from programmes. That goes to show that more needs to be done to help those who are currently disengaged from education to access vocational training. Secondly, we must look to expand the role of community-based charitable institutions. Many such bodies throughout Scotland help NEETs. I recently visited the Fairbridge project in Dundee, which is targeted at youngsters who are not in employment, education or training. It was clear from the youngsters to whom I spoke that they are benefiting hugely from the support that is on offer from that voluntary organisation. That is one example of the many different groups throughout the country that provide targeted, hands-on, one-to-one support for youngsters from some of our  most disadvantaged communities and from difficult backgrounds. As it develops the strategy, the Executive should consider policies to increase the voluntary sector's independence and to end the excessive bureaucracy that stifles such organisations. Of course, all bodies that are in receipt of public money should have to account properly for it, but all too often those groups find that an undue proportion of their time is taken up with form filling and ticking boxes when they need to get on with much more important tasks. It is time for a new partnership between the public sector and the voluntary sector that recognises the voluntary sector's strengths and frees up those involved to get on with the important tasks in hand. I trust that the minister will, if he is genuine in saying that he wants to hear our views on drawing up the framework, take on board what I have said this afternoon. I move amendment S2M-3806.2, to leave out from "recognises" to end and insert: "notes the outstanding success of modern apprenticeships in helping thousands of young people into work and training since 1994; welcomes the devolution of workforce services currently provided by the New Futures Fund from Scottish Enterprise to local community partnerships; notes with concern that Scotland has more young people who are not in education, employment or training (NEET) than any other OECD country or UK region; is disappointed at the delay in the Scottish Executive publishing its long-awaited Employability Framework; notes the findings of the NEET working group set up by the Executive that young people who are NEET are generally characterised by low educational attainment, truancy and/or disadvantaged backgrounds, and calls on the Executive to extend the vocational opportunities available at further education colleges from the age of 14 and to expand the role of community-based voluntary programmes which play a crucial role in combating deprivation."

Will Mr Mather tell us which of the interesting economic policies that he espouses on the SNP's behalf have been signed off by his party's new friends in the Scottish Green Party?

I congratulate Andrew Welsh on securing the debate. I was happy to sign the motion, for which he obtained cross-party support before lodging it with the chamber desk. Although it refers specifically to Mr Welsh's Angus constituency, I believe that that was a device to get the motion through the chamber desk; the issue is relevant to all Scotland. I congratulate him also on the comprehensive case that he made for the change mentioned in the motion. In fact, he addressed the issue so comprehensively that he has not left me much to say. The issue might seem to be esoteric and of little interest—the chamber is not exactly packed this afternoon—but it is important for the people who are involved and so seems to be an appropriate  subject for a members' business debate. I will be interested to hear what the minister has to say in response. Given that we are about to go into our Christmas recess, it is also appropriate to be discussing issues about the heating of our homes. The introduction of the gas work notification scheme has placed more administration on registered gas installers, and that means more costs for local authorities, housing associations, customers and people right across the country. I am sure that everyone in the chamber would agree that the last thing that Scottish gas consumers need is higher, unnecessary administration costs, especially when there has been such a rise in energy prices across the board. The scheme was introduced by CORGI in April 2005. It seems ludicrous that a scheme based on building regulations in England and Wales and aimed at installers there has been imposed on registered installers across Scotland. I would be interested to hear whether the minister thinks that that is right when Scottish building regulations do not require such a notification scheme. The gas work notification scheme does nothing to improve the safety standards for gas installation in Scotland, as is stated in the motion. It would be interesting to hear about the Scottish Executive's contribution to any consultation in advance of the scheme's introduction and whether it expressed any views to CORGI. What action does the minister propose to take to try to resolve the issue? To be fair to the minister, I am not sure what locus the Executive has in this particular matter. As far as I am aware, CORGI is not a statutory body; it is a confederation of gas installers. However, I would expect the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, as someone who is concerned about the impact of regulation on business, to be able to make representations to a private body and to express the concerns of Scottish businesses. The Parliament is about promoting the Scottish economy and that is a stated aim of the Executive. If the scheme is inappropriate and unnecessary, the Executive should be doing what it can to have it removed. There is no need to put additional costs on gas installers north of the border or their customers in the public and private sectors. There is genuine cross-party agreement that the gas work notification scheme is inappropriate and should be withdrawn from Scotland. We must have high standards, but contractors and consumers are being unfairly penalised by the application of a scheme designed to meet requirements in England and Wales. With the evidence before us, it seems to be folly to continue with the scheme.  Christmas is coming. Would it not be a nice present for the gas installers of Scotland, and their customers, if the Executive was to ensure that the scheme is removed?

Given that we now seem to have cross-party consensus in favour of efficient government, does the First Minister believe that it is still appropriate for Scottish Enterprise to have 12 individual local  companies each with its own chief executive and board? Surely some slimming down would be a step in the right direction.

There is much in the bill that is worth supporting. Among the provisions that I believe are very worthy are the improved protection against domestic abuse, the ending of the problem of non-evacuated survivorship destinations in title deeds and the granting of additional parental responsibilities and rights. So the list goes on. Those of us who have concerns about bills that contain a mixture of good provisions and provisions with which we are uncomfortable face the challenge of deciding how to proceed. I have serious concerns about some of the provisions in the bill. In the stage 1 debate, I flagged up some of my concerns about the new rights that will be granted to cohabiting couples. That debate has had a good airing this afternoon. People have the right to cohabit, if they wish, but by cohabiting they have taken a conscious decision not to enter into the legal contract that is marriage, with all its attendant rights and responsibilities. As someone who practised law for many years, I see it as perfectly obvious that, if people want to have the rights and legal protections that come with a relationship, they should get married. We have civil marriage on the statute book because it was created as an alternative for those people who, for whatever reason, do not want go through a ceremony of religious marriage. I am concerned that the bill creates rights for cohabiting couples, but only in certain circumstances—where the sheriff is persuaded that a case has been made. I listened with great interest to the speech of Susan Deacon, who is unfortunately no longer with us. She made an eloquent case for more rights to be granted to cohabiting couples. I do not agree with her argument, but in my view it makes much more sense to say that cohabiting couples should have rights similar to those of people who are married, rather than the halfway house that the bill proposes, which will do nothing but create confusion and send out mixed messages. I am a lawyer and have examined the bill carefully, but I am confused by its provisions regarding cohabiting  couples. I cannot imagine how the general public will be able to understand it. My more fundamental concerns relate to the divorce provisions. When looking at family law, we should start from the clear point that marriage is good for society. I accept that society orders itself in different ways. People are perfectly entitled to order their lives as they wish and to enter into different forms of relationship. Other relationships can be just as stable as marriage and can provide homes for children that are just as loving for children as those that marriage provides. However, in general marriage is a good thing and should be supported by public policy. On that point, I disagree with Patrick Harvie. I suspect that my views are more in line with public opinion than his are. For me, the test for the bill is, are its provisions good for society? Do they support marriage? Will they help couples to stay together? I welcome the announcement this morning of additional sums for counselling and mediation, but that does not outweigh my concerns regarding the separation periods. I do not intend to rehearse all the arguments from this morning, as there is not time for that. However, it is a pity that the Parliament did not accept the middle way that was proposed by my colleague Margaret Mitchell and accepted by the Justice 1 Committee. That was a compromise between two different positions. It is a pity that the committee, which considered the matter carefully and looked at all the evidence, was not listened to. It is a pity that the Executive did not allow a free vote on what should be a matter of personal choice and conscience. Whatever careful arguments are heard in the chamber, the bill will be seen by others as support for quickie divorces, even though public opinion is substantially against that. The Conservatives will have a free vote on the bill. I will vote against it, but some of my colleagues, including Margaret Mitchell, will vote in favour. I will vote against it because I am not convinced that the bill meets the important test of building a better and stronger society in our country.

To ask the First Minister what discussions the Scottish Executive has had with Her Majesty's Government in respect of payment of security costs for the G8 summit at Gleneagles. (S2F-2002)

I am aware of the Executive's claims about the economic benefit of the G8 summit, but those claims will be of little comfort to  many businesses in Perthshire that, in effect, had to write off the whole of July, suffering severe losses. In his discussions with Her Majesty's Government, has the First Minister raised the issue of compensation for those businesses for their losses?

I will oppose Executive amendments 8 and 9. The starting point for the debate and for all of us is that marriage is good for society—all the objective evidence points in that direction. As a Parliament, we should be clear and unapologetic about that in the face of political correctness. As a responsible Parliament, we should be nervous of taking any measures that might weaken or undermine marriage, even if to do so is not the bill's intention. I have listened to the arguments on both sides and I simply do not know whether the measures, if passed, would undermine marriage and make divorce rates rise or fall. There is not enough evidence on either side to support either contention. However, we know that many couples change their minds about divorce during the process. I fear that the Executive's proposed reductions in separation periods go too far and so should be opposed. An important principle in a liberal democracy is that, before we change the law, a persuasive case should be made and compelling reasons should be given for the change. I do not think that the reasons for the proposed changes are compelling or that the evidence supports them. I listened with interest to Brian Adam and I have much sympathy for his position, but it is fair to say that he takes an absolutist view—he believes that the current position should not be changed. Similarly, the Executive takes an absolutist view in the opposite direction—it believes that we should go right down to a one-year separation period with consent. If there is a lack of clear evidence, it is entirely wrong to take an absolutist view in either direction. There is a case for reducing the periods, but not for reducing them by as much as the Executive proposes. If there is a lack of available evidence, it is surely sensible and responsible not to take an absolutist position; rather, a sensible middle road should be taken, which is what the bill currently takes.  We should remember that the Justice 1 Committee properly and thoroughly discussed the matters that we are considering. That committee reached the view that there is insufficient social research to support the reduction in periods to one  and two years respectively, but the Executive is seeking to overturn that committee's decision. Not for the first time, we must ask what the point is of having a committee system in the Parliament. A strong committee system was supposed to be one of the Parliament's jewels. It was supposed to allow parties to consider difficult issues and the evidence on a cross-party basis. However, again an attempt is being made to ride roughshod over a committee's opinions. I cannot believe that doing so is in the Parliament's best interests. I have one more point to make. It is a long-standing convention in Parliaments that Governments do not whip on matters of conscience. The Conservatives will have a free vote today and I think that the Scottish nationalists will have a free vote. We should allow people to make their own judgments on matters of conscience. If it is true that the Executive is whipping on the matter that we are discussing—and I believe that it is true—that is deeply regrettable and will do the reputation of the Parliament no good at all. I did not campaign to have a Scottish Parliament; indeed, I campaigned against it. I accept that I lost that argument, but I cannot believe that those who campaigned to have a Scottish Parliament would have wanted to see a day on which the Executive is prepared to whip members on an issue of conscience that is important to people throughout the country. If members vote according to their conscience and against the amendments, the Parliament's stature will be enhanced in the eyes of the Scottish people.

Will Mr Ingram give way?

Come on—Mr Ingram must give way.

This has been a wide-ranging debate, with interesting contributions from all sides. Let me start on a consensual note—it will not last—by welcoming this morning's announcement by the Minister for Transport and Telecommunications on the route for the Aberdeen western peripheral road. The route that has been chosen will mean that the future of the Camphill school in Aberdeen will not be threatened. Like many other members, I met some of the residents and teachers from that area when they came to the Parliament a few months ago. One cannot but be impressed by the quality of education that is offered in that setting, so the fact that today's announcement will safeguard the school's future is very much to be welcomed.  We support the principle of "ambitious, excellent schools". We welcome the steps that the Executive has taken towards greater devolved school management and autonomy, modest though they may be. We also accept that, across the piece, the general standard of education in Scotland is good and that most of our children receive a good quality of education. However, there are problems. As the minister acknowledged in his opening remarks, too many young people leave school with too little. The problem is that those who miss out, who do not have an education system that fits them for their future lives, tend to be those from less privileged backgrounds. In effect, the current system militates against such children accessing a better quality of education. We must do more for those groups. On this side of the chamber, we believe that we need a more diverse system that provides more choice and more local decision making. We should not shy away from philanthropists who want to assist education in Scotland. Why do we not set up new types of schools? For example, why do we not have a city academy in Glasgow to give more opportunities to the youngsters in that city who are not fulfilling their potential? As James Douglas-Hamilton said, we should perhaps consider some of the interesting ideas that are being developed by the Labour Government south of the border and adopt those that work.

That is an extraordinary intervention. All the evidence suggests that the city academies in the industrial centres are delivering a quality of education that is far above that which was delivered by the previous schools. Such academies are better for youngsters from disadvantaged backgrounds who receive a far better quality of education than was ever available to them in the past. Mr Smith should look at the facts. On the subject of so-called league tables, which was raised by several speakers including Bill Butler, I think that it is, frankly, a bizarre idea that we should seek to withhold information from parents. Of course we all want better information, but surely even partial information is better than none. Why keep parents in the dark? Indeed, why assume that parents are daft? If one goes to any town or suburb of any large city in Scotland, one can stop people on the street and ask them what the schools in the area are like. From the  conversations that people have with their children, neighbours and others, people know exactly what their local schools are like. They know what the quality of education is, what the standards of discipline are and how the kids behave themselves inside and outside school. Everybody has that information, so the idea that we will achieve anything by seeking to withhold information is, frankly, rather daft. An interesting debate has developed on the teaching of history in schools. I have some sympathy for the SNP amendment and, being a student of Scottish history, I enjoyed Mr MacAskill's tutorial on the subject. History is an important part of our national identity, so of course our youngsters need to know about Scottish history. However, history should not be restricted to Scottish history. We cannot afford to be insular and inward looking. We need to know about British history and world history, too. I have a vision—or nightmare—that children in an SNP Scotland would be force-fed all the dismal parts of Scottish history. According to Mr Gibson—who sadly, is no longer in the chamber—certain parts of history must be taught to all children. My suspicion is that those will be the clearances, the collapse of the Darien scheme and the Hanoverian crushing of Highland culture after 1745. The SNP wants people to be taught all the negative aspects of Scottish history to perpetuate the idea of Scots as victims who are hard done by. In teaching Scottish history, we should celebrate it. We should look at positive aspects such as the great Scots, and the many things that we have achieved over the centuries, such as our contribution to the development of the British empire. More than 100 years after he died, the great Scot David Livingstone is still celebrated in Africa for his humanity and his Christian concern for the people he met. Surely that would be a more responsible approach than the rather narrow-minded view that is put about by some SNP members. In conclusion, if the Executive is serious about creating ambitious, excellent schools, it will have our support. We believe that a more diverse and open system with more school independence is required if we are to have an education system that meets the needs of Scotland's youngsters, especially those from disadvantaged backgrounds.

Money well spent.

Does the minister agree with Euan Robson that the measure is an experiment?

I declare an interest. I am a solicitor, although not currently practising, and I spent 12 years before entering Parliament practising in the field of property law, among other areas. Therefore, I have a certain background knowledge of the subject. I support Mary Scanlon's amendments to remove the single seller survey. I believe that the measure is unnecessary and unwanted; it is  noticeably and vigorously opposed by those who practise in the field, who are surely the ones that we should listen to. I believe that there are five reasons why the survey is wrong. First, as Mary Scanlon said, the survey was introduced to remove the supposed social ill of multiple surveys being paid for by purchasers. As we have heard, the market has cured that social ill in Edinburgh and in many other places, and that is happening in more and more parts of Scotland as a result of the introduction of offers subject to survey. That social ill, which was at the centre of the rationale behind the measure, has been all but removed.

I am afraid that Sarah Boyack shows her complete ignorance of the operation of the property market and the survey system. People who make offers subject to survey make their offer conditional upon seeing a survey report. They then have the opportunity to study that survey report and consider whether or not to proceed. It is a perfectly simple and straightforward matter of legal contract that has operated perfectly well for many, many years. I see no difficulty with that. Secondly, the single seller survey is wrong because it will present a cost barrier to sellers, who will have to find the money up front to fund the survey and the seller's pack, as Christine Grahame said. We heard talk from the minister of some sort of loan scheme, but we have no idea how that will operate in practice. I remember many cases of people coming to me in difficult situations when they wanted to sell property. A couple could be separating or getting divorced, and it could be difficult for them to find the money even to put the property on the market and pay for the initial advertising. How could they find the money to pay for a survey fee and a seller's pack in addition to that? Where would the money come from? Thirdly, there is the problem of slow markets, in which properties can sit on the market for months on end. After three months, the valuation could be out of date because of changing circumstances, as Christine Grahame said, and the seller would have to find yet more money to update the survey. In effect, the survey will be a regressive tax on sellers because, regardless of the value of the property, they will have to find money to fund the sale.  Fourthly, the Executive's proposal challenges the basis of the Scottish system of property law. The Roman-law principle of caveat emptor, which has applied for centuries, is being swept away in favour of reliance on a seller-instructed survey. What purchaser or lender will rely on such a survey when issues of duty of care, liability and conflict of interest have still to be resolved? Finally, and most compellingly, surely in a liberal democracy Government should legislate only as a last resort, when there is no other way in which to proceed. In the stage 1 debate on the St Andrew's Day Bank Holiday (Scotland) Bill, Tom McCabe said: "we should legislate only when it is necessary to do so".— [ Official Report , 6 October 2005; c 19875.]  That is patently not the case here, because there is no evidence base for the measure in question. The pilot has been a failure—even Executive members accept that. Euan Robson, who is a Liberal, gave the game away when he said that the single seller survey was an experiment. The Executive is experimenting with the property market and with the investments of millions of ordinary Scots. For centuries, the property market has been regulated by private contract and has worked fine. Now this meddlesome and interfering Executive thinks that it knows best, despite all evidence to the contrary. The Executive knows nothing and understands even less about our property market. It should remove its proposal, which is irresponsible and meddlesome.

I welcome the debate, and I thank Sarah Boyack for bringing the issue to the chamber. I was not quite expecting all the excitement of earlier this afternoon and I have a further engagement at 6 o'clock, so if I have to leave early, I offer my  apologies to Sarah Boyack, the minister and you, Presiding Officer. I did not sign Sarah Boyack's motion because I was a little bit uncomfortable with the idea of the Executive setting targets for local authorities, but I agree with almost everything else in the motion. I am particularly attracted to the idea of "micro and small-scale renewable technology", not least because, as members know, I am something of a critic of the development of large-scale onshore wind farms. Developing micro-technology would be greatly preferable and would get us away from any of the problems associated with large projects. I will say more on that subject in a moment.

Mr Ruskell and I will have to agree to differ on that point. I am afraid that time will not allow me to elaborate to any great extent on the arguments on that subject, to which we can return on another occasion. I agree with Sarah Boyack that micro and small-scale renewables offer opportunities to tackle both fuel poverty and the causes of climate change. The idea of amending building standards to include micro-renewables technology projects as permitted developments is interesting. Although I am no building expert, I would like to hear the minister's response on that. I refer to some of the successful schemes that are being undertaken in my region of Mid Scotland and Fife. In May 2004, a small-scale wind turbine was designed and fitted on top of Collydean Primary School in Glenrothes. It was the first school in Scotland to have a purpose-built wind turbine and I congratulate all those involved who worked so hard to make it happen. Such schemes could be rolled out throughout Scotland. They are important, because they not only make a contribution to renewable energy but help to educate youngsters about the opportunities that green energy provides and to make them more aware of the environment. Small-scale turbines do not have the disadvantages of visual or environmental impact that large wind farms have. Where I grew up in Inverness-shire, it was relatively common to see windmills on crofts and small holdings not to provide electricity, because they pre-dated that technology in that part of the world, but to power water pumps to raise water from the well to feed  the water supply to the house and steading. Sadly, few of those windmills still exist, which is a shame, because they were quite a feature of the landscape, but there is no reason why we cannot replace them with small-scale wind turbines that provide electricity for dwellings, with any surplus being sold back to the grid. I offer another example of small-scale renewable energy in action. Recently I visited two small-scale hydro schemes just outside Aberfeldy. They do not involve damming up the river or creating reservoirs; the river flow generates electricity by flowing down water pipes underneath the river. One small scheme is capable of generating enough electricity to power a small town. Strictly speaking, that is not micro-generation, but it shows what can be done, and with low visual and environmental impact. There are great opportunities throughout rural Scotland to develop small hydro schemes, which would bring tremendous economic benefit to landowners, farmers and communities. Funding mechanisms for renewable energy should be altered to help to promote such small-scale renewables technologies, because the opportunities for Scotland are tremendous. Small-scale renewables technologies, such as the ones mentioned in the motion, are the way forward for Scotland. Compared with large-scale wind farms, they cause near to no damage to the local environment and their visual impact is virtually non-existent. I thank Sarah Boyack for lodging the motion and believe that the Executive should consider developing these opportunities to the benefit of us all.

The minister might be aware that I corresponded with her predecessor about the condition of the Ardoch Roman fort in Perthshire. That historic monument is being destroyed by the action of burrowing rabbits. I know that Historic Scotland tried to reach a deal with the local landowner to control the action of the rabbits, but can the minister give us an update of where matters stand in this serious situation? [ Interruption. ]

Nine years.

We have heard a statement from Lewis Macdonald on the Executive's big plan for dental action. Too many times, the Executive has promised to get to grips with the dental crisis in Scotland and I am sure that the people in Tayside and Fife, who have seen their dental service disappear under the Executive, will not be smiling at the latest plans, which appear to be little more than a sticking plaster for the problems of dentistry. The point has already been made in the debate that it does the Executive no favours at all that it has failed to engage properly with the British Dental Association and has, instead, indulged in soundbites and posturing and attacked dentists. Already this morning, we have heard people accusing dentists of being greedy and selfish. That does nothing to help the debate.

If I may, I will quote from the chairman of the BDA's Scottish dental practice committee. He said: "Health ministers seem determined to force their views on dentists, issuing statements and press releases with no attempt to discuss these complex issues with representatives of the profession."

That is a quote from Robert Donald, which the minister will be familiar with. There is a convenient scapegoat for the members of the Executive parties who are desperate to displace blame for the crisis that has occurred over the past six years. What do they pick on? The closure of the dental school. Dr Elaine Murray was gracious enough to accept that, at the time, the industry wanted the dental school to be closed because it was concerned about the oversupply of dentists. As we well know, the problem is not to do with the lack of dentists in training but to do with the retention of dentists in the NHS. Only 3 per cent of dental undergraduates say that they are considering a full-time career in the NHS. It is not the lack of dentists being trained that is the problem, but the lack of dentists being trained who want to go into the NHS.

I quite accept that the BDA now says that there needs to be an increase in the total number of dentists. However, I remind the members of the Executive parties that the Executive has been in power for six and a half years and it is time that it moved on from blaming all the ills of Scottish society on the previous Conservative Government, which was in power eight and a half years ago. Let us end the blame displacement. With regard to NHS dental services in Tayside and Fife, Tricia Marwick unearthed some figures that show the shocking truth. In 2004-05, 4,537 patients were withdrawn from NHS registration in Tayside. The situation is worse in Fife, where 10,540 patients were withdrawn from NHS registration. There has been a mass exodus. In fact, more than half of all of the patients who were withdrawn from NHS registration in 2004-05 came from Tayside and Fife. That meltdown in Tayside and Fife underlines the crisis that is happening across Scotland. This summer, the local dental practice in my home town, Alyth, in Tayside closed down permanently, leaving no dentist in the town. Nobody in the town can remember any time when Alyth did not have its own dentist. In 2004, a new dental practice was opened in Dunfermline in Fife. When it opened, hundreds of local residents queued for hours to register. I understand that that is by no means a unique experience. Surely it proves that the Executive must do more to deliver affordable dental care. Further afield, earlier this week, I was in Thurso—in Jamie Stone's constituency—with the Enterprise and Culture Committee. One of the issues that we were discussing was economic development and ways in which people could be attracted to come and live in the area. In that regard, the issue of access to NHS dentistry was raised. We were told that people in Thurso face a round trip of more than 200 miles to find a dentist. Such quality-of-life issues are vital to our attempts to attract people to live in rural areas. They will do that only if they have access to decent services. We cannot consider problems in isolation. If we are to try to address population decline, we have to be aware of other problems. I want to deal with the NHS recruiting Polish dentists. I have nothing against Poles and I welcome the arrival in January 2006 of 32 Polish dentists, six of whom will be employed in Fife. However, that is only a quick fix for shortages in dentistry.  In case there is any doubt about the politics of the situation that we are discussing, I will quote Alex Falconer, who was Labour MEP for Mid Scotland and Fife until 1999. Earlier this year, he wrote to the Dunfermline Press and West of Fife Advertiser , saying: "I have two health problems. One is my ear. Under the Tories, I saw a consultant within three months at the Queen Margaret. My other problem is asbestos pleural plaques. Under the Tories, I saw a chest consultant once a year at the Queen Margaret. After eight years of Labour, I have now waited over six months to see an ear consultant at the Victoria. I also have to travel to the Victoria to see the chest consultant. Also under the Tories, I had an NHS dentist. Now I don't have one and the prospect of getting one is remote." That is from a gentleman who was an elected Labour politician but who is now making statements against his own party. The minister does not need the Tories to tell him what is wrong; he can listen to his own representatives.

Who is to blame?

Before Alex Johnstone reaches the end of his remarks, could he tell us whether he enjoys Scottish food and, if so, in what quantities?

Would Mr Rumbles like to confirm that the person who started the campaign for Laurencekirk station was Alick Buchanan-Smith when he was the Conservative MP for that constituency?

I welcome the fact that the Executive is dedicating some of its debating time to the important subject of rail. I do not want to spend my speech making partisan, party-political points, despite the temptation to do so. However, I thank Karen Whitefield for her good grace in praising the Bathgate line, which was a creation of the last Conservative Government; I shall resist the temptation to dwell on that. As the Executive knows, Scotland's railway network is vital to the country's economic performance—people rely on trains to commute to work and business relies on trains for freight haulage—and it links all parts of Scotland. I want to concentrate on rail services because they affect my constituents in Mid Scotland and Fife. I am sure that I am not alone in having a mailbag that is full of letters from constituents about the inadequacies of the rail service. I have been a strong advocate of more rail services to Perth and of improvements to the station there, but I fear that Perth's rail situation is another example of the city being forgotten by the Executive. Of the £40 million that First ScotRail is investing in infrastructure, it is investing only £155,000 in Perth, which is to be spent on improving the station's closed-circuit television system and upgrading its clocks. The people who use Perth station will appreciate that many more upgrades than just those are required. There is a lack of vision for Perth and a lack of will to improve its train services. People in Perth want—indeed, they deserve—a decent train service. There are not enough services to Edinburgh. Surely it is unacceptable that most services from Perth to Edinburgh are indirect and take more than two hours. Of course, we used to have a direct rail line from Perth to Edinburgh, but it was closed in 1970—I remind Mr Muldoon that that was done under a Labour Government. I am sorry for making partisan, party-political points again. Trains now have to loop round by Stirling and Dunblane or along the Fife circle. We are far from being able to make a case for reopening the direct line from Perth to Edinburgh, but surely we can come up with a better solution that provides more effective and reliable rail services between the two cities. Such services are essential for the Perth area and its economy. What a difference having fast, regular and direct links to Edinburgh would make to Perth's economy. First ScotRail is responsible to the whole of Scotland. It is all very well for it to invest £100 million in Waverley station—that is tremendous news—but surely Perth station deserves more than £155,000 for better services.

I accept that there is a major constraint on Waverley station and that expansion will open the door to more services, but much more could be done. For example, extending the commuter service from Edinburgh to Dunblane as far as Perth would give more opportunities to people in Perth and the wider area. We have heard about the reopening of stations. My colleague David Davidson—no doubt, with a little assistance from Mr Rumbles—was involved in the campaign to reopen Laurencekirk station, but I want to mention the case for reopening Blackford station in Perthshire, which a feasibility study shows would be of massive benefit to the area. We all know about the success of Dunblane's park-and-ride scheme for commuters who travel to the central belt, but there is now immense pressure on car parking capacity in Dunblane, the streets of which have been left chock-a-block with cars by people commuting to Glasgow or Edinburgh. It would make sense to reopen Blackford station, if only to relieve some of the pressure on Dunblane. Commuters from Crieff and other parts of Strathearn who do not use a rail service to the central belt might be more inclined to do so if Blackford station were reopened, as it would be closer to their homes. That would also relieve traffic pressure on the roads and be more environmentally friendly. Furthermore, a reopened station at Blackford would provide local businesses with opportunities for freight haulage. The best example of such a company is Highland Spring Ltd, whose product—water—is heavy, stable, and high volume and would be perfect for rail transportation. The Highland Spring plant sits right beside the main railway line. With a little imagination, surely we could get such goods on to trains. That would ease the pressure on the A9, which carries a higher percentage of heavy goods vehicles than the national average. Taking some of the traffic off the A9 would reduce the horrendous accident statistics on that road. I discussed the idea with Highland Spring and it is interested in transporting its goods by rail. All that is needed for that to happen is a bit of encouragement from the Executive, so I urge it to give the suggestion serious consideration. The minister said that he travelled on the Fife circle line this morning. I hope that he had a better experience than many of my constituents, who  complain regularly about severe overcrowding and the line's poor punctuality record. First ScotRail must make it a priority to improve that part of the rail network. I drive in over the Forth road bridge and I know that many people who make that journey by car would rather use the train, but do not do so because the service is simply inadequate. It is essential for the Executive to consider improving the service on the Fife circle. I have concentrated on local issues because they are a microcosm of the problems on the network as a whole. The Executive has much more to do if it is to deliver the rail service that the people of Scotland deserve.

To ask the Scottish Executive what factors  it will take into account in determining whether a public inquiry will be held into the planning application by Scottish and Southern Energy plc for the 400kV Beauly to Denny power line. (S2O-7969)

I am grateful to the minister for that comprehensive response. He should be aware of widespread concern in Perthshire and Stirling about the size of the new power line and about the visual intrusion that it would present in an area that is highly dependent on tourism for its income. He should also be aware of the specific concerns about the routing of the line and its proximity to dwellings and communities such as Crieff. Would the minister agree that, in order to allow a proper airing of all those issues, it is essential that a public inquiry be held into the planning application?

Not yet.

Will the member give way?

We are talking about manufacturing. Even if it is the case that we lost 155,000 jobs during the 18 years of Conservative Government, is the minister proud of the fact that the Executive has managed to lose 100,000 jobs during the past six years?

Scottish manufacturing is in crisis. Since 1997, we have lost nearly 100,000 jobs in the sector. According to the Scottish Council for Development and Industry, exports have fallen below £15 billion in value for the first time in a decade. The Scottish Executive must stop sitting on its hands and start taking action to address the decline in our manufacturing base. Let us start by separating reality from mythology. It is part of the mythology of Scottish politics that manufacturing declined under the Conservative Government. In fact, the opposite is the case. According to figures produced by the SCDI, the value of manufacturing exports rose year on year from 1979 to 1997. In 1979, at today's prices, the figure was £3.5 billion; in 1997, it was £19 billion. Those are the facts, despite the nonsense that is put about by our political opponents about the decline in our manufacturing base during that period. Particularly during the 1990s, Scottish manufacturing saw growth at high levels. The value as a percentage of Scottish gross value added rose year on year between 1992 and 1997. The percentage has fallen substantially in each year since. There was a net gain of more than 5,000 manufacturing jobs in Scotland during the last year of the Conservative Government, whereas the most recent figures show a catastrophic loss of nearly 20,000 jobs in a year. Yes, there has been a dramatic decline in manufacturing, but not on the watch of the Conservatives. It has come on the watch of the Executive and it is the Executive that must be held accountable. If the current rate of decline continues, Scottish manufacturing may well disappear altogether within 10 years. It is depressing, but not surprising, to see that the Executive's amendment contains no recognition of the sector's problems, such as job losses, competitive pressures and the fall in exports.

The Executive does not have the first idea how to deal with those problems, but perhaps a reluctant ex-member of the Executive will give us an idea.

Wendy Alexander clearly has far too much time on her hands if she spends her waking hours reading our old manifestos. We are committed, as we have always been, to growth in the Scottish economy and Scottish businesses. We do not need to spell that out in detail in relation to every sector in order to make the point. We believe that Scotland requires a strong manufacturing base and that the decline in manufacturing is driven by a lack of competitiveness on the part of the Scottish economy.

I have a sense of déjà vu. As Mr Ewing knows, we have debated the point endlessly. My party and I accept that there is a case for looking at the powers of the Scottish Parliament. At the moment, we are not convinced that fiscal autonomy is the right option, but there is a debate to be had on the matter and we will be happy to engage in that debate in the months ahead. We accept that Scotland cannot compete in terms of price with countries such as India and China, but we are hampered by the unduly high cost base in Scottish manufacturing. The 2005 United Kingdom competitiveness index, which has been produced by the University of Sheffield, shows that Scotland has fallen four places since 1997, from fourth to eighth out of twelve regions of the UK. That can only be a direct result of the Executive's decisions. The SCDI states that manufacturing exports peaked in 2000. That is the year in which the Executive increased business rates. As we have heard many times in the chamber, Scottish businesses have paid an extra £838 million since Jack McConnell abolished the uniform business rate and increased business rates to a higher level than applies down south. I am pleased that a cut in business rates has been announced, but it is disappointing that the cut is to be staggered. The Executive should bring the entire cut forward to April 2006 so that business rates in Scotland match those in England. That would deliver a real boost to the competitiveness of Scottish manufacturing.  Scottish manufacturing companies also suffer from higher water bills than those paid by their counterparts down south. BP at Grangemouth pays nearly twice as much as would an equivalent plant south of the border. It is time to move Scottish Water into the private sector, to make it more competitive and to reduce the costs to Scottish businesses. We have to tackle regulation. People in business regularly complain that they are hampered by red tape. Our new Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning says that he understands the position, but it is time for him to deliver. We need an enterprise minister who really believes in slashing red tape and allowing businesses to compete more freely.

We know that the European economy as a whole has not performed particularly well, so perhaps Europe should not be our model. It is disappointing that the Executive rejected many of the Subordinate Legislation Committee's recommendations on the regulatory burden. We need to examine the size of the public sector in Scotland, which stifles private sector activity. We are familiar with the comments of the chairman of Scottish Enterprise on the matter and there is a growing consensus that the way to grow the private sector is to start reducing the burden of the public sector. Under the Executive, the decimation of Scottish manufacturing continues apace. Unlike the happy years of Conservative Government, when Scottish manufacturing went from strength to strength, all we have seen during the past six years is a sad story of decline. It is time for the Executive to stand up for Scottish manufacturing and take the necessary steps to turn the situation round. I move, That the Parliament notes with concern that the value of the manufacturing sector fell every year between 1997 and 2002, having previously risen year-on-year between 1992 and 1997, and that nearly 100,000 manufacturing jobs have been lost since 1997; further notes with concern the recent findings of the Scottish Council for Development and Industry that exports have fallen below £15 billion in value for the first time in a decade; believes that Scotland can benefit from a solid manufacturing base as part of a diverse and modern economy, and therefore calls on the Scottish Executive to take the action required to increase the competitiveness of the sector by taking measures such as reducing red tape and the size of the public sector, privatising Scottish Water, encouraging greater  participation in vocational training at further education colleges and bringing forward the promised business rates cut to April 2006.

Will the minister give way?

The minister must understand that such matters can be dealt with by stage 2 amendments in the normal passage of a bill. Will he explain—

Does Karen Gillon appreciate that if the bill proceeds there will be an opportunity at stage 2 to vote on which alternative bank holiday should be removed? That would be determined by the committee and then by Parliament. If members voted for May day, or any other holiday, to be removed, that is what would happen.

That was a pretty poor apology by the minister for the Executive's stance. I commend Dennis Canavan for the way in which he has pursued the issue and for introducing his member's bill. Whatever one's view on the details of the bill, it must be acknowledged that Dennis Canavan has done a tremendous amount of work in consulting interested parties and in rallying support for his proposal. The  Scottish Conservatives support the bill's general principles, with one important caveat, which is covered by my amendment. I will come to that caveat shortly. St Andrew was the Lord's first apostle. He was a fisherman in Galilee who was executed by the Romans. His bones were buried but removed 300 years later to Constantinople in Turkey by Emperor Constantine. Legend has it that a Greek monk called St Rule—or St Regulus—was warned in a dream that St Andrew's remains were to be removed and that he was directed by an angel to take the remains that he could find to the ends of the earth for safekeeping. St Rule followed those directions and took a tooth, an arm, a knee-cap and some fingers from the tomb as far away as he could. At that time, Scotland was at the edge of the known world. St Rule was shipwrecked in Scotland with his cargo and the town of St Andrews—which is, of course, the home of my colleague Mr Brocklebank—was founded. St Andrew is now our patron saint, of course, and his name is celebrated on 30 November by Scots around the world. Dennis Canavan's intention in introducing the bill was to create a national holiday that would be a day for celebrating Scottish identity. He made a persuasive case and drew parallels between the economic benefits that there could be with the tremendous economic benefits that the Irish draw from celebrating St Patrick's day. Of course, it is not just in Ireland that St Patrick's day is successful; it is celebrated throughout the world by Irish expats and is particularly significant in north America. The committee heard evidence from retailers and those who are involved in the tourism industry that the creation of a St Andrew's day holiday would provide a substantial benefit to their businesses. Quite apart from that, it should be a day on which to celebrate Scottish identity and the diversity of our culture. Those objectives should receive widespread support. I was, therefore, depressed and dismayed to see the terms of the Executive's amendment. As Mr Canavan said, it is no more than a cynical attempt to kick the issue into the long grass. The Enterprise and Culture Committee has already considered the issue, so what is the point of referring the matter back? What does that say about the four MSPs from the Executive parties who are on the committee—Susan Deacon, Christine May, Richard Baker and Jamie Stone—who approved the general principles of the bill? Are they not to be trusted by the Executive? What is the point of having committees undertake pre-legislative scrutiny if we are to dismiss what they say, even when the Executive has a majority membership of them?  I was flabbergasted to read that the Executive's amendment "seeks to uphold the consensus across the Parliament that we should only legislate where necessary". In the past six years, we have had reams of ridiculous, unnecessary and unwanted pieces of legislation from the Executive. Frankly, if the Executive does not support the bill it should come out and say so. It should vote against the bill, not indulge in complicated subterfuge. Contrary to what I believe the Liberal Democrats were told at lunch time today, the Conservatives will vote against the Executive's amendment. I turn, briefly, to my amendment. The committee heard strong evidence from employers that they did not wish an additional holiday to be granted for St Andrew's day because that would lead to extra costs, especially for small businesses that struggle to compete with larger rivals who could afford the staff to cover public holidays. They would have no objection to a St Andrew's day holiday, provided that it substituted an existing holiday at another time of year.

I will not be prescriptive about which day that might be; that could be dealt with at stage 2. We do not need an additional holiday. We should ensure as widespread support as possible for the bill. It would be unfortunate if the bill were to succeed without the support of the business community and employers' organisations. By amending the bill in the way that I propose, we would ensure that there is genuine consensus throughout the country in support of a St Andrew's day holiday. Some people will criticise the bill and say that it achieves virtually nothing in legal terms but is just about symbolism. However, symbolism is important. Parliament should be about more than just the bare bones of legislation and the dry dust of legal clauses; we should lead from the front, change public perceptions and set the agenda. We should support the motion. I move amendment S2M-3356.1 to insert at end: "but, in so doing, believes that a new bank holiday established as a result of the Bill should not be so established unless an existing bank holiday is no longer specified as a bank holiday."

I thank the minister for his statement and for the advance copy of it. In light of the figures that we  heard earlier showing the decline in Scottish manufacturing exports, the cut surely cannot come soon enough. Over the past five years, Scottish businesses have paid an extra £838 million in rates as a direct result of a decision taken by the minister's predecessor. Every year that goes by, an additional £180 million is paid. Now that the Executive has accepted the principle that rates should be cut, why should businesses have to wait before the full reduction comes through? Does the Executive now accept that it was wrong to increase rates in Scotland six years ago or are all its critics in the business community simply to be dismissed as idiots?

Not huge numbers.

When the chairman of Scottish Enterprise says that the economy of parts of the west of Scotland is like that of eastern Europe, does that make him proud of the Executive's record?

I thank the SNP for allocating some of its business time to the economy. There is no more important subject that the Parliament could discuss today. If any members are sceptical about that, I simply remind them that, without a strong, stable, wealth-generating economy, we could not deliver the quality public services that we all want. Economic debates in the Parliament are sometimes surreal. Although the primary duty of virtually all Parliaments is to manage the national wealth through the raising and allocation of revenue, our Parliament has no such duty. On the contrary, the Executive is merely an agent of the Treasury—it has been assigned the task of spending money that it has not earned. That means that the Executive has little or no accountability for the money that it spends. It also means that it has presided over a growth in the public sector that is starting to damage our economy, a point that was acknowledged as recently as yesterday by the chairman of Scottish Enterprise, Sir John Ward. I welcome much of the spending that was outlined in the Executive's budget—indeed, I would like to see more spending on areas such as road building. However, the overriding conclusion from any study of the Executive's spending plans is that vast sums of money are being squandered on waste and bureaucracy. That is damaging our economic health, because the public sector has become so large that it is crowding out the private investment that we need. The proof is in the figures: zero growth in the first quarter of this year; significantly lower levels  of entrepreneurship and business start-ups than in the rest of the UK; 100,000 manufacturing jobs lost since 1997, with figures that came out yesterday showing a further fall to a 10-year low; and a fall of four places in the UK regional competitiveness index from fourth in 1997—under a Conservative Government—to eighth in 2005. Those are not just statistics; they are figures that matter in the lives of ordinary Scots. They tell us that the small businessmen and businesswomen and entrepreneurs in our constituencies are struggling to cope and that the Executive has failed, in the words of the SNP motion, "to create conditions that foster meaningful levels of economic growth". What should the Parliament be doing? The SNP's solution, as outlined in Mr Mather's motion, is that the Parliament should have "full competitive control of the Scottish economy"— or, in normal speak, independence. That would be a disaster not only for the economy, but for Scotland as a whole. We Conservatives believe that there is a debate to be had about the fiscal powers of the Parliament. However, we understand that the massive constitutional upheaval that tearing Scotland from the United Kingdom would entail would be a futile distraction from the action that we can take here and now to help our businesspeople and entrepreneurs. Worse than that, the SNP's approach lets the Executive off the hook. By talking about the need for constitutional change, the SNP suggests that nothing can be done now to turn around our economic underperformance. There is much that the Executive could and should be doing today with the powers that it already has.

I am not going to set a target for them. However, it is entirely possible that growth in the Scottish economy could at least match that of the other parts of the United Kingdom; indeed, it should exceed that if we gave Scotland a competitive advantage. The important point is that the Executive already has the necessary powers. We do not need constitutional change to bring about improvements. That is the difference between our view and the SNP's. We are happy to look at the whole question of the powers of the Parliament and how we might use them to deliver competitive advantage for Scotland, but we believe that the Executive should be using the powers that it already has—it could use them today without waiting for that process of constitutional change.  What would we do? First, we would bring forward the cut in business rates. Later today, the Parliament will hear an announcement of the timing of the cut. It has been too long since there was uniform poundage and it is time that something was done. The Executive needs to tackle the problems of excess regulation and red tape. Every Executive department should be tasked with scouring the statute book for every regulation that is of no proven worth or is in need of abolition. That would allow small businessmen and businesswomen to spend more time on their work and less time on Government forms.

Mr Rumbles asks for an example; I will give him one. The Executive is consulting on proposals to introduce regulations that will require small businesses to undergo an annual inspection of private water supplies. That will put a substantial burden on small businesses in rural areas; it is completely unnecessary and exactly the sort of burden that we should be scrapping. I see that Mr Rumbles is nodding. We can go further. We should privatise Scottish Water and help to bring down the costs, making the situation more competitive for business. We should also invest in our roads network. We must reject the SNP's failed tonic because we can take action today, within the devolved settlement, to help our businesses and to revive economic growth. I move amendment S2M-3377.1, to leave out from "regrets" to end and insert: "notes, however, that under the stewardship of the Scottish Executive economic growth has consistently trailed that of the United Kingdom; believes that independence would be a costly and unwelcome distraction from the concrete action that can be taken within the devolved framework to boost economic growth, and therefore urges the Executive to cut red tape, privatise Scottish Water, increase investment in transport and cut business rates at the earliest possible opportunity."

Sandra White should tell Mr Mather that.

The debate has been constructive and well informed, with good speeches by members from all parties. Before responding in detail to some of the points that have been made, I want to lift my eyes for a second from the minutiae of the white paper and to consider the wider picture of planning. At the start of his speech, Donald Gorrie talked about the purpose of the planning system. Historically, development in Scotland was unregulated. As society developed, towns and cities developed systems of town planning. In Edinburgh, the city corporation of the day set out street plans, but the style and design of houses were left very much to private contract between individuals. The feu charter, which was developed in the 19 th century, set out the detail of how buildings should look and be constructed and the obligations on property owners. That system worked well until the middle of the last century. It is interesting that the great majority of the quality buildings in Scotland today predate our current planning system. The grand townscapes of urban Scotland—the new town of Edinburgh, the sandstone terraces of Glasgow and the granite buildings of Aberdeen—all date from a time prior to our current planning system. As we have heard from other members, in 1948 it was decided that, essentially, planning should be nationalised. A new regime was introduced, which established a balance between the right of the landowner or property owner to develop his or her property and the public interest. That included both the interest of neighbours of the property owner and wider considerations, such as environmental and transport issues. What is wrong with the current planning system? A number of members have spoken in great detail about the problems. I want to approach matters from a slightly broader perspective. It is clear that the current planning system conflicts with our demand for economic growth. The Executive accepts that there is a problem. Business takes the view that the system is too cumbersome, too  bureaucratic, too expensive and too time consuming. There must always be a balance between the need for economic development and the need to have public control of planning and development, but the consensus view is that the current regime is too restrictive. That is why we generally welcome the white paper that the Executive has published, especially measures such as fast-tracking of developments of national significance—which is warmly welcomed by the business community and will be important especially for driving forward some of the transport initiatives that the Executive has proposed—and the introduction of a hierarchy of planning, to which the minister referred. I want to talk about some more specific issues. The first is the important and contentious subject of third-party right of appeal, to which a number of members referred. Mike Rumbles, in particular, spoke about it in a speech designed to be constructive for future relations between Labour and the Liberal Democrats. He and other members said that there had to be a third-party right of appeal in some limited form, but we all know that the business community is very much against that. I—and, I am sure, other members—receive letters from people who say that we should support a third-party right of appeal because the planning system is unbalanced. If developers have a right of appeal, why should objectors not have one? People who take that approach fundamentally misunderstand the basis of our current planning system. When the Town and Country Planning Act 1948 was passed and the current regime was introduced, it was always understood that the basic principle and starting point would be that the property owner had a right to develop his or her property, subject to public control. For that reason, the property owner had a right of appeal, but the objector did not. Those who pursue the case of a third-party right of appeal, even on a limited basis, misunderstand the basic principle that underpins the planning system.

I believe that there are other ways of approaching the issue. The proposal from the Executive, which is effectively front-loading the  consultation, is a better way of addressing the concern. I accept that there is a concern, but I believe that there is a better way of addressing it than the introduction of a further right of appeal, which Mr Rumbles suggests. I have to say to the Scottish nationalists—to Christine Grahame and Sandra White in particular—that their party is all at sea on the issue. Last year, I was at a CBI Scotland breakfast with Jim Mather, the Scottish National Party enterprise spokesman. When he was asked about the issue, he assured the business audience that the SNP's so-called shadow Cabinet had discussed the matter and was opposed to a third-party right of appeal. The SNP should be consistent in its message.

Sandra White can respond to my point in her winding-up speech. That is what Jim Mather told me. The SNP must ensure that they are not saying different things to different audiences. In the short time that remains, I will mention wind farms, an issue that has been raised by Mary Scanlon, David Davidson, Margaret Jamieson and Rob Gibson. Wind farm planning is a huge issue for people in rural Scotland, as the current approach is piecemeal. Even those who are in favour of renewable energy understand that the current planning system, which promotes a free-for-all, is not in the best interests of either the developer or the objectors. There should be more certainty in the process, which means that there must be national strategic guidance. Given all the planning applications that are currently going through the system, we cannot afford to wait until the outcome of a planning consultation two thirds of the way through next year. We welcome the white paper. A lot more detail is required and there must be more discussion of the contentious issues in particular, but the white paper is at least a step forward.

I am grateful to the member for setting out her robust views on the third-party right of appeal. Do her views reflect those of all members of the SNP's parliamentary party? I remember hearing her colleague Mr Mather express a contrary view to the Confederation of British Industry not long ago.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is satisfied with the long-term sustainability of Scottish agriculture. (S2O-7642)

Does the minister agree that unless the welcome return of over-30-month beef into the food chain is accompanied by the lifting of the current export ban on that product, there is likely to be a detrimental impact on the already low price? What discussions has the Scottish Executive had with the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs on that and what progress is being made in relation to the lifting of the ban? I am sure that she would agree that unless the export ban is lifted, the future sustainability of the beef sector is under serious threat.

I welcome the opportunity to discuss the Scottish economy. The Greens highlight in their motion an issue that they have raised consistently over a long period—that GDP is not the best assessment of economic strength. On one level, the Greens are correct. We on the Conservative side of the chamber have never argued that quality of life is mainly dependent on having wealth. The fact is that, under the Executive, the factors that are damaging the quality of life for so many Scots, such as the drug-fuelled violence in our communities, are chiefly non-economic. We now know that, on one measure, Scotland is the most violent country in the world. Family breakdown, school indiscipline and the centralisation of local health care services are other examples of such factors. That is why the Conservatives are developing concrete policies to tackle those issues  head on and to improve the quality of life for all Scots, especially those who live in vulnerable communities. However, I disagree with the Greens, in that I believe that such quality-of-life issues are inextricably linked to economic growth. A strong and healthy economy is the necessary foundation for a good quality of life for all our citizens. A strong economy provides jobs, which reduce dependency and give people both the security to provide for themselves and their families and a sense of worth. A strong economy creates the wealth to pay for the quality public services that all of us—even the Greens—are in favour of. The GDP growth measure that the Greens deride is an extremely useful and important tool for assessing the extent to which Executive policies are helping or hindering the economy, on which our quality of life depends. It is unfortunate that, under the Executive's stewardship, Scottish GDP has consistently trailed behind that of the UK as a whole. As a result, it is hardly surprising that Scotland has fared so badly on several quality-of-life measurements. Our amendment highlights the fact that growth in the Scottish economy in the first quarter of 2005 was 0 per cent, whereas growth in the UK economy in that period was 0.4 per cent. There is no doubt that it would suit the Executive for us to stop drawing attention to those figures; in fact, I am surprised that the Executive has not grasped with both hands the opportunity that the Greens have offered it to move away from the use of GDP, given that it has failed so dismally on that measure over the past six years. However, the Executive probably appreciates that it would lack credibility if it took that route.

I do not agree with that at all. As I will outline shortly, and as our amendment states, we believe that a change of Administration and the resulting change in Executive policies would deliver higher GDP growth. It is not a necessary function of the Scottish economy that our GDP growth must lag behind that of the rest of the UK. In spite of what the minister said, the gap between Scotland and elsewhere in the UK continues to grow.

If the member will forgive me, I will not give way at the moment, because I want to make some progress. The latest evidence came from "The UK Competitiveness Index 2005", which was produced by the University of Sheffield and which  represents the most up-to-date, thorough and authoritative benchmarking of the competitiveness of the UK's regions and localities. It showed that whereas in 1997, under the Conservatives, Scotland was ranked fourth out of 12 regions in the UK, it is now ranked eighth out of 12—a fall of four places. What a testament to the Executive's track record. Perhaps we should not be surprised at those outcomes when we consider the Executive's approach to our wealth creators. In spite of his attempts to cosy up to the business community at the recent business in the Parliament conference, Jack McConnell let the mask slip at last week's Labour group meeting, when he is alleged to have referred to business leaders Janette Anderson and Ian Graham as idiots. Perhaps some of the Labour members who are present would like to tell us whether that remark was made, because the First Minister's press officers are reluctant to confirm or deny whether the story is true. When the First Minister displays such contempt for our business community, is it any wonder that Scotland is not regarded as a good place in which to do business? In Blackpool this week, the new Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning said that he wants business rates in Scotland to be reduced to below the level of those in England, to give us a competitive advantage. I am delighted at our new enterprise minister's conversion to Conservative policies. What a pity that, for the past six years, his predecessor and the Executive as a whole told us that we did not need such a reduction. It is clear that the Conservatives have won all the arguments on what is wrong with the economy and that the other parties are playing catch-up. I do not think that the Greens have much to offer when it comes to turning around our economic underperformance. Measures such as increasing fuel tax will simply damage businesses, especially in rural areas.

It is quite wrong to seek to disregard GDP growth as a measure of economic success, even though it might suit the Executive to do so. The Conservatives are winning the arguments on what needs to be done to turn around our economic underperformance. People from other parties, including the new Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, are queuing up behind our manifesto proposals. I move amendment S2M-3321.2, to leave out from first "GDP" to end and insert:  "the Scottish economy actually experienced zero growth in the first quarter of this year; believes that GDP growth is an extremely important measurement of quality of life because a strong economy is crucial to providing individual financial security and the necessary investment for quality public services; further believes that the Executive's stewardship of the economy has been detrimental to the quality of life of many Scots; notes that Scotland fell four places in the UK Regional Competitiveness Index between 1997 and 2005, and therefore calls on the Executive to take concrete action to reverse our economic under-performance by cutting red tape, privatising Scottish Water, increasing investment in roads and public transport and specifying a date for the proposed cut in business rates."

Will the minister take an intervention?

I am grateful. As we are bandying around statistics, will the minister tell us whether the Executive is satisfied that Scotland has fallen four places in the UK regional competitive index since 1997? We were fourth out of 12 regions of the UK in 1997; today we are eighth. Is that a record of success?

I congratulate John Swinney on securing a debate on such an important subject. I do not always agree with him, which I am sure will come as a relief to him, but I agreed with virtually every word he said. I approached this debate with a sense of déjà vu, because we have been here before. We debated the dualling of the A9 in 2002. I am sorry to say that we got little satisfaction at that time from the then transport minister. Why are things different today? Why should the Executive and the Minister for Transport and Telecommunications listen to pleas for the dualling of the A9, when the previous Executive and transport minister did not listen to similar pleas in 2002? I believe that two significant issues make the situation different from what it was in 2002. First, there has been a continual increase in traffic levels on the A9 over that time; indeed, that has been the pattern throughout Scotland. Public policy has been to try to reduce traffic levels, but evidence shows that levels are going in the other direction. That problem is particularly acute on the A9 because the road links Inverness—which we know is Europe's fastest-growing city—with the central belt. As Inverness and its economy and population grow, it generates more and more traffic. Any road that might have been suitable as a single carriageway 10 years ago may well now require upgrading, but that must be doubly the case for the A9, given its particular circumstances and the growth of Inverness. Secondly, and perhaps more pressingly, we now know what many people in Perthshire and the Highlands have suspected for a long time, which is that the A9 is officially the most dangerous road in Scotland. The relevant figures were in a parliamentary written answer to my Conservative colleague Brian Monteith. As we have heard, there were 82 fatalities on the A9 between 2000 and 2004, which is an average of 16 deaths a year. In addition, the A9 has always been in the top five of our most dangerous roads for injuries from road accidents during that period. Those figures are important. When we last debated the issue, the then Deputy Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning, Lewis Macdonald, said that the A9 had a "lower accident rate than the average for ... Scotland".— [ Official Report , 27 November 2002; c 15789.]  The new figures give the lie to that statement. I hope that our new Minister for Transport and Telecommunications acknowledges the true position. Sadly, the statistics will not come as a surprise to locals who use the road every day. The  particular problem with the A9—people who use it regularly will know this, and we have already heard about it this evening—is the continual switching from single to dual carriageway and back again. Even regular users of the road find it very easy to forget whether they are on a dual or single carriageway stretch. Imagine the confusion for foreign visitors flocking to Perthshire and the Highlands, particularly in the summer months, if they are not familiar with the road or comfortable with driving on the left. It is little wonder that the accident statistics are high. An energetic campaign has been running for many years to have the road dualled. It has been supported by local newspapers such as The Courier , as Andrew Arbuckle, who is a former employee of that paper, said. Despite the fact that the campaign has been running for years, the problems of the A9 get no better. In fact, as the latest figures show, they seem to be getting worse. I say to the minister that I understand that the costs of dualling the A9 will be substantial. At the previous debate in 2002, the then minister suggested that the cost would be in the region of £500 million. The minister today is suggesting a figure of £600 million. In anyone's book, that is a very substantial sum. However, expenditure at that level is not unprecedented by this Executive. I believe that the cost of the proposed Aberdeen western relief road will be similar. Although I have no doubt that that road is essential for the economy of Aberdeen and the north-east, the A9 must have at least an equally pressing case because of the statistics for road accidents. I acknowledge that any Government has to balance its priorities and that there can never be blank cheques. However, surely it is time for us to say that the A9 is such a danger that it must be a priority for future expenditure. Over the past five years, there has been an average of 16 fatalities on the A9 every year. With growing traffic levels, we can expect only that the level will at least continue unchanged, if not increase. That means 16 deaths this year, 16 next year, and 16 the year after that. So it will go on, unless something is done. For the sake of 16 lives every year, I urge the Executive to take this issue very seriously.

The debate has been considered and has attracted quality speeches from members of all parties. That is absolutely right, because we are dealing with serious and sensitive issues. Before we examine the bill's detailed provisions, we must consider what the Government's approach to marriage should be. Should the Government support, oppose or be neutral on marriage? Before we answer that question, we must examine the impact of marriage on society. Marriage has always been highly prized in the western legal tradition because of its social benefits to adults and children. All the evidence suggests that children whose parents are married do better than those whose parents are not married. That in no way denigrates the efforts of  single parents, who often do very well in what can be difficult circumstances. However, the general rule—the evidence supports it—is that the children of married parents tend to live longer, have fewer illnesses, do better at school and have better nutrition, comfort and conviviality levels. They are more likely to be employed and less likely to be criminals than those who come from other homes.

I will in a second. Furthermore, adults who divorce have a greatly increased incidence of heart disease, cancer, alcoholism and suicide. Those are the facts. Who would like to intervene?

If nobody wants to intervene, I will continue. Given those facts, we should not apologise for saying that marriage, in the generality, is good for society. On that I disagree with Patrick Harvie, because I think that the evidence supports what I said.

I will not give way at the moment. Of course some marriages break down—we all know of circumstances in which that has occurred. However, the fact is that most people marry and most marriages last for life. Some 65 per cent of children in Scotland live in a married couple household. I return to my original question. I believe that Government policy should be neither opposed to nor neutral on marriage; it should support marriage. That is by no means a moral judgment. The judgment is based purely on the objective evidence that is available to us. In that respect, I support Fergus Ewing's comments.

If Susan Deacon had listened carefully to me, she would have heard me say that I accept that exceptions to the rule always exist. However, the evidence is clear that, in the generality, marriage is good for society. Even the Scottish Executive admits that. Its document  "Family Matters: Improving Family Law in Scotland" says: "marriage remains the dominant family form in Scotland ... and is ... the preferable setting for bringing up children." If we accept the premise that marriage should be supported, we should examine the detailed proposals in the bill. The bill will reduce the periods of separation before a divorce can be granted. As we have heard, some religious groups are concerned that that will lead to quickie divorces and increase the incidence of divorce. I am concerned that the Executive has not yet made the case for the reductions—it is interesting that the majority of the Justice 1 Committee agrees with that stance. Before the Executive proceeds with the changes, it needs to establish that they will not undermine marriage. I am concerned about the lack of emphasis on reconciliation in the bill. Reconciliation and mediation are by no means the same thing. The Executive promotes mediation services, which provide a means to resolve conflict between couples who are divorcing. Those services are valuable, but they should exist in tandem with encouragement for reconciliation, which involves saving marriages through counselling. The evidence is that many people who divorce live to regret it. The standard research shows that more than 50 per cent of men and 28 per cent of women regret divorcing. We know that many couples become reconciled after considering divorce. If we accept that marriage is a good thing, surely it is worth putting some effort into achieving reconciliation. In the short time that remains, I will express one more concern about the bill, which relates to the proposed new rights for cohabiting couples. People have a perfect right to cohabit if they wish. However, by so doing, they make a conscious decision not to enter into the legal contract that is marriage, with all its attendant rights and responsibilities. The bill intends to give cohabiting couples some of the rights that married couples have. The suggestion is that cohabitation is a long-term alternative to marriage, but the evidence is to the contrary. The Executive admits that cohabitation is primarily a transitional state that often lasts about two to three years. Two thirds of cohabiting couples proceed to marry and about one third separate. As I practised law for many years, it is perfectly obvious to me that if people want the legal rights and protections that accompany marriage, they should marry. Civil marriage has no religious connotations, so there should be no civil or religious objections to it. When I practised as a lawyer, I remember advising clients—usually young men who owned  property—who told me, "My girlfriend wants to move in with me. I need to know the legal implications." I could tell such a man that his girlfriend would acquire no rights if he allowed her to move in. The presumption was that if the answer had been different, the couple would continue to live apart. I listened intently to the deputy minister's speech, in which he said that there was doubt about what the law was. He is right. Confusion is felt about where the law stands—people do not necessarily understand the legal position. However, at least the current law is clear. Cohabiting couples have no rights. My concern is that we will move from clarity in the law to a position of uncertainty that involves subjective tests on cohabitation. That will not be a positive development. Entering into a contract of marriage requires a conscious decision on the part of both parties. They both decide to take on the rights, responsibilities and legal protections in the role. The same cannot be said of cohabitation and I see no advantage to society or to individuals to create a form of marriage lite, which is what cohabitation with legal rights would be. Much in the bill makes sense and should be supported, but we have reservations about other parts of it. I do not believe that I can support the bill's general principles. We should not rush to change the law without making a compelling case that change will be for the better for individuals and society. I regret that the bill does not yet pass that test.

rose—

It seems that I am not allowed to intervene at this point.

I welcome Nicol Stephen to his first debate in the position of Deputy First Minister and Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning. I am sure that we all wish him well and look forward to him  making good the various promises that he made during his election campaign. This section of the debate is about growth and prosperity for all. I am sure that that is an aspiration with which we can all agree. We all want Scotland to be a prosperous and successful country, with a growing and vibrant economy. We want a Scotland in which our young people have great opportunities, to the extent that they do not need to leave the country and to seek to advance their careers elsewhere. We want a Scotland in which those currently disengaged from work find meaningful employment and can make a contribution to the economy. We want a Scotland that leads the United Kingdom in economic growth. Sadly, as we know too well, that is not the position that we are in today, after six years of the Executive having been in office. Our economic growth rates lag behind those of the rest of the United Kingdom, and there is no sign in recent data of that situation being reversed. We continue to suffer the loss of our bright young people as they go elsewhere to further their careers. Although employment rates are high, we face the problem of hidden unemployment, with people on disability benefit making up one in 10 of the workforce and others not appearing in official statistics. We have a low level of entrepreneurial activity compared with the rest of the UK. We have a particular problem in manufacturing. In 1999, when the coalition came into office, there were 336,000 manufacturing jobs in Scotland. Today there are 282,000. Sad to say, Scotland is not going forward under the Executive—it is going backwards. We have the recurring problem of the size of the public sector, which is now estimated at between 52 and 54 per cent of gross domestic product. There is virtual unanimity among commentators that that level of public sector activity is crowding out the private sector and stifling economic growth. Despite words from the First Minister on that topic yesterday, there is little sign of the situation being reversed. On numerous occasions in the chamber, I have set out what Conservative members believe needs to be done to reverse the situation. Scottish businesses are overregulated, with a large public sector contributing to the burden on their activity. For the past six years, Scottish businesses have paid higher business rates than businesses in the rest of the UK—a direct legacy of Jack McConnell's time as Minister for Finance. We still suffer from a poor transport infrastructure, which, given Scotland's geography, puts business at a particular disadvantage.

We could have a very interesting debate, which could go on all afternoon, about how the size of the public sector can crowd out private sector activity. There are a large number of well-paid, attractive jobs with good pensions in the public sector. The concern is that the size of the public sector can skew the decision making of young Scots who are seeking a career and looking to make decisions about how they lead their lives and whether to become entrepreneurs, to take risks and to set up businesses. That is a serious issue, and I am sorry that the member is trying to diminish it. However, he should listen to what I am about to say, because he may be encouraged. I think that there is hope. We have a new Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, which may mean a change of policy. On 29 May, Nicol Stephen told the Sunday Herald : "My instincts are for lower taxation for business, less of a grants culture and more of an investment culture. Scotland's got to change dramatically if we're going to have the sort of economy that will allow us to compete internationally. We have to move away from the focus on the public sector and increase the number of well paid private sector jobs." Hear, hear—that is exactly what Conservative members have been saying for the past six years. Does it mean that we now have a blue-tinted Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, who is preparing to pursue a Conservative agenda? The initial signs have been encouraging. The Executive has indicated that it is prepared to reverse its existing policy on business rates, which is extremely welcome and long overdue. We have been calling for a change in that policy for the past six years. For six years, the Deputy First Minister and his predecessors as Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning—including Mr Wallace, who, sadly, is not with us this afternoon—told us how wrong we were and that there was no competitive disadvantage for Scotland, as we had claimed for so long. In the biggest U-turn since the Liberal Democrats decided that local income tax might not be such a good idea after all, there is now to be a reduction in rates to the English level. The reduction may even go further in certain cases. It gladdened my heart to hear Executive members on the benches behind the ministers queueing up to praise this wonderful new policy that they had so recently denounced.

As I am not a walking encyclopaedia, I do not have the exact figure at my fingertips. However, I have something to tell the minister, which I am sure that he will already know, because he is a clever man who will have done his research. In the early 1990s, there were three years in which Scottish growth outstripped growth in the UK as a whole. That situation was virtually unique in the past 50 years. The growth in those three years was achieved under a Conservative Government because—if members can believe it—that Government took decisions about encouraging manufacturing in Scotland, to the extent that Scottish manufacturing exports in the early 1990s were at record levels. At that time, manufacturing was a key driver of the economy and, as members know, that was largely the result of the programme of inward investment that the Conservative Government pursued. We need no lessons from the Executive on how the economic record of the Conservatives in Government compares with the Executive's record over the past six years.

We may live to see the day when we have a Scottish nationalist Administration—although I doubt that even I will live to see that day—and then we will find out how well it does. Rather than a change of passport, which the nationalists advocate, we need a change of policy to create an environment that is more pro-competitive business. That is how to improve  economic underperformance. The Conservative Government of the 1990s proved that that could be done in three years, in spite of all the inherited problems of the Scottish economy at that time. The same can be done again with the right policies, not by pursuing the fantasy land of independence. The new Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning has a clear choice. He can carry on with the policies of his predecessor and maintain the coalition with his Labour colleagues that has led to high spending and centralising policies that have failed to improve public services, regenerate our communities or strengthen our economy, or he can turn his campaign pledges into action right now. There is no mystery about what is required to make a successful economy—the evidence exists all around the world. Less Government interference, lower taxes and a solid infrastructure are what private companies need to allow them to compete. Those measures will deliver the economic growth that we all want to see. I believe that the minister knows what needs to be done; now it is time for him to deliver.

Could Mr Mather clarify the SNP's policy on corporate takeovers? Earlier this afternoon, the SNP's deputy leader seemed to be suggesting that the SNP now supports some form of protectionism to defend Scottish Power when, of course, other successful companies, such as the Royal Bank of Scotland, have built up their capital  by taking over companies in other countries. Does he agree that there is a contradiction there?

I want to press the minister on the question that Alasdair Morgan asked. The minister will be aware of the widespread concern in many rural communities about the overemphasis on onshore wind developments. What discussions has he had with the renewables industry about the likely impact of the proposals that he announced today on shifting the balance away from onshore wind towards marine technology?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will support a presumption against closing rural schools. (S2O-7412)

I am not sure that that is an encouraging response. Does the minister accept that a presumption against closure, such as that which exists in England, would protect communities such as those in Angus, where the Scottish National Party-run council is threatening to close a number of small, rural primaries, despite vigorous opposition from parents' groups?

I congratulate Karen Gillon on securing this debate on this important subject. I agree with virtually every speech that has been made so far. Those of  us who are members of the cross-party group on autistic spectrum disorders, of which I am the secretary, will be familiar with many of the issues that have been raised this evening, as they have previously been raised in the meetings of that group. And, of course, all of us will have encountered them in our surgeries. The motion is entirely right to highlight the complex needs of children who are on the autistic spectrum and the difficulties their parents face. That is the key part of the issue: many parents feel frustrated that, under the current system, they cannot enable their child to gain access to the quality of education and service that they feel their child requires and deserves. There is a patchwork of provision for youngsters with ASD and it can be difficult for parents to access the quality of provision they think their children require. We all know of excellent examples of schools offering services for youngsters with ASD, but they can be the exception rather than the rule. I am sure that we have all been contacted by frustrated parents asking, "Why can't we get the service we require? Why can't we get the local authority to understand that the services they are trying to direct us towards are simply not what we believe our youngster requires? We can see good services being offered elsewhere, but we simply can't get into them." Last week, I had the pleasure of visiting the new school at Butterstone by Dunkeld, which was set up as an independent specialist school in the early 1990s by Veronica Linklater—Baroness Linklater of Butterstone. Many of the school's youngsters suffer from Asperger's syndrome, attention deficit disorders or similar conditions. It was encouraging to see the progress that the youngsters were making in that setting because of the quality of the care they were receiving and the hands-on approach of the teachers. It was making a difference to the youngsters' lives. Youngsters who had not made progress in local authority schools or mainstream schools were turning around their performance. Many of the youngsters who were leaving that school were going on to further education—the school has a link with Elmwood College in Fife—and many others were going into employment. That would not have been possible without the level of care and support that they had received. Of course, the problem is that that sort of service is expensive. The annual fees at a school such as that are £19,000 or much higher. We always have debates about finances in this chamber and I know the pressure the Executive is under but, as has been said before, if the appropriate intervention is not put in place at an early stage, public services will spend £2 million on an autistic  person over their lifetime. I put it to the Executive that it might be worth spending money at an early stage as it would save money in the long run.

The First Minister's adoption of a Conservative policy on cutting business rates is welcome, but will he say exactly when Scottish business will see reductions in their rates bills? Will he also take the opportunity to apologise to the business community for overburdening it with business rates for the past six years?

To ask the Scottish Executive what impact the draft Private Water Supplies (Scotland) Regulations 2005 will have on the environment. (S2O-7386)

Many small businesses, such as hotels, bed and breakfasts, and caravan and camping sites, rely on private water supplies and now face bills of up to £435 from local authorities for analysing their drinking water to see whether it is fit for use. Will the Executive confirm that when it looks to implement the regulations, it will take on board representations from the business community about the burden of regulation and the impact that such charges will have on the viability of small businesses?

To ask the First Minister what discussions the Scottish Executive has had with Caledonian MacBrayne regarding the status of its employees. (S2F-1769)

Does the First Minister agree that it is extraordinary that a company that is owned by the taxpayer and which is to a large extent funded by the taxpayer is aiming to offshore its employees to avoid payment of national insurance? Does the First Minister not see the irony of a publicly owned company operating in a manner that would—if the company were privately owned—be greeted with howls of protest from the Labour benches behind him?

Although the minister is right to point out that there are exceptions to the general rule, in that countries such as Norway have shown high levels of economic growth, does he accept that countries that have lower levels of taxation and state intervention generally deliver higher economic growth levels?

I congratulate my colleague Derek Brownlee on his excellent and thoughtful maiden speech. On the evidence of today's speech, I am sure that he will be a valuable addition both to the Conservative benches and to the chamber as a whole. However, I welcome him with some mixed feelings because, with his arrival, I lose my mantle of being the youngest member of the Conservative group. Derek is considerably younger than I am—in fact,  he is the youngest member of the Parliament. I wish him a long career at Holyrood, if he does not emulate his illustrious predecessor and seek a transfer to another place. The debate started off as the usual groundhog-day debate on the economy and finance, with members on the Executive benches saying that everything is wonderful, Opposition members saying that everything is terrible and Mr Mather making his usual plea for independence/fiscal autonomy, depending on which side of the bed he got out of in the morning. However, as the debate went on, it became a bit more interesting. We have heard some new ideas and thoughtful speeches from members on different sides of the chamber. I join other members in commending the Finance Committee on its report, which has highlighted some important points. We all agree that growing the economy should be the top priority; that is the Executive's stated aim. The report makes it clear that the Executive's current budget does not support that aim: "research undertaken for the committee concluded that just 5% of that budget is spent on activities which are intended to directly promote economic development and, moreover, that the share of this item in the Scottish budget has been falling since 1999." Serious questions need to be put to the Executive on the issues. As Ted Brocklebank said, there is a lack of proper assessment of some of the spending. For example, if we look at spending on transport, we begin to question the relevant importance to the Executive of projects such as the M74 and the Borders rail link, both of which the Conservatives support. Which of those projects will deliver higher economic growth? It is clear that more work needs to be done. The really important question is the one that Des McNulty highlighted in referring to the report. The committee offered three possible explanations for why expenditure on economic development has grown more slowly than expenditure on public sector spending as a whole. The first explanation is that the Executive may be misleading us that economic development is its top priority, when other priorities are more important. The second explanation is that, because it has not increased them, the Executive is satisfied with the spending levels that it inherited in 1999. The third explanation is that the Executive believes that spending on areas other than economic development may better achieve its aims. It will be interesting to hear the minister's response. Which of those three explanations does the Executive agree with? That is the crucial question on which the committee is looking for an answer.  My colleague Ted Brocklebank livened up the debate somewhat by referring to the size of the public sector. As he said, 10,733 extra staff were recruited to the public sector in 2004. None of us would dispute the recruitment of additional doctors, nurses, teachers or policemen, but we know that many of the extra staff are not in front-line services but in backroom operations and, sadly, that they do not deliver the contribution towards economic growth that we want to see. Professor David Bell said in evidence to the committee last year: "We are moving to a situation in which the public sector is gradually taking over a larger and larger share of economic activity in Scotland." He also said: "If economic growth is the Scottish Executive's key objective, some attention must be paid to the possibility that private sector activity is being crowded out."—[ Official Report , Finance Committee , 2 November 2004; c 1805-1810.] My questions might be uncomfortable for some of those members on the Labour benches who have no experience of the private sector and think that it is simply a cash cow to fund the public sector. The issue is important: those of us who live in the real world know that a strong private sector is vital. In response to Stewart Stevenson's comments about the difference between the public and private sectors, I say that the private sector creates the wealth that means that we can raise the tax revenue to fund public sector activity. That is why we need a strong, growing private sector. If it is the case that the larger the public sector, the more that private sector activity is crowded out, as Professor Bell said, we must be careful about the continuing expansion of the public sector in relation to gross domestic product and the payroll. There are simple, but important lessons for the Executive. It must start to cut back on excessive costs and regulation. It must cut business rates and consider a new model of economic development. As Jim Mather said, we do not have to follow rigorously a model of enterprise that is not delivering the economic success that we need. The Executive must also consider examples from elsewhere in the world. I am sorry that the new Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning is not in the chamber, because I am sure that he would have learned much from the debate. I hope that he makes a new resolution to take action and make the changes that are needed if the economy is to be driven forward. If he does so, he will have our full support.

I congratulate Paul Martin on securing the debate and on the way in which he spoke to the motion. We are discussing the closure of up to 60 Clydesdale Bank branches across Scotland over the next 18 months. Members have already pointed out the potential impact of such a move as well as the possibility of there being wider economic consequences. Ten years ago, the small town in which I live in rural Perthshire had three banks: a Clydesdale Bank; a Royal Bank; and a Bank of Scotland. First, the Clydesdale Bank closed, then the Bank of Scotland closed. The Royal Bank is the only bank that is left. I commend the Royal Bank on its policy of not closing down a branch that is the last branch in a particular community. Although I am not a customer of the Royal Bank, I think that that attitude is to be applauded. The closure of branches, particularly when they are the only bank in a community, is to be regretted. As the motion acknowledges, it is a particular problem for older people, those who are less comfortable with new banking arrangements, those who are less mobile and those who are disadvantaged and cannot travel to other areas to access banks.  However, we have to recognise that society is changing and that banking is changing with it. That change has accelerated over the past few years and we must expect banks to change to accommodate the evolution of technology. We now have 24-hour telephone and online banking; we get mini-statements and cash at ATMs; we can use banking services in post offices and so on. At the same time, bank branches have high maintenance costs as they are secure premises and are the face of globally competing banks. They also require highly trained staff. Further, because of the many different ways of banking, some of those branches have fewer than 100 transactions in a day. The argument is very much a case of use it or lose it. Many people think of having a bank in their town as their right. However, we must remember that banks are not public institutions and must do what is best for them financially. I have a great deal of sympathy with the last statement in Paul Martin's motion, which outlines the impact that a branch closure will have when it leaves a community without any local bank. Perhaps other banks have a policy that is similar to the Royal Bank's policy of not closing a branch if it is the last bank in the town, but it is my understanding that around a third of the Clydesdale Bank branch closures will be banks that are currently the last branch in a town. We need to be clear about the fact that, in the end, it is not for Parliament or Government to dictate to private companies how to order their affairs. If the Clydesdale Bank is going down this road, it will lose out because its customers will go elsewhere. They will simply go to other banks that are offering a better service. The irony is that, in some communities, the post office has benefited from the closure of bank branches because it has picked up more banking business. We have often debated the importance of a post office network both in rural communities and in small urban communities. I once heard the saying, "A good idea plus capable men cannot fail; it is better than money in the bank." I believe that the proposal of the Clydesdale Bank will turn out to be a bad idea and that its customers might turn away from it altogether. Nevertheless, the decision is commercial and the bank must face the consequences.

From an economic perspective, the Executive's proposals for widespread reform rather than tinkering with the current system are very welcome as is the rejection of the third-party right of appeal. The minister said that the impact of major applications on local economic opportunities and job creation would be a relevant factor in the way in which those applications were dealt with. Will he confirm that, in effect, he is signalling that developments that bring major economic opportunities and large numbers of jobs will be fast tracked? If that is the case, it will be very welcome.

The minister says that he wants all areas of Scotland to benefit. Does he consider it fair that no public sector jobs have been relocated to either Perth and Kinross or Angus? Does he agree that it is about time that those areas had their fair share too?

The minister may seek to discredit the IMD data, but they represent an important piece of international research that is relied on, for example, by international companies that want to find locations for direct investment. Is the Executive satisfied with Scotland's ranking in the IMD tables and, if not, what will the new enterprise minister—whoever that will be—do about it?

I am not a member of the Finance Committee and sometimes find these debates a little dry. Today's affair has been rather more lively than usual; it has been quite entertaining in stretches.

In a second. Let me make this point. The debate has been enhanced by the length of the speeches; allowing members a little longer to make their speeches improves the debate. That seems to be the point that Mr Morgan was about to make, and I am grateful to him for not taking up time with an intervention. As Ted Brocklebank said, we should not spend too much time congratulating the Executive on the reduction in the EYF figures, because they are still high. It is most worrying that they are highest in enterprise and lifelong learning, with £61 million, and transport, with £93 million. As we have heard on many occasions, it is those two areas of spending that have the most impact on economic  growth, which we are always being told is the Executive's top priority. Clearly, there is more to be done. We welcome the Government's drive for efficient government but it remains to be seen how effective that is going to be. The key point in that came out in several speeches. If the Government is going to save on costs, it will have to tackle the number 1 cost, which is the wage bill. We cannot talk about efficient government unless we are prepared to accept that that will mean a reduction in salary costs. To be fair, the minister has acknowledged that. I say this for the benefit of Jeremy Purvis in case he missed it. In an interview with The Times , the Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform said, "I have been quite specific - I have said we expect to see an increasing number of people working in the front line, but less people overall." To those in the other parties who ask how many people we would cut, I say, "You tell us how many jobs you are going to cut," because that is what the minister has made a commitment to do. We have to start reducing the size of the public sector. The point has been made many times before in the chamber. The public sector in Scotland consumes 54 per cent of gross domestic product. It is difficult to have a growing economy with that brake on private sector activity. Although the savings that are being made by the Executive are welcome, they could be higher. The Executive could do better. Professor Arthur Midwinter says that another £240 million of savings could be found if the Executive applied the Whitehall figures. There is much more to be done.

It is extraordinary for Mr Purvis to say that the Executive is not suggesting that there will be job losses when I have just quoted the minister saying that there will be job losses. Perhaps Mr Purvis should get in touch with the minister and listen to what he has to say. We should not forget the Executive's past performance. Since 1999, there has been a £50 million increase in administration costs; the number of Scottish Executive staff has increased by 1,057 and the number of other civil servants has increased by 556; an additional £137 million has been spent on quangos; and, of course, the Parliament building was £390 million over budget—and it does not even have a proper system of temperature control, as we have found out during the past few days. If the Executive is  genuine about efficient government, it will have our support, but there is much more to be done. If the Executive has too much money and there is a yearly underspend, it should return that money to its taxpayers. Governments have no money and no right to money. They only have the right to tax the people for the money that they need to spend on their programmes. Every penny over and above that need is stolen from the people and should be returned; otherwise it will be spent in areas that are, by definition, not priorities. We know that the Parliament has limited powers of taxation—I am not going to go down that road this morning—but it could cut the council tax by giving more money to local authorities, and it could cut business rates. This week, the Scottish Chambers of Commerce launched a new campaign for a return to the uniform business rate. We have made that point many times in the past. The Chambers of Commerce likened the business rate differential to "being asked to run a high hurdles race with lead weights attached to their feet". It is interesting to watch the way in which a political consensus is developing on that issue. We have been talking about cutting business rates for many years now. The SNP has now started talking about doing that, and the contenders for the Liberal Democrat leadership are now talking about doing it. Perhaps Mr Rumbles will take the crown this afternoon.

I am sorry, but I am in my final minute. If Mr Rumbles takes the crown this afternoon, he will tell his partners in the Executive to make the cut, or perhaps it will be Mr Stephen who wins—whoever it is, there will be a strong voice in the Executive for a cut in business rates. It will be interesting to see who the new Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning will be. If it is Mr Stephen, or even Mr Rumbles, will we have a minister who is on the record as saying that business rates should be cut? We await that with pleasure. However, I suspect that the new minister responsible for enterprise will be a Labour member, because Labour members of the Executive will not want to take the risk of leaving that portfolio in the hands of a Liberal Democrat. I hope that the Executive will listen to all those voices and support a cut in business rates.

For the record, what is the Green party's policy on the uniform business rate?

Between them, Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise spend something like £500 million a year, and there is precious little sign of that money having had a substantial positive impact on our growth rate. Does the Deputy First Minister believe that every penny of that money is being spent as effectively as it could be?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to help prevent future flooding damage to homes and businesses in Tayside. (S2O-6999)

The minister might be aware that residents at Dalguise on the River Tay suffered severe flood damage in January. As a result of damage to the flood banks, there is a likelihood of further flood damage in the future. What steps will the Executive take to support Perth and Kinross Council if it decides to promote a flood prevention scheme in that area?

Does the First Minister accept that there may be advantages to rural Scotland from such a scheme, but only if it is revenue neutral over the piece and if it replaces in their entirety fuel duty and road tax?

We seem to have a growing consensus in the chamber that Scottish businesses are suffering from a competitive disadvantage from the high levels of business rates. Is it not about time that the Executive started listening to the business community and indeed to leadership candidates in the Liberal Democrats and took action on the matter?

Labour cuts.

The minister may be aware of the concern in Auchterarder about protestors going to that small town, particularly given that protestors in Auchterarder will be no more visible from Gleneagles hotel than protestors in Edinburgh or anywhere else. What assurances can he give me and the people of Auchterarder about the impact that protesters might have on the town? What can the Executive do to encourage protestors not to go to Auchterarder but to gather elsewhere?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. It just occurred to me that I should have declared an interest at the start of the debate but omitted to do so, for which I apologise. I am a member of the board of management of the University of Dundee's students association.

Hear, hear.

I welcome the opportunity to debate the important issue of student debt. At the outset I commend Fiona Hyslop for the constructive and consensual way in which she moved the motion. I am sure that in these exciting post-election times we are all interested in new ideas and we should encourage debates on such subjects. Fiona Hyslop is entirely right to raise the issue and point out the concern about the growing levels of debt among graduates. The figures show that there is a serious concern. In 2004, 1,541 graduates declared themselves bankrupt—that is almost 50 times as many as did so in 1997. Sadly, some students see bankruptcy as a way of getting out of the high levels of debt that they have accumulated. Those stark figures do not necessarily reflect the difficulty that many other students have in repaying the loans that they have accumulated. The British Medical Association's briefing for the debate points out some facts about debt for medical students. The average debt for medical students in Scotland was more than £11,000. One in five Scottish medical students has more than £20,000-worth of debt. It is not surprising that the BMA is concerned about the impact that those figures have on recruitment to medicine as a profession, particularly given that students of medicine study for longer than students do for the average profession. We must recognise that there is a difference between borrowing via student loans and borrowing via other means. When I went to university in the 1980s, I was fortunate enough to receive a full grant due to my parental circumstances. Of course, that was under a Conservative Government. The Conservative Government of the day massively increased the number of university places and, in order to fund that increase, it introduced the student loans scheme. I have no difficulty with that concept. I supported it at the time and I support it today, because I believe that students should be prepared to make a contribution towards their own upkeep during their education. I do not support the idea of students  paying towards the provision of that education, but I support the idea that they should contribute towards their upkeep. The student loans scheme allowed a whole new generation of youngsters, whose parents would never have had such an opportunity, to access higher education. I listened with interest to what the minister said on fees and specifically about fees deterring those from underrepresented groups accessing higher education. Of course, it was the Labour Government—to be fair to him, he was gracious enough to acknowledge this—that introduced those fees in 1997. I accept that they have now been removed and replaced with a graduate endowment, but I will not take any lessons from the Labour Party on the cost of higher education. I will return to the SNP motion. The problem with student debt is not primarily to do with the debt of student loans. Contrary to the assertions that Fiona Hyslop made in her saltire paper on student finance, the percentage of those who defer student loan repayments has fallen from more than 24 per cent in 1997 to 13 per cent in 2004. The figures do not indicate that students are struggling to repay their student loans. As we know, students start to repay their loans when their salaries reach the threshold of £15,000, so there is no evidence that student loan repayments represent a huge burden on most graduates.

I accept that there are graduates in that position. There are problems in the economy. Many graduates have not been able to find jobs that pay the salaries that they expected to earn, and their salaries have not reached the threshold for repayment. That is a difficulty. The borrowing that students take on above and beyond their student loans, through bank overdrafts or even credit cards, is of far greater concern than is borrowing through student loans, because it incurs higher interest rates. We must consider ways of expanding the student loans scheme, to allow more students to access student loans rather than borrow at more expensive rates. I disagree with Fiona Hyslop on the matter; the expansion rather than the replacement of the student loans scheme offers the way out of the problem.

We envisage a system in which a market rate of interest, instead of a subsidised rate, would be paid. We accept that the market rate would be higher than the rate that is currently paid by students and I will expand on that. Because the Student Loans Company is an efficient provider of loans, the cost of administering student loans as a percentage of the total loans bill of £15 billion is negligible. Given the low running costs of the company, the SNP's claim that it would be cheaper to remove loans entirely and replace them with grants is dubious. I would be interested in seeing the SNP's figures in detail. The Conservatives would, first, scrap the graduate endowment, which is no more than a tuition fee by the back door. Despite the trumpeting of the Liberal Democrats, tuition fees have not been abolished but exist by another name. We should remove that burden from students. Secondly, we should increase the repayment threshold for student loans to £20,000 and we should make available greater sums in loans by increasing the amount that can be borrowed to £5,000 or more per annum. Eligibility for a loan should not be subject to a means test. To pay for that approach, student loans could be transferred to independent providers and, instead of paying a discounted rate of interest, students would pay a commercial rate. However, in a scheme that was backed by a Government guarantee there would be no need for excessive rates of interest. As a result of those measures, the average student would be better off, because they would receive money from student loans schemes and no longer have to build up bank overdrafts or credit card debts. Extra sums would be available to fund higher education, but there would be no additional burdens on the taxpayer. Our proposals are mature and sensible and would go a long way towards addressing the problem of student debt. Our plans are costed and can be afforded. I welcome the debate and take pleasure in moving amendment S2M-2866.1, to leave out from "further" to end and insert: "calls on the Scottish Executive to end the graduate endowment which places an increased debt burden on students; recommends that the student loan repayment threshold be raised to £20,000 and that the loan value be increased to £5,000 per annum at a low, but commercial, rate of interest, which will remove the necessity for students to resort to expensive overdraft and credit card borrowing, and calls on the Executive to transfer all or part of the loan book to independent providers so that higher education can expand without extra and undue burden being placed on the taxpayer."

I listened with great interest to what the minister said about the removal of fees. Was it not the Labour Party that brought in fees in the first place?

Does Fiona Hyslop acknowledge that the problem of student debt is primarily not one of students borrowing from the Student Loans Company but one of students borrowing from other providers, on credit cards and on overdrafts from banks? Does she accept that extending the student loans system would remove some of the problems that she is concerned about?

Blame the Liberals.

Thank you, Presiding Officer—I am a little taken aback by that. In this short debate, many issues have been raised. I will address matters that relate to the report and the tourist board shake-up. Given the interest in the debate, it would be worth while for the Executive to schedule another debate on the tourism industry in the near future, because it is clear that many opinions need to be expressed and because tourism is our most important industry. I approached the shake-up with some scepticism, because the area tourist boards in my region worked well. Perthshire Tourist Board,  Angus and Dundee Tourist Board and Kingdom of Fife Tourist Board, which I dealt with, all seemed to perform and to serve their purpose. However, I appreciate that that was not the case throughout the country. The strength of the area tourist board system was membership involvement. The industry bought into the structure, which was responsive to industry requirements and involved some local decision making. In deference to the committee's convener, I will not spend too long on criticisms of the process, but several important points require to be made that emerge from the committee report. The first is about the time that the process took. It was one of the longest pregnancies in history—the new hub structure seemed to have the gestation period of a woolly mammoth. The review was announced back in May 2002 and it was March 2004 before its outcome was made public. That period created uncertainty, which was unhelpful to the industry and to the staff of local tourist board organisations. Concern was expressed about lack of consultation with staff, stakeholders and local authorities, which also have an important role. Paragraph 25 of the committee's report draws attention to that. The Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport gave evidence to the committee and acknowledged that lessons had to be learned from that phase of the process about communication and the impact on staff morale. Much concern was felt about funding, because the new structure will be funded differently from the previous system. It will rely on the industry buying packages from the new hub structure. The committee was unconvinced that much evidence showed that the industry would automatically do that. Much work remains to be done on that issue. The committee's interim report dealt with that. There is no doubt that we have lost key people from the tourism network. The chief executives of tourist boards have moved on. I do not know whether they have gone to England, as Jamie McGrigor suggested, but the concern is that they have been lost from the tourism industry.

I will speak about tourist information centres if I have time. However, the chief executives—certainly those with whom I interfaced—had much experience and local knowledge. They were instrumental in ensuring that the staff who work in TICs are well trained and knowledgeable. Many of those staff are not Scottish. In my experience, many are from overseas and work here on temporary contracts,  which places the key knowledge base in the organisation's management structure. What needs to be done? We have the new structure, which the committee and stakeholders have welcomed. We need a viable financial model. We must ensure that the system works and that the industry buys into the new structure. Tourist information centres are hugely important, because they are many visitors' major interface with VisitScotland and many visitors' first port of call. Of course people will use the internet and will book holidays by telephone, but the first port of call for many people when they arrive in a geographical locality will be the tourist information centre. Tourist information centres must be preserved—I would be nervous about any suggestion to remove a number of them. We must ensure that the purchasing of goods and services is not centralised under the new structure. Local businesses in different parts of Scotland should still have the opportunity to benefit from the purchasing power of the organisation. We also want jobs to be relocated out of Edinburgh to the local hubs—indeed, that has already happened. Tourism is our key industry and the debate is important, but we must reconsider the issues in the near future.

It has been a generally consensual debate. The most contentious issue has probably been the unavailability of the document "Lifelong Partners". I was one of the fortunate ones because yesterday I managed to get hold of a photocopy of the document, which I read with interest. That was helpful in informing my contribution, and those of my colleagues, to this debate. However, I have sympathy for the back benchers who were unable to be similarly informed and I am sure that the Executive will learn its lesson—indeed, the minister was gracious enough to apologise to the chamber. I hope that the situation will not be repeated. Some post-election partisan points have been made in different parts of the chamber, but I will try to steer away from that as best I can. However, I was interested to read paragraph 3.7 on page 9 of the document. The paragraph, which is entitled "Scottish Parliament—Skills and Continued Learning Debate", says: "On 20 May 2004 the Scottish Parliament agreed to a motion that among other things urged the Scottish Executive 'to increase the opportunity for school pupils across Scotland to access courses in further education colleges from the age of 14' ". It does not say that the quote was from a Conservative amendment that I lodged and which was agreed to. I am delighted, therefore, that the Executive is taking on board Conservative policy. Paragraph 3.7 also states: "The motion had the support of 107 MSPs with five MSPs voting against." It was the Scottish Socialist Party that voted against that amendment. I was rather surprised by Rosemary Byrne's speech, because she made it clear that she supported the initiative and yet on the day of that vote, the SSP voted against the amendment. No doubt the SSP can explain itself on a future occasion.

Lord James should perhaps have clarified in his intervention that he meant that he supported a proportional system for a devolved Parliament. He did not support proportional representation for the Westminster Parliament, which is an important distinction. Personally, I do not support—

I will happily do so, but you will appreciate, Presiding Officer, that I was simply responding to an intervention on an entirely different point. However, I am sure that we will talk about PR on another occasion. The arguments in favour of developing school-college partnerships have been well rehearsed. Dr Elaine Murray, Donald Gorrie and others set out the arguments for such partnerships. We all know about the difficulties with disengaged youngsters who are not interested in academic subjects. I absolutely accept the point made by Christine May and others that colleges should not be dumping grounds for those who find school difficult. Nevertheless, we know that there are youngsters who are not academically engaged and the opportunity for them to pursue a more technical or vocational approach is therefore very welcome. When we look at the spectrum of education and consider the figures on truancy and discipline in the classroom, I am sure that the programme will have a beneficial effect. Giving pupils a wider range of opportunities is bound to help with such problems. We also need increased vocational training for our economy, which has skills shortages and gaps. It will be better for everyone if youngsters can come out of education at 16 or at whatever age with additional skills that better equip them for the workplace. Indeed, various studies on pilot projects have shown that they are extremely successful in re-engaging youngsters who have not been otherwise engaged in education and in ensuring that they are better equipped for the workplace when they leave education. The Conservative amendment, in the name of Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, considers a number of specific issues that require careful monitoring. First of all, colleges must have adequate capacity to accommodate eligible school pupils, and effective and fair systems must be established to deal with disruptive behaviour in colleges if and when it arises. Finally, we must ensure that funding for school pupils who study at FE colleges is correctly dealt with. I will elaborate on one or two of those points and touch on the issue of rural areas, which is mentioned in the amendment. On rural areas, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton mentioned the Crichton campus in Dumfries. At this point, I must correct Elaine Murray, because I understand that the Crichton campus is in the Dumfriesshire, Clydesdale and Tweeddale constituency.

In that case, perhaps we can all agree on the matter. Crichton campus is in the constituency of Dumfriesshire, Clydesdale and Tweeddale, which of course is that of my good friend David Mundell, who is now a member of Parliament. Other examples have been highlighted this morning. Banff and Buchan College, which is mentioned in the strategy document, delivers to youngsters in a rural area with a scattered population. Clearly, certain transport issues have to be addressed and we must consider the development of distance learning. In my area, Perth College has a number of outreach centres in towns such as Crieff, Aberfeldy and Pitlochry, and there is scope to use those to deliver services to pupils in remote and rural areas. However, the matter must be monitored carefully. Funding must be put on a sound footing. I note that the issue is to be revised in August 2005, and it is important that we keep the matter under review. Several members mentioned discipline. It must be pointed out that the college environment is different from that in school. For a start, the onus is much more on the student, which might, as a number of members pointed out, create a challenge for college lecturers in dealing with potential discipline problems. After all, they might have less experience than schoolteachers in such matters. Robert Brown made a very good point about the commitment of schools. Schools must not simply pay lip service to the whole agenda and must show real commitment in encouraging youngsters to take up opportunities where they are suited to them. Moreover, the whole process must be continually monitored and evaluated to ensure that everything fits. The exciting thing about this approach is that it opens up the prospect of a more diverse education system. Indeed, Chris Ballance conceded as much in his speech. Perhaps we should also look at the school leaving age and consider whether 16 is the right age at which our youngsters should aim to leave school. We are opening the door to a wider spectrum of available opportunities. As Brian Monteith said, we should allow schools to be as free as colleges are. If incorporation set colleges free and allowed them to expand and to follow their current successful path, why can we not do the same for schools? Last night, the Deputy First Minister, a number of other members and I spent a very pleasant evening in the spring sunshine on the Spirit of Fairbridge at Leith docks. As members know, the Fairbridge enterprise tries to give disadvantaged youngsters new opportunities in life. We all have a  duty to look at our young people, particularly those who are disengaged from mainstream education and job opportunities, and try to bring them back in. That is why this programme is so welcome, and why we support it. We support the Executive motion, and I am delighted to support my colleague's amendment.

The First Minister should be aware that there is widespread concern among rural communities in Perthshire, and right across Scotland, about the fact that they are being swamped by large-scale wind farm applications coming in hand over fist. Is it not time that the Scottish Executive introduced national strategic guidance on locating wind farms and, in the meantime, brought in a national moratorium on wind farm applications that face substantial local opposition, as the only way to protect those communities?

Given that the Government's figures show that barely a third of people who go into the new deal programme find jobs that last more than 13 weeks, is it not time to stop the appalling waste of money and use it to reduce taxation on our overburdened businesses? Of course, that is not only the Conservatives' policy but the policy of the Liberal Democrat Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning.

Would Allan Wilson concede that there are, according to best estimates, 1.5 million pensioners in this country who would be entitled to pension credit but who do not claim it?

In this debate, I suppose that we should all start by declaring interests. I have a few rather small policies with various Scottish financial services providers. To my eternal regret, I also have a pension with Equitable Life. I remember that when I started work as a young lawyer, one of the senior partners took me aside and said to me, "Young man, if you get yourself a pension with Equitable Life you will never go wrong." I hope that he is enjoying his retirement in straitened circumstances. All that I can say is thank goodness for the Scottish Parliament's final salary scheme. The Scottish Conservatives welcome the opportunity to debate the future of the financial services industry, which is a key component of the Scottish economy. As the minister said, the industry generated £5 billion in 2003, which is nearly 6 per cent of gross domestic product. It accounts for 108,000 jobs in Scotland directly and almost 90,000 more jobs in a range of related industries. The sector is a keystone of the Scottish economy. The industry proposed the financial services strategy group, which was established in September 2003 in partnership with the Executive. We have supported that group and the steps that the Executive has taken to assist it. As always, we hope that the Executive's glossy publication proves to be more than that and that we have delivery on the ground. One example of that is in transport infrastructure, which I raised in my intervention on the minister. The industry needs people to be able to move around easily, but its view is that that is not happening. I quoted to the minister the results of the SFE survey that showed that 70 per cent of people in the industry were dissatisfied with Scotland's transport infrastructure. Their priorities were delivery of the rail links to Edinburgh and Glasgow airports, more direct flights, a high-speed link between Edinburgh and Glasgow and completion of the M8. They seek greater connectivity across the board, particularly to  London, which is the key financial centre and provides access to wider world markets. There is much to do. I have talked about transport in the Parliament on numerous occasions. The Executive needs to start delivering improvements to our transport network, because we have seen precious little progress in the past six years. We have had plenty of talk and glossy publications, but precious little delivery. We should start to see that.

Happily.

People have waited a long time for the western peripheral route, as they have waited a long time for other road improvements in the past eight years.

When we have anything like the number of roads and new transport connections that were constructed in the 18 years of Conservative Government, I will shake Mr Rumbles's hand warmly and thank him, but that time will be many years in the future and I suspect that he will have retired by then. I will say a little about the banking industry, because Scotland has succeeded in banking. Two of Europe's top seven banks by market value—the Royal Bank of Scotland and HBOS—are Scottish. We can say proudly that two world-class companies are headquartered in Scotland. When those two banks published their results a few weeks back, I was pleased to lodge a parliamentary motion that congratulated them on their success. Unlike some in other political parties, I do not think that we should begrudge profits in the banking sector or elsewhere. It would be hard to find a country other than Scotland in which large profits for domestic companies were viewed as anything other than a success story. Both the big banks are excellent employers. Their staff share in the companies' successes. High profits mean that large sums are paid in corporation tax to the Exchequer to fund all the public services on which we depend. Moreover, high profits mean high dividends. Those dividends go into the pockets not of mythical bodies called City fat cats, as some claim, but of institutional shareholders, which are overwhelmingly pension fund providers for millions of ordinary working people up and down the land. High-profit  companies such as the Royal Bank and HBOS benefit millions of workers directly throughout Scotland and the United Kingdom.

I will do so shortly. I hope that Mr Stevenson agrees that we should be utterly unapologetic about celebrating the success of those companies.

I thank Mr Stevenson for that intervention. Unusually, I agree with him. I will deal with that point in a moment. In the past five years, financial services in Scotland have grown by almost 36 per cent and have grown almost four times faster than the overall economy has. That is good news. However, there are threats to the industry's success and, for once, most of those threats arise not from the actions of the Scottish Executive but from the actions of the UK Government at Westminster. That is what our amendment refers to. Over the past eight years, we have seen a collapse in the savings culture. The savings ratio in this country—the amount of money in the economy that is saved as a percentage of GDP—is at a historic low. That has not happened by accident. First, as Mr Stevenson said, we have had Gordon Brown's £6 billion-a-year stealth tax raid on the pension funds, with changes to advanced corporation tax payments. The losers from that are investors and private pension funds up and down the land. Secondly, we have had the extension of the means test, by way of pension tax credit across the board. Some 5 million pensioners up and down the land are now subject to means testing. Some 1.5 million pensioners who are entitled to claim means-tested benefits do not do so, probably because the 16-page form is too complicated to fill in or because they do not want the Government to know every detail of their financial affairs. Who can blame them? The joint impact of those changes has meant a collapse in confidence in the pensions and savings industry. What is the point of someone saving and putting money aside for the future if it counts against them when they retire? If they are means tested on everything, where is the incentive to save? If their pension fund has lost its value because of poor performance in the stock market compounded by Gordon Brown's tax raid on  pensions, why should they bother with a private pension at all? Will the state not just look after them when they get old? It used to be said that the UK had the best pension provision in Europe. Sadly, those days are gone—destroyed by Gordon Brown as chancellor. We must start to restore confidence in financial services. We need to provide incentives for people to save and to invest in pensions for their old age; the country cannot afford to support future generations of pensioners purely out of general taxation. The current Government has been incredibly short-sighted in its approach. It is deterring people from saving and investing for the future, and it or a future Government will reap the consequences of that. Although we should be pleased at the success, to date, of the Scottish financial sector, there is no doubt that it is being held back by the actions of the UK Government. That is why we need a change at the top—a change to a Government that is prepared to promote savings. I move amendment S2M-2729.2 to insert at end: "notes, however, that, as a result of Labour's stewardship of our economy, the savings ratio is at a historically low level, means-testing has been extended to 5 million pensioners, £5 billion per year has been removed in additional taxes from pension funds and public confidence in the pensions industry has been destroyed, and therefore believes that the financial services industry in Scotland requires a UK government that is committed to restoring trust in the industry and improving incentives to save."

The minister mentioned the importance of infrastructure. Is he aware of the recent survey by Scottish Financial Enterprise that suggested that 77 per cent of financial services companies believe that Scotland's transport connectivity compares unfavourably with those available to financial services sectors in other countries? Some 70 per cent of respondents reported that they were dissatisfied with Scotland's current transport infrastructure. Are those figures of concern to the minister?

I should declare my interest as an occasional consumer of the product in question. I should also  say that I have enjoyed hospitality from Diageo in the past. I thank Andrew Arbuckle for raising the issue and for bringing the debate to the chamber in his first members' business motion. The Parliament has debated the whisky industry a number of times—the most recent debate was on my motion about strip stamps, when the Parliament voted to send a message to Gordon Brown saying that it did not approve of the measure. Unfortunately, as we know, he decided to impose the stamps anyway, despite the motion and the vigorous opposition of the industry. There are many whisky distilleries in Perthshire and throughout Mid Scotland and Fife—the industry is very important in the area that Andrew Arbuckle and I represent. The distilleries produce some of the finest whisky, if not the finest alcohol, in the world. The industry supports more than 40,000 jobs and spends more than £700 million each year on goods from local suppliers. Andrew Arbuckle's motion essentially makes two points: first, that the Parliament should call for European Union protected geographical indicator status for Scotch whisky; and, secondly, that the manufacture of Scotch whisky should require the use of only Scottish grain. I appreciate that Mr Arbuckle has been lobbied by the National Farmers Union of Scotland and I understand the stance that it is taking, which is in defence of its members' interests. Indeed, I appreciate the concerns of cereal farmers about the farm-gate price of their products. Many of them have made similar representations to me. However, I fear that, in suggesting solutions, Andrew Arbuckle has paid insufficient attention to the views of the whisky industry, which, as he knows, is very concerned about his proposals. I do not think that we need PGI status for whisky. Acquiring PGI status would do nothing to enhance Scotch whisky but would reduce existing legal protection for Scotch. Let me set out the facts. The EU spirit drinks regulation—regulation 1576/89—regulates the production of all EU spirits. The regulation makes it clear that the production process gives the spirit its intrinsic character; consequently, that process needs to take place in Scotland. For Scotch whisky to be called Scotch whisky, it must be distilled and matured here. The EU regulation that establishes PGI status relates to agricultural products and foodstuffs. Its provisions specifically do not apply to wines and spirits. The regulation states that there is existing EU legislation on spirit drinks "which provide for a higher level of protection". At EU level, there are already regulations in place  that ensure a higher level of protection for Scotch whisky than PGI status can offer.

With respect, that is pretty self-evident. Newcastle brown ale is neither a wine nor a spirit—it is a beer product. Jackie Baillie made many of the points that I would want to make. We are all in favour of Scottish farmers producing cereals for Scotch whisky. With lower transport costs because of Scottish farmers' close proximity to the distilleries, it must make sense for producers to buy Scottish cereals. That is exactly what has happened. Before the 1960s, Scottish cereals were not commonly used for Scotch, but the situation has changed. Now more than 90 per cent of the barley requirements for the industry are sourced in Scotland. No one can argue that Scottish distillers are not committed to Scotland. However, it is absurd to seek to tie their hands and to force them to depend on Scottish cereals alone. As we have heard, the consequences of that could be catastrophic. Such a measure would place the industry at the mercy of the weather, restrict its ability to compete internationally and threaten the jobs that depend on it. The Scotch Whisky Association has made reference to what happened to the French brandy industry when the vines were attacked by disease. Due to legal restrictions, the producers were unable to source grapes elsewhere and the gap in the market was filled by Scotch whisky. That was to our benefit, but the restrictions that Andrew Arbuckle is proposing tonight would not be. We should not put these protectionist barriers in place. I regret that I cannot support Mr Arbuckle's motion.

Of course, graduates will remain in Scotland after graduation only if we have an economy that offers them the opportunities that they seek. At the moment we export graduates because we do not offer sufficient economic opportunities. What is the Executive doing to encourage an increase in spending on research and development in the Scottish economy, which might provide some of the graduate-level jobs that we require?

I commend John Swinney for securing the debate and for his assiduous pursuit of the issue during a number of years as the constituency member for North Tayside. Like him, I welcome members of the PARC campaign who are in the public gallery and I commend the way in which they have pursued the issue. Perhaps unusually, I do not disagree with a word that John Swinney said. The debate is about righting a wrong. When the boundaries of the Cairngorms national park were drawn up, they included parts of Inverness-shire, Moray and Aberdeenshire and a small part of Angus, but no part of Perth and Kinross Council's area, despite the fact that all objective commentators said that the northern part of highland Perthshire should have been included. Even the Government's advisers, Scottish Natural Heritage, said that the boundaries should include parts of Perthshire. Only the Executive said anything different. Frankly, the Executive failed to marshal any objective evidence that their view was right and everyone else's was wrong. We can conclude only that the decision to exclude Perth and Kinross was taken for political reasons, because it would suit  the Executive if a majority of the people who were elected to the national park's board came from the Highland Council area. The Executive's decision was wrong and we should right that wrong at the earliest possible opportunity. It would certainly make sense to do so before we incur major expenditure on gateway signs and on the promotion of the park based on its current boundaries. If the current boundaries become entrenched, it will be even more difficult to reverse the position. The summer before last, I had the pleasure of climbing Beinn a' Ghlo, which is a magnificent and expansive mountain with three Munro peaks rising steeply above Blair Atholl. It is clear to anyone standing on top of Beinn a' Ghlo that it is at the heart of the Grampians and at the southernmost edge of the Cairngorm massif. If the minister would like to join me for a re-ascent one day, I will show him what I mean. Why should Beinn a' Ghlo be given any less protection than Beinn Bhrotain or Ben Avon, or any of the other mountains in the Cairngorms? Why, for that matter, should Glen Tilt be given any less protection than Glen Feshie? The whole thing makes no sense whatever. The extent to which Scotland has benefited from national parks at all is a debate for another day. For many years, while England had national parks, we stood against them. The evidence to date shows that, where national parks have been created, visitor numbers have risen; but I do not know what has happened to visitor numbers in areas outwith the parks' boundaries. However, I do know that, if we are to have national parks at all, it must make sense to include within their boundaries all those parts of the country that fall naturally within the park. We should not artificially exclude some areas for political reasons. A practical issue arises. As one drives up the A9—which I suspect is the access route to the Cairngorms national park for most people—one enters the park at the Drumochter pass. There is nothing there, apart from a lay-by on a busy main road. One can stop and take a photograph, but there is nowhere to buy refreshments or even souvenirs. The first settlement one comes to is Dalwhinnie, and there is not a great deal there for the visitor apart from a shop and a hotel—although there is also the distillery, of course. The obvious gateway to the Cairngorms national park is Blair Atholl. It is well equipped to cater for the visitor. There are a number of shops and hotels, as well as the major tourist attraction that is Blair Castle. It would make perfect sense to develop Blair Atholl as the gateway to the Cairngorms national park. However, it will be more difficult to do that if Blair Atholl lies outwith the  park boundaries. I understand that Atholl Estates is working with Perth and Kinross Council and others to establish Blair Atholl as just that gateway, notwithstanding the present park boundaries. However, it would make much more sense, and be much more to the economic benefit of the area, if Blair Atholl could accurately say that it was part of the park. A similar situation occurs a little to the east, in Glenshee. The obvious gateway to the national park on the east side of Perthshire is the Spittal of Glenshee. With its hotels, it is the obvious stopping point. However, the current park boundary is at the Glenshee ski slopes. It would be substantially to the economic benefit of the area to have the park boundary brought south and to make the Spittal the gateway to the park for those coming up the A93. Frankly, the current boundaries of the Cairngorms national park are nonsensical. The Executive should stop dragging its feet on the issue and take action to right its wrong of two years ago. That wrong was to the detriment of the Perthshire economy.

I echo the tributes that have been paid to the clerks who service the Enterprise and Culture Committee and to my fellow members of that committee, who approached the bill collaboratively. With one  exception, the provisions of the bill attracted a fair amount of consensus. I hark back to the stage 1 debate, at which we welcomed the bill. We welcome the legislative trend that started under the previous Conservative Government, which incorporated the further education colleges and established the Scottish Further Education Funding Council. The bill will merge that funding council with the Scottish Higher Education Funding Council. The incorporation of the colleges resulted in a flowering of the FE sector, because it brought outside expertise on to FE colleges' boards and drove the sector forward. The bill is important, not least because it incorporates in legislation the principle of parity of esteem between the higher and further education sectors. Higher education and further education have complementary and equal roles. Higher education has a greater academic focus and more emphasis on research. In contrast, further education is usually more technically based and is more focused on skills and meeting the economy's needs. It is wrong to suggest that one sector is more important or has higher priority than the other. Having a single funding body for both types of organisation will help in confirming that point. I am sorry that I had to step out of the chamber during the debate about amendment 12, on the skills committee, because I discussed that in the stage 1 debate. Originally, the bill provided for just one statutory committee for the new funding council, which would be a research committee. The point is important because a skills committee will be relevant to the funding council's work, particularly in connection with further education, and because of parity of esteem. It is inevitable that a research committee will deal primarily with the higher education sector, so it makes sense to have a skills committee to balance the research committee by dealing primarily with the further education sector. That will ensure that those who run the funding council give both sectors equal weight. It would make sense for a skills committee to have members from the business community and an enterprise body. I am pleased that the Executive listened to the arguments that were made and lodged an amendment to establish a skills committee, which has improved the bill. We still have concerns about section 8, which gives ministers the right to set fees for students who undertake full-time courses of study. We debated the issue at length this afternoon and I do not intend to labour the point. As I said, I appreciate that the current situation is not of the minister's making. He is in the difficult position of trying to protect Scottish students' opportunities to gain places at Scottish universities. However, the bill will have an impact not only on English  students but on some from Scotland, such as those who follow part-time courses, who have changed their course of study or who are studying for a second or subsequent degree. I have made it clear that the Conservative party opposes top-up fees for Scottish students and for all students in all parts of the United Kingdom. It is essential that no attempt is made to introduce such fees by the back door, even with the best of intentions. The best that can be said about the minister's powers in the bill is that they are premature. Given that a consultation is continuing and that the UK general election that will take place in two weeks' time could change the backdrop dramatically, the powers are not needed. Therefore, the Scottish Conservatives will support Fiona Hyslop's amendment. If that amendment is not agreed to, I regret to say that we cannot support the bill, which is a pity because we welcomed it at stage 1. We are enthusiastic about the formation of a new funding council and the strengthening of the FE sector, but we cannot stomach top-up fees in whatever form. If that means that we cannot support the bill, I regret that.

I am interested to hear Mr Baker's comments on dishonesty. Was it not dishonest of Mr Blair to say, in advance of the previous general election, that he would not introduce top-up fees, only for him to bring them in?

Section 8, which contains the right to impose top-up fees, is the most controversial part of the bill. The minister seeks the power to charge English students who come to Scottish universities. The example of medical students has been given but of course the door to top-up fees would also be open elsewhere. As I said in the stage 1 debate, I have some sympathy with the minister's predicament. It is not the Executive that has caused the problem with top-up fees. It is the Labour constituency colleagues of many members on the Executive benches who have caused the problem by voting for the legislation for England. We all know about the potential danger of cross-border flows and the damage that might be done to the chances of Scotland-domiciled students who apply to study medicine at Scottish universities. The power has been heavily lobbied against by NUS Scotland and by the Coalition of Higher Education Students in Scotland—CHESS—because of their concern that it opens the door to top-up fees here. The irony is that the Liberal Democrats are campaigning on a United Kingdom basis as the student's friend but we have a Liberal Democrat minister proposing to take for himself the power to charge top-up fees. The Scottish Conservatives' position is clear, and I restate it for the benefit of Mr Neil: we oppose all top-up fees north and south of the border. A Conservative Government will remove top-up fees and any consequent damage to Scottish universities. We should be clear about who is to blame. Those to blame are Labour, for imposing top-up fees; the Liberal Democrats, who are complicit with Labour; and the SNP, which is impotent to deal with the issue because it is going backwards, not forwards. Only the Tories can stop top-up fees and their knock-on effect on Scotland. Most of the amendments in the group would restrict ministerial powers to charge top-up fees. My problem with, and the best that I can say about, what the minister seeks to do is that his proposals are premature. They are premature because he is consulting on the issue and it is  extraordinary to legislate while a consultation is being held. The Executive should decide what to do after considering the consultation responses, so the legislation is premature. The proposals are also premature because, in 15 days' time, we will have a UK general election and we could well have a change of Government. We will have a Conservative Government, which will stop the legislation on top-up fees. We may even—I appreciate that the idea is in the bounds of fantasy land—have a Liberal Democrat Government, which would legislate against top-up fees. We may even have a minority Labour Government, which would mean that top-up fees did not proceed. The best that we can say about the powers is that they are premature and inappropriate. For the reasons that I have given, we will support first, the amendments from Chris Ballance, secondly, those from Fiona Hyslop and, if all else fails, the amendment from Mike Pringle, because it would restrict ministerial powers. Amendments 7 and 17 refer to NUS Scotland, which has lobbied against the minister's proposed measures, as has CHESS. The NUS is a coalition of affiliated student unions. I say as gently as I can to the NUS that it would have a little more credibility as an organisation if it were not closely aligned to the Labour Party. The Labour Party benches in Westminster are stuffed full of former NUS leading lights, who all, to a man, voted for top-up tuition fees when the matter was considered at Westminster. The immediate past president of NUS Scotland—Rami Okasha—has just cropped up in the general election campaign as the Labour Party candidate in Banff and Buchan. If he were elected, how would he vote on the issue? I recognise the de facto position that the NUS represents the majority of student unions in Scotland.

I thank Ms Hyslop for making that fair point. We will support that amendment. I would be grateful if the minister assured me that he will not restrict consultation to the NUS and that he will consult CHESS and any other relevant student bodies. I do not seek to denigrate the NUS's work, but we must recognise that student unions such as that at the University of Dundee, with which I am associated, are not part of the  NUS. On that basis, we would be happy to support amendment 7.

I declare an interest, in that I am a member of the board of management of the Dundee University Students Association. The Scottish Conservatives support the principle of preserving academic freedom. At stage 2, we were happy to support Michael Matheson's amendment to that effect. I listened with great interest to the minister's arguments for amendments 6 and 10. I feel that the wording of amendment 10 is an improvement on the wording of the original amendment. The fact that the obligation to preserve academic freedom will fall on the academic institution rather than on the funding council will mean that the institution's autonomy will be upheld. The requirement that institutions should "have regard to" academic freedom does not constitute a significant regulatory burden and is entirely consistent with the desire to have a light touch  when it comes to regulation. We should remember that freedom of expression is already safeguarded under the Human Rights Act 1998 and existing employment law. I applaud the Executive for working with the various stakeholders to develop consensus on the wording to deal with the issue. For those reasons, we will be happy to support amendments 6 and 10.

That is an interesting analysis. Of course, many people would say that many people now work for the Government. Since 1997, we have lost 1 million jobs in manufacturing. Scottish manufacturing is now at its lowest ebb—lower than it has been in the history of this country. What does the Executive have to crow about in relation to the state of the Scottish economy?

Our policy is perfectly clear. We are transferring the funding of education from councils to central Government budgets. We will pay for education through efficiency savings, which have already been identified by the Executive. There will be no cutting of education budgets.

I appreciate that there is an election campaign going on and that, with a 13 per cent poll rating, the SNP has to work hard to try to get its message across, but I will try to drag the debate away from constitutional arrangements and back to skills, which is what we should be discussing. I agree with a lot of what the Deputy First Minister had to say in his opening speech. To have a successful economy, we need a well-trained and skilled workforce. The Conservatives certainly agree with the opening part of the Executive's motion, which underlines "the importance of a policy of effective skills improvement". We can all agree that a more skilled, better-trained workforce could increase productivity and business revenue. The Sector Skills Development Agency has found that, if we trained up just another 1 per cent of the current UK workforce, we could add £8 billion to gross domestic product. That would be a prize worth having. Many of the Executive's best policies on skills are, of course, Conservative ones. It was the Conservatives who launched the modern  apprenticeship scheme, the sustained success of which is referred to in the Executive's motion. There are now more than 30,000 people in modern apprenticeship initiatives, which we fully support. The Conservatives also introduced other measures, such as the young enterprise initiative.

I am always reluctant to give way to Mr Stevenson, because he goes off at rather obscure tangents, which are no doubt based on his previous night's reading of the "Encyclopaedia Britannica". However, in the interests of debate, I will give way.

The Scottish nationalists might believe in a free-for-all immigration policy, but the Conservatives believe in controlled immigration, which requires controls. The SNP should be a little bit more honest and admit whether it wants controlled or uncontrolled immigration; I am not entirely sure what its policy is. Let me return to the subject of this afternoon's debate. The "Skills in Scotland 2004" report, which was published in January, sets out the results of Futureskills Scotland's latest employer skills survey, which is drawn from interviews with more than 7,500 employers and provides information about skills shortages, skills gaps, recruitment and training activity in Scotland. The report discloses that 25 per cent of vacancies in 2004 were related to skills shortages and most hard-to-fill vacancies were hard to fill because of a shortage of the required skills. That is a major issue for the construction industry in particular; when we drill down further, we find that employers in the engineering sector are the most likely to report skills gaps. There is much to be done. The report also says that basic literacy and numeracy skills are a major issue. There is plenty of anecdotal evidence that employers are concerned that school leavers lack the basic ability to read, write and add up to a reasonable  standard. The poor performance indicators for 14-year-olds in our schools seem to bear out the anecdotal evidence. Not just basic skills are lacking. Many employers emphasise soft skills such as planning and organising, problem solving, customer handling, team working and communication. We all want a well-educated and capable workforce, but we also need a set of new employees to leave school annually equipped for the workforce and with the work ethos that employers look for. Between 40 and 50 per cent of employers that have recruited school leavers report that they do not consider them to be well prepared for work, so there is much to do. Key to improving the skills base is the further education sector. Next week, the Parliament will debate stage 3 of the Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Bill, which will merge the further and higher education funding councils. I am particularly keen for the bill to progress, not least because it will ensure parity of esteem between higher education and further education. I was interested that the Executive lodged this week an amendment that proposes the introduction of a statutory skills committee, which I would support, not least because it would provide the necessary balance between the two sectors in the new funding council. We should not forget that a Conservative Government incorporated the further education colleges, which freed them from local authority control and set them on their current path of expansion and success. Our amendment refers to school-college partnerships. The partnerships that have been tried—several programmes exist—have been extremely successful in providing youngsters with an alternative to school-based education post-14.

We have no such policy. Moreover, we want schools to be given greater freedom. Perhaps there is an argument for schools to emulate further education colleges in being freed from local authority control and being able to develop their own paths. We have championed for some time the development of school-college partnerships. We know all about the dangers of having young people in the classroom who are not particularly interested in academic work. The current horrendous figures on truancy and school indiscipline bear that out. If we can give all  youngsters the opportunity to access vocational training in FE colleges, that will be better for all pupils. The more academic pupils can get on in school and those who are more interested in a vocational route to a career can pursue that, which will improve their employability. We should not tell our youngsters that they must go on to highers or to university and that, if they do not, they will somehow be failures. Going straight into work or into further education is as valuable a career route. We have succeeded in raising the number of young people who enter university and I am proud of the previous Conservative Government's record on that, but we also need people who are educated to sub-degree level, particularly in technical subjects, to fill some of the skills gaps in our economy to which I referred. I was interested to see in information from the Equal Opportunities Commission in Scotland that 5 per cent of young people have careers advice from careers advisers and that 63 per cent have careers advice from their mums. That says something about parents—particularly those who did not go to university—having expectations about their young people, wanting them to go on to higher education and perhaps having a slightly different perspective. Sometimes, it might be in young people's best interests not to go to university, not least because graduates now leave with high levels of debt. I agree that it is essential to have a well-trained workforce if we are to turn around our relative economic decline. I also agree that we need a more business-friendly environment across the piece. Our further education colleges supply the foundations for the necessary training and skills not only for our young people, but for those who are older and who are part of the workforce. We should expand the existing school-college partnerships and provide greater opportunities for those who are in school. We should place greater emphasis on basic literacy and numeracy skills and on soft skills, such as communication, to meet our employers' needs. Together, those measures should ensure that future surveys of employers present a more encouraging picture on the problem of skills gaps. I take pleasure in moving amendment S2M-2694.2, to leave out from "supports" to end and insert: "notes the success of the Modern Apprenticeship scheme initiated in the mid-1990s by a Conservative government which has trained over 75,000 people in Scotland and which is currently providing skills training for over 31,000; notes with disappointment figures from the Futureskills Scotland 2004 report which show that 29% of applicants to skill shortage posts lacked basic literacy skills and 24% lacked basic numeracy skills; notes with concern findings from the same report that between 40 and 50% of employers who have recruited school leavers report that  they are not well-prepared for work, and calls for more effective school-college partnerships with a view to improving the skills base of the economy."

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it has taken to encourage the development of small-scale hydro-electric schemes. (S2O-6235)

The minister may be aware that changes that are being proposed to the rating system would have the effect of increasing the rateable values of small-scale hydro schemes by including the value of renewables obligation certificates as part of the rateable value. The impact of that would be to increase substantially the rates bills for many such small schemes. Those proposals apply only north of the border and will not affect hydro schemes in England and Wales. Given the Executive's commitment to renewable energy, will he undertake to examine the issue and bring forward proposals to try to alleviate the impact of the changes on hydro schemes?

Is it not a source of some embarrassment to the First Minister that we have a Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning who is promoting a policy of scrapping the Eurofighter, which will cost hundreds of jobs in Edinburgh? Is it not time for the First Minister to sack his enterprise minister and replace him with somebody who is interested in increasing employment opportunities in Scotland and not reducing them?

Does the minister agree that nothing would do more to deter venture capitalists than to increase the top rate of tax by 10 per cent?

We have heard a lot from Jim Mather about corporation tax, which is very interesting. Will he share with us the SNP's proposals for personal taxation?

I welcome back to the chamber the Deputy First Minister after his mysterious absence yesterday. Perhaps this is the first success of the Executive's new anti-truancy strategy that was announced today. Much as I enjoyed Alex Neil's contribution, he did not in any way speak to the SNP amendment, which was about a completely different subject. I suppose that we should be grateful because we have been spared Jim Mather's speech for the  15 th time, although I dare say that we will hear it later. I welcome this opportunity to debate the important role that life sciences play in Scottish society and the contribution that they make to economic prosperity and wealth creation. As has already been said—I am sure that there will be much consensus in this debate—Scotland has the potential to be among the world leaders in life sciences. There is no doubt that the life sciences sector has been a Scottish success story in recent years. There are well over 360 organisations in Scotland's life sciences community and they employ more than 25,000 people. The number of companies in the sector has grown by an average of 28 per cent each year, outstripping the European average of 15 per cent since 1999. We in Scotland have 50 per cent of the UK industry's manufacturing facilities. As we heard, Dolly, the world's first cloned sheep, was born in Scotland in 1996. Scotland has an enviable reputation for the quality of scientific research in academia. The recent research assessment exercise saw a doubling of top-rated 5* departments and a trebling of staff. We are particularly strong when it comes to people. As the Deputy First Minister said, Scotland is home to many top bioscience graduates. With less than 9 per cent of the UK population, our universities have 13 per cent of the UK's bioscience degrees, 61 per cent of the UK's pharmacy degrees and 31 per cent of the UK's genetics graduates. The sector is particularly strong in the universities, which have world-class research capacity. Much of that research is funded by the Medical Research Council, which has an annual spend of £40 million on medical research in Scotland. As Alex Neil said, one university that has a particularly strong life sciences department is Dundee, where division of signal transduction therapy—DSTT—which is a collaboration between the university and six pharmaceutical companies, has seen great success. It has been one of the largest research collaborations between the pharmaceutical industry and the UK research institution. In 1999, the pharmaceutical company Pfizer Ltd described DSTT at Dundee as its most important academic collaboration worldwide. Therefore, there is much to celebrate. I note that the University of Dundee has made an interesting proposal to set up a Scottish institute for life sciences. Dundee would be the perfect place for such an institute if we were to go down that road. I ask the Deputy First Minister to look on that proposal sympathetically.  I should declare a small interest in passing. I have a slight connection with the University of Dundee, in that I am on the board of management of the students association. Sadly, that is not a pecuniary interest, but I put it on the record in case anyone thinks that I am being unduly partisan. Not everything in the garden is rosy. The UK lags behind in the bioprocessing sector. The preferred investment location for bioprocessing is the United States of America and western Europe, not Scotland or the UK. At present, the UK has only 2 per cent of global capacity for microbial-derived biologics. There is a great opportunity for growth here. The BioIndustry Association works hard in the area to promote the sector. The bioscience innovation and growth team, which it leads, reported to Westminster in November, recommending that the UK build a strong bioprocessing sub-sector that would include a network of bioprocessing centres of excellence throughout the UK. The industry believes that the recommendation to set up such centres of excellence presents an opportunity for existing Scottish companies and the economy of Scotland as a whole. The difficulty of obtaining funding is one of the greatest challenges that the sector faces. Considerable investment from third parties is required to grow life science companies and develop products for the marketplace. Since 2001 there has been a serious downturn in the investment market, with the result that many bioscience companies are struggling to realise their potential. Scotland is home to a large number of financial institutions and has an active angel-investment network, but we simply do not have enough venture capitalists. That is holding back the sector. The industry believes that tax breaks are vital for Scottish organisations that invest in bioscience, because they would encourage our healthy financial community to invest at home.

As the member knows, I am generally in favour of tax reductions across the board. I am sure that the sector would welcome any measure that would reduce the tax burden. The Conservative amendment refers to the Scottish life sciences community strategy. The industry welcomes the strategy in broad terms, but the people in the industry to whom we spoke had a number of concerns about aspects of the strategy, such as the speed with which it was drawn up and the fact that some sections of the community thought that their views were not sought or taken on board. The people to whom we spoke thought it important that the Deputy First  Minister should personally chair meetings and have hands-on involvement in the strategy—rather than leave that to Scottish Enterprise—because that would give the strategy the necessary impetus. I hope that the Executive will reflect on that. We heard about the intermediary technology institutes. The ITI in Dundee has been very active and recently announced a substantial investment in Stirling Medical Innovations. The jury is still out on whether that will turn out to be an effective use of public funds, particularly as such a large proportion of the ITI's budget has been spent on that single project. My colleague Brian Monteith will say a little more about that. The industry's concerns are much the same as those of other sectors. There is continuing concern about the growth of bureaucracy and regulation, which holds back development, and about the lack of available skills. We need to encourage more young people to choose a career in science, to provide the flow of graduates that the industry needs. The deputy presiding officer is looking at me menacingly and I know that I am over time. The greatest challenge for the industry remains the need to fill the funding gap. We can provide more venture capital only if we can produce more venture capitalists. For that to happen, we need a business-friendly environment in which people of high net worth are encouraged to come and live and to locate and invest in Scotland. Policies such as those of the Deputy First Minister's party, which wants to increase the higher rate of income tax by 10 per cent for people who earn £100,000 or more, would have only a negative effect on that agenda. The same can be said for the proposals to charge local income tax, which would inevitably hit higher earners and drive away potential investors. We need joined-up Government that considers all the implications of its policies on enterprise and growth, instead of just paying lip-service to the industry's needs. The life sciences industry presents a major opportunity for Scotland—

That opportunity will be realised only if we are prepared to put in place the policies that will allow the sector to grow and to gain access to those who have the confidence to invest in Scotland. I move amendment S2M-2644.2, to leave out from "endorses" to end and insert: "notes the Scottish Executive's support to the sector, notably through initiatives such as the Scottish Co-investment Fund and the Life Sciences Intermediary Technology Institute; regrets, however, that the Scottish  Life Sciences Community Strategy failed to engage adequately with all sectors of the industry; notes the industry's very real concerns about bureaucracy, infrastructure and an appropriate skills base, and therefore calls on the Executive to supplement glossy brochures with tangible action to grow biosciences and encourage venture capitalist investment in Scotland by creating a more business-friendly environment."

To ask the Scottish Executive what provisions are being put in place for Tayside NHS Board to cope with the expected demand that will be placed on it during the G8 summit. (S2O-5921)

I thank the minister for his comprehensive response. He will be aware that there are concerns locally about additional demand on the health service because of the influx of visitors to the area. Will he assure us that there will be the necessary support for NHS Tayside and—in particular—that there is no possibility that there will be a diminution in services to local residents as a result of the extra demands?

Will the minister give way?

It was 20,808.

In this battle of statistics, will the minister confirm that the number of VAT registrations in Scotland has fallen since 1997, when his party came to power?

The minister will be aware that he quotes figures that refer to business taxation as a percentage of GDP. In Scotland, the private sector economy is a smaller percentage of GDP than it is in the rest of the UK or in many other countries, which means that business taxation must be proportionally higher and have a more serious impact, so my point is proved.

rose—

I might be about to disappoint Mr Arbuckle. Will he explain why the Liberal Democrat policy of putting an extra 10 per cent on income tax rates for those who earn more than £100,000 a year will attract entrepreneurs to Scotland?

I must correct Mr Pringle's figures. According to the Committee of Scottish Clearing Bankers, in the year ending in 2003 there were 21,468 new businesses in Scotland. In the year ending in 2004, there were 20,808 new businesses. That represents a fall of 600. The figures that the member has quoted are entirely wrong.

The Government that Mr Muldoon supports has been in power for eight years. Why has it taken it so long to progress Scotland's motorway network? Why, for example, is the A8000 still a single-carriageway road?

For the sake of clarity, the point that I was trying to make—which is perfectly clear from the statistics—is that compared with the rest of the UK, we have fewer self-employed people and fewer start-up businesses.

I welcome this opportunity to debate an important issue. Today was supposed to be the day we had our strike. Of course, it was called off—although I see that nobody has bothered to tell the Scottish Socialist Party. I wonder whether the topic of today's debate was chosen on the ground that those of us who are most interested in enterprise would be most likely to cross picket lines, but perhaps I am being unduly cynical. The Executive is quite right to identify the need for an enterprise culture in Scotland. Our record of economic underperformance is well known and has often been debated in Parliament. Our gross domestic product's growth lags behind that of the UK as a whole. The hardest-hit sector of our economy is manufacturing; exports and output continue to fall. We found out last week that a million UK jobs have been lost in manufacturing since 1997. Because of Scotland's historic manufacturing strength, that has hit our economy especially hard. It is worth remembering that in the early to mid-1990s Scottish manufacturing was performing at record levels. Sadly, we have gone into reverse since then. Other figures are no more encouraging. The  figure for business start-ups has fallen since 1997 and the gap between our performance and that of the UK as a whole has widened. According to figures from major Scottish banks, the number of new business start-ups has fallen over the past year. Most worrying of all is that figures from the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor demonstrate that entrepreneurial activity is in decline and that Scotland continues to lag behind the UK as a whole. Again, the gap is widening. In 2004, the proportion of Scots who expected to start a business in the following three years was 6.6 per cent. The figure for the UK was 9.5 per cent. That is a very worrying gap. Why are we performing so badly? Is something innate to the Scottish character that means that we cannot be entrepreneurs? I cannot believe that that is the case. If we look throughout Scottish history, we find examples of great entrepreneurs who grew businesses in Scotland and throughout the world. In the Victorian era, Scotland probably had the most successful economy on the planet. In addition—as has been demonstrated by eminent historians such as Michael Fry, in his classic work "The Scottish Empire"—[ Laughter. ] I knew that members would enjoy that. As he demonstrated, Scots travelled throughout the world to build hugely successful enterprises. Andrew Carnegie made a fortune from steel. A Scottish company, Jardine Matheson, made the economy of Hong Kong. I therefore cannot believe that there is anything innate to the Scottish character that makes us poor at creating wealth. What makes an entrepreneur? Undoubtedly, one of the major drivers is economic necessity. Anyone who has travelled in the third world—in sub-Saharan Africa, for example—will have seen people turn their hand to anything to earn a crust. They will have seen people selling goods at the roadside or offering to perform basic services simply to make enough money to live. For such people, necessity is the mother of invention. We are fortunate that we do not face such circumstances here.

I am not suggesting that at all—although some socialists would no doubt like us to be oppressed by the state. However, that is not part of my agenda. We in Scotland live in a more comfortable world. In our world, our attitude to risk is a major factor in determining whether people become entrepreneurs. The potential rewards from starting one's own business are much higher than the rewards of being in business with someone else. However, starting one's own business also carries  the risk of failure. If the risk-to-reward ratio gets out of kilter there is a disincentive for people to start businesses. I fear that that is a major factor in our economic underperformance. Much has been written about the size of the public sector in Scotland. We believe that the public sector consumes as much as 54 per cent of GDP. I cannot believe that that has anything but a negative effect on an enterprise culture. Consider a young Scottish graduate looking for a career. If he or she picks up any Scottish newspaper on a Friday, they will see that it is full of public sector jobs, which are usually well paid, well pensioned and very secure. Jobs in the private sector may be better remunerated in some cases, but they will be less well pensioned and undoubtedly less secure. What graduate who is considering the best future for himself or herself and his or her family will, in those circumstances, opt for a job in the private sector? Worse still, what graduate will risk setting up his own business with all that might follow that? I have no doubt that the size of the public sector militates against people taking risks. We have to ensure that we have an environment in which entrepreneurial activity is encouraged. Above all, that means having a competitive economy. The International Institute for Management Development rankings for 2004 placed Scotland 36 th —14 places behind the UK at position 22, as Mr Mather stated. Among economies that have a population of fewer than 20 million, Scotland was ranked 21 out of 30. On the extent to which Government policies were conducive to competitiveness, Scotland ranked even more poorly, at 39 th out of 60. There are serious lessons there for the Executive. The fact is that despite all the good intentions of the Executive and all the talk about growing the economy being the top priority, we continue to have an environment that is not business friendly. We continue to have business rates that are 9 per cent higher than those in England; indeed, according to the latest figures, that gap has widened. We continue to have water charges that are higher than those in England. We continue, driven by a larger public sector, to have more regulation than England. Unless or until those fundamental issues are dealt with, we will not see serious growth in entrepreneurial activity. I am sorry that the Deputy First Minister, who is also the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, is not here—I thought that he would have been—because I have some points to make to him. However, he is amply supported by his Liberal Democrat colleagues in his absence. If we want entrepreneurs, we have to ensure that rewards are available to them because—of course—entrepreneurs want to make money. Not only do they want to make money, they want to  retain as much of that money as possible without it disappearing in taxes. If we want more entrepreneurs, the worst thing that we can possibly do is to propose an increase in taxation. However—incredibly—that is what our enterprise minister wants to do; he wants to impose a 10 per cent tax hike on high earners. It is hard to imagine any measure that is more likely to deter entrepreneurs and drive the few that we have out of this country. In what country other than Scotland would the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning propose that we punish entrepreneurs?

I cannot give the member the exact figures. The economic growth rate in Sweden is fairly dismal, and the birth rate there is even lower than Scotland's, so the examples are not the best that the member could have picked. We know from all the international evidence that if high earners are taxed at a high rate, they will migrate elsewhere. We saw that in Great Britain in the 1970s. I cannot believe that high personal tax rates will do anything for our enterprise culture.

Yes. There is also a considerable difference between 40 per cent and 50 per cent, as we will find out if the Liberal Democrats ever have the opportunity—which, of course, they will not—to impose their tax increases. It is not only the Liberal Democrats' proposals on income tax that would hit entrepreneurs. Already, entrepreneurs are damaged by the graduate endowment and high business rates, both of which are the responsibility of the Liberal Democrats in the Executive. Entrepreneurs would be damaged yet more by a local income tax that would hit high earners, and which is proposed by the Liberal Democrats and—to their shame—by the Scottish nationalists. We should be looking to reduce taxes and to increase incentives for high earners in order to encourage them to come here and start businesses. Scotland needs more Tom Hunters and Irvine Laidlaws, not fewer. Any enterprise minister worth his salt would surely see that.

We need to have low taxes at United Kingdom level. Frankly, if the Scottish  Executive was prepared to use its existing powers to reduce business rates in Scotland, as we have been telling it to do for the past eight years, that would be a valuable step forward.

I am not sure whether that was a speech or an intervention. I will be specific on tax cuts: we would reduce the council tax for pensioners. That is a funded commitment—we would allocate about £4 billion to meet that and other tax-cutting commitments. On Wendy Alexander's second point, many people whose jobs depend on the public sector are not directly employed by the public sector. For example, the salaries of people who work in construction in private finance initiative or public-private partnership projects are paid by the public sector, but such people are not classed as public sector employees. That accounts for the discrepancy that Wendy Alexander mentioned. Much has been said about the supposed crisis of confidence among Scots, but I am sceptical about such arguments. It is a useful alibi for politicians to say that the economy is not going well not because of their policies, but because something in the Scottish character means that Scots are afraid to take risks. Scots do not lack drive, ambition or inventiveness; rather, they are being held back by the economic policies of the Executive and the UK Government, which work actively to put barriers in the way of people who wish to start up businesses. We must ensure that the Scottish economy becomes truly competitive, both within the UK and further afield. If we do that, we will unleash the true enterprising spirit of the Scots and our country will move forward to true economic success.

Will the member give way?

If we are to have a competitive economy, we must attract entrepreneurs. How will the SNP's plans for a local income tax, which will hit high earners, encourage entrepreneurs to come to Scotland?

To ask the Scottish Executive what the benefits of reforms to VisitScotland will be for tourism in Perthshire. (S2O-5833)

The minister may be aware that a number of service providers that have contracts with area tourist boards are worried about their future as VisitScotland moves towards more centralised procurement. Will she do what she can—for example, by examining the packaging of tendering—to ensure that small local firms in areas such as Perthshire do not lose out in, and are not disadvantaged by, the new system?

Eight years on.

We have had some informative contributions this afternoon. Reflecting on the debate, I am struck by the fact that, once again, the genuine debate has been between the Executive and the Conservatives. Yet again we saw that trend, because the SNP was almost on a different planet. Again, the genuine opposition in the chamber has come from the Conservatives and I am sure that that position will be confirmed after the general election in a few weeks' time when we become Scotland's second party once again. As we have come to expect, today's Executive motion boasts of record infrastructure investment. My experience on the ground is quite different. Looking at my constituency of Mid Scotland and Fife, I struggle to think of infrastructure projects that have been completed in the past eight years—the first two of which were under a Labour Government at Westminster followed by six years of the Scottish Executive. Because I was struggling, I asked Mr Arbuckle whether he could help me out by giving me a list of projects, but he was unable to help either. Perhaps he will give me a list later on.

I am grateful to Mr Arbuckle for his kind offer, which I would be delighted to accept. Of course, he will have to allow much more time for the trip, because I will have to show him all the Conservatives' achievements in the area during their 18 years in Government.

Many members referred to the length of the Conservative amendment, but as Brian Monteith acknowledged, it provides only a partial list, because we forgot to include many of our achievements. I take comfort from the fact that  Stewart Stevenson was able to find only one mistake in our long list, because that confirms that we were not too far away from the truth. I assure him that if we had been re-elected in 1997, we would have carried on the dualling of the A90. I will give some examples of the Conservatives' achievements in Mid Scotland and Fife, starting with the health service: the construction of medicine for the elderly wards and the new day hospital at Perth royal infirmary in 1981; the new neonatal intensive care ward at Forth Park hospital in Kirkcaldy in 1982 and the midwife-led unit in that hospital in 1997; the refurbishment of Stirling royal infirmary; and Queen Margaret hospital in Dunfermline, which we commissioned and which opened in 1993. In contrast, during the past eight years, we have witnessed only the running down and closure of hospitals. I will major on the failings of the past eight years in relation to transport, which Brian Monteith mentioned. In the final four years of the Conservative Government, 2.35 million square metres of trunk roads were constructed, compared with 0.57 million square metres in the first four years of the Labour Government. I make no apology for mentioning roads, because it is important to the business community that there should be an excellent road network, so that people can develop their businesses and send their goods to market, as Mr Brocklebank said.

Not at the moment. When Mr Brocklebank mentioned the matter, Tavish Scott seemed keen to acknowledge the Executive's shift away from roads spending—albeit from a sedentary position—even though the Executive constantly tells us that growing the economy is its top priority and we know that the business community wants spending on roads construction to be a priority. It is simply a disgrace that after eight years there has been no movement to upgrade the A8000, which serves many people in the north of Scotland and is the direct link on the trunk road network from the Forth road bridge to Edinburgh airport and the south.

Mr Scott well knows that the upgrading of the A8000 was in our plans in 1997. The moratorium that the Labour Party imposed when it came to power in 1997 prevented the upgrading from proceeding. Mr Scott's party has been in Government for six years but absolutely nothing has been done and I will take no lectures from him.

Where is the upgrading? The Executive has had six years to produce the dualling of the A8000, but there is no sign of that happening. Under the Conservative Government, the M90 was completed, the A90 was dualled as far as Aberdeen, the A9 was dualled between Stirling and Perth and sections of the A9 north of Perth were dualled. What a contrast—

Not at the moment. I struggle to think of any major roads projects that have been completed in the past eight years, although there is so much more to be done. It is an absolute nonsense that the A9, which is the main trunk road that serves Inverness, the capital of the Highlands and the fastest-growing city in Europe for many years, should still be single carriageway for large stretches. We all know about the A9's reputation for having a high accident rate. The Executive should commit itself to dualling the A9 all the way to Inverness. There should also be investment in improving road safety on other stretches of our trunk roads. The accident rates at a number of junctions on the A9 between Stirling and Perth suggest that the junctions are substandard. Indeed, a recent Scottish Executive survey identified that improvements were required to almost all those junctions. It is about time that the Executive started to put its fine promises into practice and to ensure that money is spent on upgrading such junctions to make them safer for road users and local residents. Despite all the bluster that we have heard from the Executive, even the dogs on the street know that the Executive has a woeful record on infrastructure investment. Capital expenditure in 1996-97, the last year of the Conservative Government, was £1.058 billion in real terms. The figure fell as low as £873 million in 2001 and in 2003-04 the figure was £1.033 billion, which was still below the level of capital spending at the end of the Conservative period. When we consider the infrastructure improvements that Scotland needs, the record of the Executive is six wasted years. It is a dismal record, of which the country should be ashamed.

Yes.

Yes.

Can Mr Arbuckle give me a list of infrastructure projects that have been completed in his and my region of Mid Scotland and Fife in the past six years?

The minister talks a good game, but on the ground—or perhaps I should say on the waves—the situation is rather different. He will be aware of the difficulties that are faced by the Inverness-based renewables company Wavegen, which was behind the world's first grid-connected wave power plant of its kind, on Islay, but which has faced serious financial problems. Does that not show that the Executive needs to do more to encourage those new technologies, which many rural communities much prefer to onshore wind developments?

rose—

The member may be aware that, according to recent figures, independent schools in Perth and Kinross are worth around £40 million to the local economy and that much of that is generated in the constituency of her colleague Roseanna Cunningham and much is generated from overseas. I thought that the SNP was the party of enterprise, so why is it attacking a part of Scotland's economy?

Listening to the First Minister today, one would not think that population decline was a serious issue in Scotland. The First Minister will be aware that more than 600 million European Union citizens currently have a right to live and work in Scotland without recourse to any fresh talent schemes. Why does the First Minister think that so few of those 600 million EU citizens currently exercise that right?

The Scottish Conservatives warmly welcomed the announcement that the G8 summit is coming to the Gleneagles hotel in Perthshire. I have no doubt that it will bring tremendous economic benefits to Perthshire both during the conference and, more important, in years to come as a result of spin-off publicity. The conference will put Gleneagles, Perthshire and Scotland on the world map and we should celebrate that fact universally. We should also acknowledge that people have a legitimate right to protest. We have heard reference to the make poverty history campaign and other similar campaigns. Of course people have the right to gather to make known their views, provided that they do so peacefully. It is important to remember that people live and work in Perthshire—I refer to towns such as Auchterarder in particular—and that they also have a right to get on with their lives with the minimum of disruption. Some disruption will be inevitable when there is an international summit at which there are world leaders, but it is essential that the whole community is not brought to a standstill—those remarks apply to protesters as much as to the organisers of the conference. Large groups of protesters cannot roam at random across roads and fields in rural Perthshire. I have discussed those issues with Tayside police, who have assured me that they have plans in hand adequately to deal with policing. I believe that Tayside police will take a measured approach and I hope that protesters will listen to the legitimate requests of the police so that the summit can pass off without major disruption.

I am grateful to the member for intervening, as he makes a sensible suggestion to which I hope Tayside police will listen. We should be absolutely clear. If protesters are intent on causing disruption—and perhaps even violence and damage to property—the police must  have the resources to deal with them swiftly and effectively. The people whom I represent in Perthshire do not want their homes and property put at risk of damage and destruction. Tayside police have rightly put in place robust plans to deal with such protesters and they should have our full support. I am sorry that Roseanna Cunningham is not in the chamber because I thought that her argument that having robust plans in place would somehow provoke protesters to violent reaction was rather bizarre. Her constituents would want proper plans in place to protect their livelihoods and property. I am principally concerned about the local communities and in my remaining time I want to touch on two issues, the first of which is information to people in Auchterarder. Tayside police have been very proactive in communicating with people. They have had a presence at many local meetings, including the community council, but residents still say to me that they find out about what will happen in July only through what they read in the newspapers. More must be done to tell local people about the practical impact that the G8 summit will have on them. Secondly, I return to insurance, which I raised with the minister earlier. People are concerned. Auchterarder community council is concerned that some insurance companies are saying that they will not pay out any damages that are caused as a result of civil disobedience, which means that local residents may have to foot the bill themselves. Local farmers have also contacted me and said that they may be left out of pocket if there is damage to fields and crops. There is a serious case for the Foreign and Commonwealth Office to say that proper compensation will be paid to people who suffer such damage as a result of the summit. I am serious in saying that I believe that the Scottish Executive should take this up with the FCO on behalf of the residents of Perthshire and that it should get a definitive answer from the FCO. The G8 summit in Perthshire represents a tremendous opportunity for the local economy and for Scotland as a whole to present itself to the world. I hope that local residents' legitimate concerns can be addressed to ensure that they do not suffer as a result of the summit. I also hope that legitimate peaceful protest will be allowed, but that the necessary contingencies are provided, so that those who come and seek to cause damage and destruction are dealt with robustly with the full force of the law.

The minister may be aware of the widespread concern among property owners in Auchterarder and the surrounding area that they will not be covered by their insurance companies if protesters damage their properties. Property owners in the area have asked the Foreign and Commonwealth Office for indemnity. Does the Scottish Executive support those calls?

I join others in congratulating Christine May on securing this debate. It is well timed, with this being the beginning of Fairtrade fortnight. I hope that it will bring further coverage to this important issue. Fairtrade has existed for 10 years, and many fair trade products are available. In Mid Scotland and Fife, the town of Aberfeldy was, as Linda Fabiani said, the first fair trade town in Scotland—it gained that honour in 2002. I congratulate traders in Aberfeldy on their forward-thinking outlook. As one drives into Aberfeldy, one can see a new road sign that carries the international logo of the Fairtrade Foundation and the message "Scotland's First Fairtrade Town", which is excellent for marketing an area that is very much dependent on tourism. Fairtrade fortnight is the one time of year when we are encouraged to buy fair trade coffee and other fairly priced products if we do not do so  already. The movement, which was started to help producers in poorer countries get a fair deal, is an example of people leading Governments in trying to help human beings in other parts of the world. We saw that happen most recently in the response of individuals and charities throughout the world in giving help and aid to the victims of the Asian tsunami disaster. Governments, including ours, lagged behind the caring contributions of their citizens and then tried to play catch-up by offering large amounts of international aid. I hope, now that the tsunami disaster does not make the news every day, that Governments will stand by their pledges, just as the people have done. The fair trade movement aims to give a higher standard of living to producers in poorer countries and a better deal for their hard work. Those are worthy intentions and I believe that people who buy fair trade products also do so with the best intentions. Consumers have a choice about what products we buy and at what price we buy them—that is called the marketplace. As Christine May said, consumers exercise choice and buy fair trade products because they know that more of their money will go directly to the producers. As a result, the market delivers success for fair trade producers. I commend the Fairtrade mark for striving for fairer and more open trading conditions for all producers in the developing world. Fairer and open trading conditions are far better than protectionism, which we have in some cases. For example, the European Union is often guilty of creating barriers to trade with the developing world, which is extremely harmful to markets there. In choosing to protect our markets with huge subsidies through the common agricultural policy, the EU restricts market access for developing countries. Not only does that create an unfair non-level playing field, it forces developing countries to produce certain types of products that are not protected, such as coffee. Therefore, developing countries become overdependent on one or two products, which is extremely dangerous for them economically. It also means that production of the product outweighs demand, so that coffee and other items that are produced in developing countries are priced low and—because prices are dragged down—poverty is spread in other countries, such as Vietnam. If we are serious about the issue, we must not simply buy fairly traded products, but campaign for fairer trade across the board. I am grateful to Christine May for giving us the opportunity to raise the issues.

For the avoidance of doubt, I should point out at the outset that I am standing at this particular desk not because I want to put any distance between me and my colleague Mr Mundell but because the console at the desk between us is not working. I say that, Presiding Officer, because I know that you would be deeply concerned at the prospect of Tory splits. I assure you that that is not what is happening this afternoon. The Scottish Conservatives have mixed feelings about the Transport (Scotland) Bill. As David Mundell and John Scott have pointed out, we  oppose part 1 because we do not believe that creating another set of quangos and more bureaucracy will lead to better public transport.

Not at the moment. I want to make some progress. I want to consider part 2 of the bill and then come back to part 1. Part 2 contains some important provisions that we have not had time to address this afternoon. Some important points have to be made. In principle, we support any reasonable measures to reduce the number of road works. We all know the frustration that is caused by utility companies and others digging up the road—especially as it seems that they can never agree among themselves when the road is to be dug up. No sooner has one company completed its work than somebody else comes along and starts digging up the same stretch. Of course, such road works cause congestion problems. The bill proposes the creation of a Scottish road works commissioner to monitor national performance. We give that proposal a cautious welcome, although it may be that the commissioner's powers will not differ significantly from those that are already held by the roads authority and utilities committee. The key point about the new provisions—a point that was made forcibly in the part of the stage 1 report that was produced by the Enterprise and Culture Committee—is that the new powers are of little use if they do not apply equally to the private and public sectors. When there are road works, it is often public bodies such as local authorities or Scottish Water that are digging up the road. If there were a body with additional powers to co-ordinate road works, its powers would have to apply as much to the public sector as to the private sector. Road users do not care whether it is British Telecom or the local authority digging up the road. The effect is the same. It is therefore essential that we have a level playing field. The powers of the new commissioner have to be proportionate. The Enterprise and Culture Committee heard from the UK Competitive Telecommunications Association that provisions that were introduced in England and Wales—to give roads authorities the power to require utility companies to resurface the road in certain circumstances—have caused widespread concern. Any additional cost to utility companies will simply be passed on to the customer. Concerns have also been raised about a moratorium being put on a road on which road works have taken place, because such a  moratorium might restrict competition. We have to be careful that powers do not go too far and end up being anticompetitive. The major concerns lie with part 1 of the bill. Tommy Sheridan and others have pointed out that one of the principal effects of the bill will be the abolition by the back door of Strathclyde Passenger Transport's regional rail powers. SPT is a tried and tested model that works. In its written submission to the Local Government and Transport Committee, SPT said: "it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that this part of the Bill is more about administrative change than about making a real contribution to improving transport policy delivery, in the west of Scotland or more generally." SPT has now gone further than that. Its latest briefing says: "the case for the Bill is at best 'not proven'." It goes on to say: "Its implementation would seriously jeopardise existing transport delivery in the west of Scotland, and SPT therefore urges MSPs to oppose the Bill in the Stage 1 debate." It is a pity that the Executive has not listened to an effective deliverer of public transport such as SPT. The sad fact is that RTPs will be yet another tier of bureaucracy, drawing funds away from service delivery. Another issue arises to do with the grouping of RTPs. For constituents living in an area such as Perth and Kinross, which I represent, the usual routes of access are on a north-south axis—up and down the A9, or the parallel rail routes, to Inverness or Stirling and Glasgow, or across Fife to Edinburgh and beyond. However, Tayside falls within the central and Tay RTP, which is orientated east-west and not north-south. It therefore does not reflect the journeys that people make. That situation has been repeated elsewhere, as we have heard from David Mundell and Alasdair Morgan. Dumfries and Galloway Council has made strong representations that its area should not be lumped in with the Glasgow city region. The Scottish Conservatives want to see greater investment in transport in Scotland—in both public transport and our roads. However, instead of addressing the concerns of Scottish businesses and travellers, the bill misses the mark. It is for that reason that we must oppose it.

To ask the First Minister how the Scottish Executive measures economic success. (S2F-1433)

The First Minister might be aware of the publication this week of the Federation of Small Businesses index of success, written not by a Conservative economist but by John McLaren, former adviser to the First Minister's predecessors. Does the First Minister agree that the fact that the report ranks Scotland last out of 10 nations with populations of less than 9 million puts into perspective the First Minister's oft-repeated claim that Scotland is the best small country in the world? Furthermore, will the First Minister acknowledge that as Scotland has, according to the report, fallen four places in the rankings since 1990, here is conclusive proof, from a Labour economist, that we were better off under the Tories?

We have heard much about bodies being buried. Despite its graveyard slot, the debate is important. That is because it deals with council tax, which is the only tax—apart from business rates—for which the Executive has responsibility, albeit indirectly. I am sure that all members receive regular complaints about the burden of the council tax. As we have heard, the tax has increased by 50 per cent since 1997. The public are becoming increasingly concerned about the level of tax that they pay. The point has been made that the subject is an issue particularly for those who are on fixed incomes, such as pensioners. They may well live in larger houses, but that does not reflect their income position. The year-on-year increases in council tax rates mean that they continue to be penalised. Sadly, there is no sign that that will end with the current settlement. In previous years, the Conservatives were part of the administration of Perth and Kinross Council, which is in my area, so they could restrain council tax increases as far as possible. I have no doubt that had it not been for Tory involvement in the administration, the council tax increases would have been much higher over the years. Sadly, the Tories are no longer part of that administration. Instead, we have an unholy alliance of the Liberal Democrats and the SNP. That is bad news for local council tax payers, because the restraint has been removed. We could be heading for a council tax increase of 5.5 per cent, which is well above the inflation rate. That increase will be unaffordable for many people. One early act of the new Liberal Democrat-SNP administration on Perth and Kinross Council was to create a new special responsibility allowance for an arts and culture spokesman, which was given—surprise, surprise—to a Liberal Democrat member. That was unprecedented and was rightly condemned by opposition councillors from the Conservatives and Labour. Members of the council's administration appear to be more interested in lining their pockets than in working to keep the council tax down.

If Mr Rumbles wants to defend his colleagues for lining their pockets, I will be delighted to hear from him.

With respect, I do not think that that is the issue. I simply think that people would view it as rather unsavoury for a party in a new administration suddenly to create all these extra allowances to ensure that every one of its councillors got an additional payment. The Liberal Democrats and the SNP want to replace the council tax with a local income tax, because they no doubt think that such a stance will serve them well when they come to make a play for the pensioner vote. However, changing the current system in such a way simply robs Peter to pay Paul. A local income tax is a tax on the hard-working families and couples who are already paying income tax and national insurance before they can pay their rent, mortgages, other household bills and all the expenses incurred in bringing up a family. An average working couple in Scotland on average earnings will pay £1,053 for the average band D council tax bill. However, under the Liberal Democrats' proposed local income tax, that same couple will pay £1,224, which is £174 more than they pay at present. That is equivalent to a 16 per cent increase in the average band D council tax rate.

I am coming to that.

As I said, I will come to my solution directly. However, I should point out that the member's party is proposing simply to shift the burden of that taxation from one set of taxpayers to another. Under SNP proposals, the situation would be even worse, because the average working couple I mentioned would have to pay £181 extra, which is equivalent to a 17 per cent increase in council tax. Of course, the increase would be even greater for people who earn more—so much for trying to encourage people to live in Scotland. Moreover, no one has yet given a satisfactory answer to the on-going problem of council tax benefit. Without the £294 million that councils receive from the Department for Work and Pensions, the local income tax would be even higher. I suspect that the real issue about the council tax is not the system itself but the size of the bills that people have to pay. Indeed, Alasdair Morgan acknowledged as much in his opening remarks. That is why the Conservatives' plan to reduce  council tax bills and transfer education funding to central budgets would have such a beneficial, immediate effect. Such a measure would allow us to reduce council tax by an average 35 per cent, which would make it more affordable across the board, and the £600 million that it would cost could be easily afforded within the efficiency savings that the Executive has already identified. This is not, as some ignorant or stupid individuals have said, a cut in the education budget, but a transfer of funds from one budget to another.

I am sorry—I am in my last minute. The council tax is a stealth tax. Nevertheless, it hurts far too many people who can ill afford to pay it. As we face yet another round of well-above-inflation increases, it is time to address the central problem of the very high level charged for the tax. Such a solution is far better than changing the current system which, as I have said, would simply transfer the burden from one set of taxpayers to another. I have pleasure in supporting Brian Monteith's amendment.

On behalf of the Scottish Conservatives, I welcome the minister's statement and thank him for advance sight of it which, with all the acronyms and figures, was extremely helpful. The minister was right to identify research and development spending as a key concern. Of course, the situation is not helped by the structure of the Scottish economy. We have a large public sector, a large service sector and a shrinking manufacturing sector, which does not help emphasis on R and D, because we would expect the manufacturing sector to invest more heavily in R and D than the other sectors would. The awards that the minister announced are welcome, but I have two questions for him. Is he aware of the report "Comparison of Exploitation Performance of Scottish Universities with US Institutions", which Edinburgh Research and Innovation Ltd has just published? That report shows that the accumulated value of the research in all Scottish universities is equivalent to that of only one major US university, such as Harvard University or the Pennsylvania State University. It also shows that, in terms of value for money, the performance of Scottish universities vis-à-vis their equivalents in the US is encouraging, and I would  be grateful if the minister would acknowledge the success of Scottish universities in that respect. Does the minister accept that a key problem in the commercialisation of research is a lack of readily available venture capital in Scotland? Does he also accept that, to have more venture capital, we need more venture capitalists and that, to achieve that, the Scottish Executive must promote policies that are conducive to individuals of high net worth locating and staying in Scotland?

Will the minister join me in welcoming the proposal for wind turbines on Salisbury crags? Does he accept the general principle that, if we are to have onshore wind farms, it makes sense to locate them in urban areas, close to centres of population, rather than in rural areas such as the hills of Perthshire?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. On two occasions this afternoon, questions were called but the members were not present to ask them. That is, as you have said, a discourtesy to the chamber. It is also frustrating for those of us who have come to the chamber to ask supplementaries to find that the original question has not been called. I wonder whether you can give some thought to how such conduct might be improved and, in particular, whether you consider it appropriate to ask business managers to remind members of their responsibilities to the chamber in that regard.

I am grateful to Mr Neil for giving way. Does he acknowledge that, for 40 years post-independence, Ireland's economy was in decline? Does that not prove that, rather than constitutional change or independence, we need a change of policy?

What about kipper ties?

When I heard that today's debate was going to be about North sea oil, I felt a certain nostalgia. Was this the SNP going back to the 1970s? Perhaps the debate would be like a 1970s revival concert. Would Nicola Sturgeon turn up in flares or would Jim Mather turn up in a kipper tie, with the Bay City Rollers playing in the background and our impending national disaster in the world cup in Argentina on the horizon? I certainly remember those badges that everybody seemed to be wearing in the 1970s, which said, "It's Scotland's Oil". It may cause some consternation on the SNP benches to know that I wore one myself—but that was before I grew up. Today's back-to-basics SNP seems once again to be relying on North sea oil as the solution to all our problems. It is certainly true that Norway has benefited from its oil and gas reserves and that its oil fund has been a success. However, there is a major difficulty with proposing a replica of that in Scotland because, unlike Norway, Scotland runs a substantial annual revenue deficit. I know that SNP members question the figures in the GERS report, but in the absence of any other figures to the contrary that they have produced, that report must at least be a useful starting point when it comes to addressing the question of Scotland's finances. On the basis of the latest GERS report, even if all the oil revenues were allocated to Scotland—which is highly unlikely in any case—the net borrowing figure for 2002-03 would have been £4.4 billion. That is a substantial black hole, which the SNP would be unable to fill.

If Mr Swinney will explain how he would fill that hole, I shall welcome his intervention.

Mr Swinney has taken a selective period of 16 years to suit his agenda. As he well knows, in the balance of payments over that period there were three years when the figures for Scotland were higher than those for the rest of the UK, because of the high oil price. For every other one of those years, even within that period, the figures went the other way round. It is notable that the SNP has not produced any figures to challenge the GERS analysis. Where is the SNP GERS analysis? We have not seen it, so the SNP has no credibility in this debate. One can spend money only once. SNP members seem to think that they can spend the same money over and over. In an independent Scotland, there would be no oil fund for future generations, because the money from North sea oil would be required to pay for current expenditure. That is not rocket science. We know that expenditure per head of population by Government in Scotland, at all levels, has always been high—substantially higher than spending south of the border. The previous Conservative Government ensured that Scotland got far more than its Barnett share of UK spending. By 2008, the Scottish Government will be the richest in the world in terms of the money that it has to spend per head of population, with the exception only of the Vatican city, which has a population of 740 and which, of course, does not have the same education and child care demands as we do. That world-record and world-beating level of expenditure is not matched by our income.

I do not believe that the Parliament should have responsibility for oil revenues as things stand. I certainly think, as Richard Lochhead knows, that there is an argument that the Parliament should have more financial responsibility. A lot more work needs to be done on that issue. The problem for the SNP is that it wants independence and it wants to balance the books, but the books do not balance as things stand. We know all about the difficulties with the Scottish economy. To be fair, those difficulties are not of the SNP's making; the finger has to be  pointed at the Scottish Executive. We have heard the figures time and again in the chamber. Economic growth is trailing behind the rest of the UK. The latest GDP figures show that the gap has again widened. There is a low level of business start-ups. New figures last week showed that the enterprise gap between Scotland and the UK has widened, with total entrepreneurial activity in Scotland falling over the past year.

The minister has just taken one quarter. If he takes the year to quarter 3 of 2004, he will find that the gap has widened. He is being selective with his figures. Scotland's trade gap between 1998 and 2001 has ballooned from £3.9 billion to £6.8 billion. That is a dismal picture and no recipe for a successful independent country, even with North sea oil revenues. Much of the blame for that state of affairs lies squarely with the Executive, whose policies have done little to help and much to hinder our economic competitiveness. The "IMD World Competitiveness Yearbook", published last year, ranks Scotland a lowly 39 th out of 60 for "the extent to which Government policies are conducive to competitiveness". That puts the Executive behind not only the UK Government, but the Governments of Estonia, China, India and Columbia. There is much that the Executive could do now to improve the competitiveness of the Scottish economy. It could cut the business rate to at least the level in England, thus giving our businesses a major leg-up. It could take action to reduce water bills—in many cases, water charges for businesses are a multiple of what they are in England. It could take action to reduce the size of Scotland's public sector, which has been estimated as up to 54 per cent of GDP. A public sector that is too large stifles private enterprise and we are starting to see a growing consensus that the problem has to be tackled. However, the Executive continues to preside over a rising payroll in the public sector, while the private sector, particularly in manufacturing, continues to struggle.

I appreciate that the figures will not be perfect, drawn up as they are by public servants. I have yet to see the SNP's alternative figures; until we see them, the SNP will remain ill informed in this debate. Unfortunately for SNP members, their proposed solution of constitutional change completely misses the point. Worse than that, it lets the Executive off the hook. At best, it would take years to deliver the sort of constitutional change that the SNP hopes for. I do not believe that Scotland should have to wait that long before we start to turn around our economic underperformance, but perhaps we should not expect too much from a party that cannot even remember to book itself a conference venue. In contrast, the Tory solution works because the Executive has all the powers that it needs now. The Executive has the power today to cut business rates. It has the power today to reduce water charges. It has the power today to restructure Scottish Enterprise and increase investment in infrastructure. It has the power today to reduce the size of the public sector. It should be using those powers today to take action for all Scottish businesses and to improve our economy. The SNP offers merely a change of passport, not a change of policy. It is little wonder that the SNP's policies on the economy have so little support in business circles. At the end of last year, CA Magazine carried out a survey of members of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland, asking them which political party best understands the needs of business. Unsurprisingly, a large number of them said that none did—we might expect that. However, 29 per cent said the Conservatives and 9 per cent said Labour. It will not be much consolation to the Deputy First Minister and Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning to hear that only 4 per cent said the Liberal Democrats. However, only 1 per cent—one in 100—said the SNP. Would the lonely chartered accountant who supports the SNP please identify himself?

I am sorry, but I do not have time. Despite Mr Mather's best efforts, the SNP has no credibility on economic issues. The party is so obsessed with constitutional change that it cannot see that the Executive should be using its current powers to improve our economic performance.  The SNP needs to make up its mind. Is it a party that is in favour of enterprise, as Jim Mather would have it? If so, it should be pressing for less tax, less regulation and a smaller public sector. Is it, as Christine Grahame would have it, a traditional tax-and-spend, left-of-centre party? Many of its front-bench spokesmen seem to belong to the latter party, crying out weakly for additional public spending in one area or another. The SNP has again raised the issue of North sea oil as the panacea for all Scotland's ills. As we know, the solution is not so simple. That approach might have worked for the SNP in the 1970s, but the Scottish people are not so daft as to think that it will work twice. I move amendment S2M-2361.1, to leave out from first "calls" to end and insert: "agrees that fluctuating prices and finite supplies make oil revenue an unreliable source of income; notes that, even if all revenue from North Sea oil had been allocated to Scotland in 2002-03, net borrowing would still have been £4.4 billion; further notes that Scotland's businesses, who are the core drivers of wealth and economic growth, are demanding concrete action, not constitutional change, and therefore calls on the Scottish Executive to take immediate steps to create a more business-friendly environment by reducing business rates and water charges and cutting red tape, thereby encouraging business development and boosting Scotland's economic competitiveness."

In the short time available to me, I will consider the impact of the budget on the economy, which the Executive is always telling us is its top priority. By a fortunate coincidence, three sets of relevant figures came out this week. The latest growth figures were published, to which Jim Mather referred. They show that in the third quarter of the year 2003-04, Scotland's growth was 1.8 per cent against the UK's rate of 3.2 per cent. Of course, Scotland's growth in the previous year was also 1.8 per cent, and the UK's was 2.8 per cent. Therefore, the gap has widened again. We know that manufacturing is a major reason for that, because it has suffered tremendously in the past five years and continues to decline. We had a second set of figures on the trade gap. The deficit in Scotland's balance of trade was £3.96 billion in 1998, which is not a figure to be proud of. In 2001, the gap rose to £6.8 billion, which represents one tenth of the Scottish gross domestic product. The size of the United States' trade gap compared with its GDP is often criticised, but the Scottish figure is double that of the US and, rightly, should be criticised.  The third set of figures is on the enterprise gap, which has also widened. There are fewer entrepreneurs in Scotland than there were a year ago. Then, 5.5 per cent of the population was regarded as being entrepreneurs, but the figure now is 5.2 per cent. The UK figure has also fallen under this tax-and-spend Labour Government, which is not surprising, but it is still well ahead of the figure in Scotland. Again, the gap between the UK and Scotland has widened. What should the Executive be doing? First, it needs to start tackling the size of the public sector. We have raised that issue time and again, as have many independent commentators. It is simply not sustainable to have a public sector that consumes around 54 per cent of GDP. The latest quarterly figures show an increase of 7,230 staff in local government. It would not be so bad if they were all in front-line services, but I do not believe for a minute that they are. The public sector continues to grow, despite all the warnings. Secondly, the Executive should reduce the business rate. With the setting of the English rate, the gap has widened again. We know that the business rate goes straight to the bottom line of every business in Scotland and that it is a major factor in our poor progress on economic growth. If we consider the budget as a whole, we see that, apart from revenue from the business rate, the money that the Executive gets comes from London in a cheque from Gordon Brown. Therefore, as Brian Monteith said, it is entirely appropriate that we should examine the wider picture at UK level. As he said, the Institute for Fiscal Studies identified yesterday an £11 billion black hole in the UK budget. That means that, under a Labour Government, the national tax burden is likely to reach a 25-year high by 2010 and that hard-working families across Scotland will have to pay £1,000 a year more. Of course, the result of that is that money will be sucked out of the economy and economic growth will slow even more than it has done. Never mind—there is hope. Over the skyline on his charger comes our good friend Oliver Letwin, with his Conservative plans to benefit the Scottish economy. The James report, to which members have referred, identified £35 billion in savings. If Wendy Alexander examined the detail of that, she would see that the budget increases would be in the devolved areas, such as health and education. Of course, that would mean that Scotland would continue to receive what it does under the Barnett formula. The generosity that the UK Government has shown towards Scotland would continue and we would also have £4 billion in tax cuts. Therefore, Scotland would benefit twice; the very generous amount of money would continue to come in, but we would avoid the tax rises that  would be inevitable under a new Labour Government. People in Scotland would have more money in their pockets and we would get economic growth as well as the same level of public services. Therefore, my advice to the Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform and, indeed, to all those concerned with Scotland's finances and economic growth is clear: vote Conservative.

This has been a good debate, with measured and well-informed contributions from all sides of the chamber. I congratulate Andrew Arbuckle on his maiden speech, which was delivered in excellent fashion, and I am sure that he will be an adornment to the chamber. On the substance of his speech, all I can say is that he is keeping up the tradition of his predecessor, Mr Raffan, with a strange detachment from reality. The Scottish Executive claims to have a strategy for our future energy needs. In reality, it is little more than headlines about meeting renewable energy targets. Members will be aware that I have raised in the chamber on numerous occasions my concern about the overdevelopment of onshore wind farms. According to the Scottish Wind Assessment Project, there are nearly 400 either current or proposed planning applications for wind turbines. Rural communities in areas such as Perthshire feel under threat from wind farm developers. I cannot believe that it is in the long-term interests of our vital tourism industry to be seeking to overdevelop onshore wind capacity.

If Mr Neil had been listening, he would have heard that we accept the need for onshore wind farms, but in a very limited number of situations. There is an overemphasis on onshore wind at the moment.

I will not give way at the moment; I need to make progress.  The fundamental problem is the lack of national strategic guidance about the siting of wind farms. The Enterprise and Culture Committee's report on the matter was unanimous. It said that such guidance is essential, as local councils up and down the land are crying out for assistance. The Executive has now said that it will consider the matter and review the planning guidance, but not until 2006. Therefore, we need a moratorium on locally opposed wind farms until the new planning guidance is in place. Otherwise, the 400 applications that I referred to will be determined on the basis of the current planning guidance, which it is accepted is inadequate. That cannot be in anyone's interests.

Our proposal is that we should have a moratorium where there is substantial local opposition—a concept that is accepted in planning law—to a specific proposal. Where there is substantial local opposition, I will oppose a wind farm. While presiding over a free-for-all for onshore wind, the Executive is woefully inadequate when it comes to encouraging other types of renewable energy. There is great potential for small-scale hydro schemes in Scotland, yet Executive policy discriminates against such producers. Small hydro generators that sell power to neighbouring properties or to third parties within their own estates are not entitled to ROCs, because the power is supplied through what is known as an exempt supplier system. The Executive must consider that. In addition, as I pointed out to Ross Finnie, the impact of new rules that will come in from 1 April this year will mean huge increases of up to 400 per cent in rates bills for small hydro generators. Why? Because they will be assessed on the ROCs that they have received. The Executive's own policy is damaging the growth of the renewable sector. Whatever happened to joined-up Government? Another example of the failure of Executive policy, which other members have raised, concerns the burning of waste-derived fuel at Longannet power station. I appreciate that it is rather too near lunch time to go into the detail of all that, but waste is a renewable resource. By burning it, burning of coal is displaced, and that has to be good for emissions and the environment. If the waste were not burned, it would have to go to landfill, yet the Scottish Environment Protection Agency has just stopped the burning of waste-derived fuel at Longannet by taking court action  against Scottish Power and Scottish Water. We have the bizarre concept of two public agencies employing Queen's counsel at the taxpayers' expense to fight it out in a court action in the Court of Session, and both of them report to the same minister—Mr Finnie. For goodness' sake, can we not get a grip on that and try to pursue a coherent renewables policy, instead of allowing two agencies to fight it out? If Executive policy on renewables is flawed, SNP policy is foolish. The SNP wants to increase the percentage of electricity generated in Scotland from renewable sources by 2010 from the Scottish Executive's target of 18 per cent to 25 per cent, but that increase can come only from additional wind capacity. It was interesting to see Alex Salmond on Tuesday talking up wind generation, as Richard Lochhead has done today. At the same time, SNP representatives in areas such as Perthshire and the Borders are going round telling local communities that they oppose this or that wind farm development. The SNP cannot have it both ways.

If the SNP supports an increase in wind power, it needs to be open about that and tell us and local communities on which sites it intends to develop wind farms. The message to people in Perthshire and elsewhere is clear: "Vote SNP. There will be a wind farm coming to a hill near you very soon." If Mr Stevenson wants to tell us which wind farms he will support, I will give way to him.

I look forward to SNP representatives in Perthshire and the Borders telling us which applications for which hills they are going to support. I await that with interest. We have used the debate to raise also the question of the future of nuclear energy in Scotland—a question that hardly anyone but the Conservatives has dared to raise in recent years. We are starting to see a consensus develop. As David Mundell said, people such as Professor David Simpson, Sir Alec Broers and even the green guru, Professor James Lovelock, now believe that it is essential that we start expanding our nuclear capacity. We recognise the problems with nuclear power, in particular the question of waste, but it is only by having a debate about the issues that we will start to find solutions. It is instructive that, in countries  such as Finland, public opinion has been won over by the Government leading on the issue. That is what we must do. "does it make sense, at the very time when climate change and the reduction of greenhouse gases have shot up the political agenda, to be planning the elimination of nuclear power?" Those are not my words, but the words of the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, Allan Wilson, writing in the Sunday Herald on 26 December. I could not agree more. It is not just Allan Wilson on the Executive benches who thinks like that, thank goodness. I pay tribute to John Home Robertson's long support for the nuclear industry, and I wish him well with his new cross-party group on the civil nuclear industry. I hope that that helps the debate to move along. We should not be like the sheep in "Animal Farm" chanting, "Nuclear bad, renewables good." We need a well-informed debate about the issues. Current Executive policy on renewable energy is driving a massive expansion in onshore wind, to the detriment of new technologies. Furthermore, Executive policies are prejudicing existing renewable production through small-scale hydro schemes and the burning of waste-derived fuel. It is time for us to stop swamping our countryside with wind turbines and to take a more measured and responsible approach. Above all, it is time for us to start considering seriously the nuclear option before time runs out. Thank goodness that we have visionary figures such as Allan Wilson and John Home Robertson on the Executive benches, who are prepared to raise the issues, and thank goodness that we have an effective and responsible Opposition in the Scottish Conservatives, who are prepared to allow those issues to be debated.

I am grateful to Mr Finnie for giving way. He did not mention hydro, but I hope that hydro will be part of the portfolio.

Well, in that case, will the minister answer this question? Why is the Executive promoting new rating rules from 1 April this year that will result in a 400 per cent increase in the rates bills paid by some small-scale hydro schemes? How does that help the renewables industry?

Where is the minister?

He means Rip van Winkle.

Will the deputy minister give way?

I am grateful to the deputy minister for giving way to me in the competition for his interest. The deputy minister referred to the work that the Executive is doing to examine alternatives. He must appreciate that the Enterprise and Culture Committee has the important job of considering amendments to the bill at stage 2. Conservative members will want to consider carefully what amendments need to be lodged. It would be immensely helpful to us and to other members of the committee in that deliberation if the Executive could make available to us as much information as possible about the work that is being done elsewhere on alternatives. Can the minister give us that commitment?

Mr Watson should have qualified his remarks. His party is only opposed to top-up fees in Scotland. His Scottish Labour colleagues voted for top-up fees in other parts of the UK.

As the first member of the Enterprise and Culture Committee to speak in the debate, I will start by thanking the clerks for all their assistance in the preparation of the stage 1 report and for helping in the thorough process that we went through. The Scottish Conservatives welcome the Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Bill, which will merge the funding councils for further and higher education and will continue the trend of legislation that was started under the previous Conservative Government. It was the Conservatives who incorporated the further education colleges and set up the Scottish Further Education Funding Council. That resulted in a flowering of the FE sector, with outside expertise coming on to the boards and driving the sector forward. We now welcome the proposed merger of the Scottish Further Education Funding Council with the Scottish Higher Education Funding Council. The bill is important, not least because it will bring into legislation the principle of parity of esteem between the two sectors. Higher education and further education have complementary and equal roles. Higher education has a more academic focus and a greater research role. In contrast, further education is more technically based in general and more focused on skills and meeting the needs of the economy. It is quite wrong to suggest that one sector is more important or of a higher priority than the other, and having a single funding body for both organisations is helpful when making that point. Although the bill is generally acceptable to us, there is some history to the current position, as Fiona Hyslop mentioned. The original draft of the bill caused concern in education circles. There was a flurry of anxiety that the universities were all to be renamed STEPs. So, instead of the University of Edinburgh, we would have the Edinburgh STEP. Frankly, some of that was just bad journalism, but I am pleased that the proposal has been dropped from the bill. There were also more serious concerns about some aspects of the draft bill, particularly the conferring of additional ministerial powers. I do not know why the draft contained those and I am sure that the minister had no intentions in that direction. I can only put it down to an over-zealous civil servant in his department. There was vocal opposition to the proposals from both the further and the higher education sectors. I pay tribute to  the minister for listening to those concerns and for coming back with a revised bill that addresses the concerns and, by and large, meets the needs of the two sectors. That said, there are a number of concerns about the bill that is before us. A primary issue of concern to the committee was the right of ministers to set fees for students undertaking full-time courses of study. We know all about the introduction of top-up fees down south and the impact of that in Scotland—the committee has already looked at that issue in detail. I appreciate that the situation is not of the minister's or the Executive's making. He is in the difficult position of trying to protect Scottish students' opportunities to gain places at Scottish universities. However, any legislation has to be carefully worded. The minister must be explicit about his intent now and in the future with regard to the possibility of varying fees for any course or programme other than medicine, which was the area highlighted in evidence. There is another issue to do with other students who are domiciled in Scotland—for example, those who study part-time, those who have changed course during their studies, or those who are studying for a second or subsequent degree. I was pleased that the minister addressed that point in his opening speech. We wish to reserve our position on possible amendments at stage 2 to deal with the issue. It would be extremely helpful to committee members if the review that the minister mentioned in his speech were to be published before stage 2; otherwise the committee will have some difficulty addressing amendments on the issue without that information. As I said, I appreciate that the difficulty that the minister is in is not of his own making. However, my party opposes top-up fees for Scottish students and indeed for all students in all parts of the United Kingdom. It is essential that there is no attempt to introduce top-up fees by the back door, even with the best intentions. I listened with interest to what Fiona Hyslop said and I think that she overstated her case. Her rather manufactured outrage this morning at what she said the minister was trying to do did not lend any credibility to the SNP position. She gave the game away about the marvellous proposal that the SNP trumpeted this morning in its press release on golden handcuffs. The SNP has taken no legal advice on the enforceability of that proposal—it is a back-of-an-envelope proposal and exactly what we have come to expect of a party that is not an effective Opposition. Scotland is and always has been an exporter of education. Education is one of our international strengths and we should be encouraging people from all around the world, even from England—I know that that might stick in the craw of the SNP— to come to study in Scotland. What sort of message does it send to people from around the world if we seek to penalise those coming from elsewhere? That is a narrow nationalist proposition and it should be rejected. Apart from fees, we have a number of concerns. The Association of Scottish Colleges has made representations about its concern that the new funding council will seek to reregulate institutions, which is the proper responsibility of the governing body of the institution or Scottish ministers. It is important that the new funding council does not engage in any empire building. Ministers exist to set policy and make direction. Thereafter, it should be the institutions that decide how money is spent at a local level. We do not need a raft of policy makers in the new funding council passing instructions down the line and providing another tier of administration. We must protect the independence of the further and higher education sectors. Moreover, we should ensure that the new funding council is a lean operation with a tight budget to ensure that the maximum amount of money is passed down the line to front-line services. The bill proposes that there will be one statutory committee for the new funding council and that that will be a research committee. Having such a committee is certainly important. Although the Enterprise and Culture Committee does not recommend in its report that a skills committee be statutory, we encourage the new funding council to consider the need for a skills committee as an early priority when the council is properly constituted and operational. That is an important point, not just because a skills committee would be relevant to the work of the funding council, particularly in connection with further education, but because of the parity of esteem to which I referred earlier. It is inevitable that a research committee will deal primarily with the higher education sector. Therefore, it makes sense to have a skills committee to deal primarily with the further education sector. That would create a balance and ensure that those who run the funding council treat both sectors equally. It would also make sense for any skills committee to have sitting on it people from the business community and enterprise bodies. The Scottish Conservatives welcome the bill. I hope that the minister will address the specific points raised on fees either during the debate or at stage 2, so that we can move forward with the formation of the new funding council with support from across the political spectrum.

The member's golden handcuffs proposal is interesting, but she must be aware of concerns about the legal enforceability of such a proposal. Has the SNP taken legal advice on that policy? If so, will the member make that advice available to us this morning, so that we can reflect on it during the debate?

To ask the Scottish Executive what criteria it will take into account in any decision to review the boundaries of Cairngorms national park. (S2O-4855)

Does the minister accept that, under any criterion, highland Perthshire should form part of the Cairngorms national park and that the wrong decision was taken when the current boundaries were drawn to exclude that area? Will the minister undertake to reverse that injustice at the quinquennial review of boundaries, if not before then?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether more action can be taken to protect NHS staff from verbal and physical violence from patients. (S2O-4904)

I thank the minister for his very full response. Those measures are welcome. The minister may be aware that over the new year staff in the accident and emergency department at Ninewells hospital in Dundee, which is used by many of my constituents in Mid Scotland and Fife, complained of verbal abuse and spitting by patients who were acting unreasonably. I am sure that the minister will join me in unreservedly condemning such behaviour. Will he encourage Tayside NHS Board to work with Tayside police and with the staff to ensure that such unacceptable behaviour is stamped out completely?

I welcome this morning's opportunity to highlight the Scottish response to the tsunami disaster in south-east Asia. The unprecedented scale of that tragedy claimed an estimated 150,000 lives and left millions homeless. The most affected areas were in Indonesia, with at least 94,000 people dead and almost 400,000 sheltering in scattered refugee camps across the province. In Thailand more than 5,000 people are believed to have died. In Sri Lanka, more than 30,000 people have been killed and more than 800,000 made homeless in the southern and eastern coastal regions. It is a truly horrendous picture and our thoughts and prayers must be with those who  have lost loved ones and the survivors who are left homeless. It must be particularly difficult for those who have relatives in the area—whether residents or visitors on holiday—and who have not yet received word as to whether those relatives are safe. This must be a desperately difficult time for people in that situation. The response from around the world has been overwhelming and, as we have heard this morning, Scots have been at the forefront of giving, with an estimated £20 million of personal donations. We have seen great generosity from high-profile business figures such as Tom Hunter, who has given £1 million, and Sir Jack Harvie, who has given £50,000. Those who have given so generously are an example to us all and I am sure that many others will be following their lead. However, it is not just in donations of money that Scotland has rallied to the aid of those in south-east Asia. Scottish companies have given practical assistance. Members will be aware that I have not been uncritical of Scottish Water as an organisation, but I must applaud that company for its response in providing bottled water to the Maldives, and in providing personnel who have the expertise to address the vital question of clean water supplies in the affected areas. All members of the Parliament with whom I have spoken, including those in the Conservative party, have been generous in supporting the appeal. I know that some have made a public pledge to donate one day's salary and there is an argument that that sets an example for the rest of the country to follow. However, for many of us, the question of how much we give to charity is essentially a private matter. How much and how often we give to various appeals is a matter between ourselves and our consciences. Not everyone wants to parade their generosity publicly and we should respect those who hold such convictions. I have no higher authority for that than our Lord himself and his sermon on the mount. I quote from chapter 6 of the gospel of St Matthew: "But when thou doest alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth: that thine alms may be in secret: and thy Father which seeth in secret himself shall reward thee openly." One positive aspect of the disaster has been the way in which it has focused attention on the whole issue of the third world and poverty. Members who have spoken so far have all drawn attention to that. I pay particular tribute to the make poverty history campaign, which is campaigning to eradicate third world debt. We in the Conservative party share the objectives of that campaign and seek a world free from the scandal of avoidable poverty.  Although we have been impressed at the response to the tragedy in south-east Asia, there is an on-going tragedy of mass poverty throughout the world, especially in Africa. Thirty thousand children will die today from easily preventable diseases. That is why we must commit to dealing with the fundamental problems that cause poverty. There are three aspects to that: aid, debt and trade. My party has a commitment to increasing the foreign aid budget with a target of achieving the United Nations target of 0.7 per cent of gross national income being spent on foreign aid by 2013. However, foreign aid should also be spent more effectively. Too often in the past, money has gone into the wrong projects, or it has been diverted into the pockets of dictators rather than reaching the people who are in need. Aid needs to be more effective and better focused. Secondly, we also have to deal with non-repayable debt. In some cases, debts should be written off altogether; in other cases, we should consider the freezing or rescheduling of debt. Thirdly, we have to address free trade and protectionism. In this, we differ slightly from some of what the make poverty history and trade justice campaigns have said. They say that the problem that faces the third world is free trade, but we contend that the problem is exactly the opposite. It is a lack of free trade and a lack of access to markets for third world producers that is at the root of many of the problems. It is the protectionism of the countries in the west, not free trade, that helps to cause the problems of the countries in the third world. That means that we must work to reduce trade barriers and open up free and fair trade across the world. That will inevitably mean some uncomfortable decisions for politicians here. If we allow additional competition to home-based producers, there might be adverse effects on some of our industries. No doubt loud voices will speak out against that. It is ironic that some of the voices that shout the loudest in support of third world development are the first to complain when companies here talk about outsourcing jobs in Scotland to lower-paid economies elsewhere. We have to be consistent in our approach and accept that there might be pain for us if we take our responsibilities seriously. In that context, I believe that the attitude of the EU and the US in imposing a tariff on clothes from Sri Lanka and imposing new tariffs on goods from Thailand, even since the tsunami disaster, has been deplorable. EU officials have said that they want to shut down a flourishing trade in Phuket where traders are buying and selling coumarin from China. That substance is already the target of an EU export tariff. On 31 December, when Thailand was pleading for international aid and  had counted 4,400 dead, the EU published a judgment that all cumarin sent from Thailand would be treated as bootleg Chinese imports. That is precisely the sort of attitude that we have to change. Those of us living in Scotland often complain about our climate. Certainly there has been extraordinary weather during the past few days, but that is notable because it is so unusual. Our dark winter days and our wet weather are what we usually complain about, but we should be thankful that we do not live in a part of the world that is subject to the sort of natural disasters that we have seen in south-east Asia and that we live in a part of the world that is generally prosperous and peaceful. That provides all the more reason why we need to be mindful of our responsibilities to our fellow human beings who are less fortunate than ourselves. Let us applaud the generosity of our fellow men and women, who have given so much to the appeal, and let us ensure that we use the opportunity to build a better future for all those who now live in poverty.

I will address two specific issues before moving on to more general points. The first is council tax. Des McNulty was gracious enough to mention that local government's share of the budget has fallen since devolution. He would know, as he was involved in local government in a previous life. We know that council tax has increased substantially since 1997, perhaps by 50 per cent or a similar figure. It represents a major burden, especially on people with low incomes. For people such as pensioners, who have fixed incomes that do not increase annually, the increases in council tax are becoming severe. All members know that from their mailbags.

Of course, council tax continues to increase at a rate above inflation. Mr McNulty's point is that we started from a higher base. However, that is no consolation to pensioners if council tax continues to increase at a rate above inflation and they cannot afford to pay the bills. If the Executive wants to play Father Christmas, it should do something about the level of council tax. It has identified substantial efficiency savings from the budget—£700 million in three years. Why does it not use some of that money to reduce council tax bills and to give our pensioners a Christmas present? My second specific point relates to business rates, an issue that I have raised on many occasions in the chamber. We know that over the past three years the Executive has over-collected business rates. In 2002-03, it collected £140 million more from businesses than it expected when it set its budget. That figure would have been enough to restore the unified business rate between England and Scotland. Scottish businesses have suffered for far too long. Anyone in business would tell members that business rates are a severe burden. A few weeks ago, the minister made a statement on the setting of the rate. He announced proudly that the rate would not represent an additional burden and that he would engage with the business community if the rate continued to be a problem. However, just last week, the rate poundage for England was set. The result is that the gap between Scotland and England has widened once more. It had narrowed to 7 per cent, but it has now widened to around 9 per cent. That makes a mockery of the Executive's claim that it is pro-business and that growing the economy is its top priority. If it wants to play Father Christmas to the business community, it should do something about the widening gap between north and south of the border. This is the last full debate in the chamber in this calendar year, so it is appropriate that I reflect on broader issues. I will add to some of the points that my colleague Brian Monteith made. In her entertaining speech, Wendy Alexander referred to the spirit of this time of year—the Christmas spirit of giving. However, as we are all aware, this is also the pantomime season. I say that not to seek  to cast Mr McCabe and Mr Scott in the role of the ugly sisters, or Ms Alexander in the role of principal boy, or Mr Monteith in the role of Buttons, or Mr Raffan—who is sadly absent this morning—in the role of the owner of the flying carpet, but because this debate is a pantomime. It is a mockery of a real budget debate in a real Parliament with real financial powers. Apart from on the setting of the business rate and the extent to which the Executive has control over council tax, it makes no difference to the amount of money that is available to the Executive who the finance minister is. If the finance minister were Mr Mather or Mr Monteith, that would make no difference to the size of the budget. Ministers go around Scotland celebrating the distribution of largesse to the populace. Earlier this week, £27 million was made available to remove tolls from the Skye bridge. Yesterday, a scheme of concessionary fares for buses was announced. All that money is being spent, but the Executive is not responsible for the size of its budget. It is deciding merely how to divvy up the cake. There is no connection between the income and revenue base of the Parliament and the state of our economy. As Mr Monteith indicated, many people throughout Scotland have expressed concerns about the growing size of the public sector in Scotland, which now accounts for 54 per cent of the economy, and its brake effect on economic growth. However, there is no incentive for the Executive to do anything about that. Even complete economic collapse in Scotland would not stop the money rolling in—the Executive would still have the same budget to spend. That cannot be a healthy situation. Before I excite members from other parties or, indeed, my own, I make it clear that I am not making a plea for fiscal autonomy or even fiscal devolution or fiscal federalism. However, I am making a plea for a Parliament that is more responsible for the money that it spends and more accountable for how it spends it. I have an entirely open mind about the mechanisms for achieving that, but it is clear that we have a problem and must deal seriously with it. At this time of year, it is traditional to look back on what has gone before and to make resolutions for the future. I hope that we can all resolve to work for a more accountable, more responsible Parliament and for a new consensus to build a better Scotland. We will not do that with a pantomime Parliament with limited powers.

Later today, the Secretary of State for Defence Geoff Hoon will rise in the House of Commons to make a statement on the future of the Scottish regiments. If, as we expect, he announces that the King's Own Scottish Borderers and the Royal Scots will be merged into one battalion and the remaining four existing single-battalion infantry regiments in Scotland will be amalgamated into one super-regiment, that will constitute an act of political vandalism against the Scottish armed forces. I hope that the Parliament will support my motion and send a clear message to Geoff Hoon and his colleagues at Westminster that the Scottish Parliament will not tolerate such behaviour and that it will speak up for our regiments that have served this country and the British Army so well over so many years. My motion refers to the impact on Scotland of proposed defence cuts. This is not only about the army. The Ministry of Defence's command paper published in July, "Delivering Security in a Changing World: Future Capabilities", set out in general terms a number of areas that were heading for longer-term restructuring and re-equipping. The paper also outlined a series of cuts in services, including reductions in manpower: 7,500 for the Royal Air Force and 1,500 each in the Royal Navy and the Army. As members are aware, there has been a great deal of uncertainty about the future of Scottish bases and regiments. There was a particular question mark over RAF Kinloss and an announcement was made yesterday about the loss of a squadron based there. Other bases, such as HMS Gannet—the Navy's base in Prestwick, Ayrshire—could face the axe. There will be serious economic implications for Scotland. However, it is fair to say that the primary concern for many in Scotland surrounds the future  of our six infantry regiments. The proposal is that the Royal Scots and the King's Own Scottish Borderers be merged and that all five battalions then be amalgamated into a super-regiment of five battalions. That proposal has been vigorously opposed with an energetic campaign headed by the save the Scottish regiments group, backed up by support from across the political parties. The arguments in favour of retaining the existing six Scottish infantry regiments have been well rehearsed, not least during the members' business debate on the subject that I led in the chamber on 23 September. In the short debate this morning, I do not intend to repeat all those arguments, with which I am sure members are familiar. I will say, however, that there has been an attempt in some quarters to portray the proposal for amalgamation as a military one. Certainly, General Sir Michael Jackson, who has been pushing the plans, has no sense of regimental loyalty, coming, as he does, from a Parachute regiment background. However, we need to be absolutely clear that any decision that will be taken will be political and not military. It is up to the Army board, stuffed full of Ministry of Defence mandarins, to take the final decision. If Geoff Hoon, Alistair Darling, Gordon Brown or Tony Blair wanted to stop the plans going through, it would be entirely within their power to do so. There should be no attempt to pass the blame to the military. This is not just a Conservative issue, although I am proud of the role that my party has played at the forefront of the campaign to retain our regiments. I am pleased that I have had the support of colleagues from other parties. Indeed, during my members' business debate, politicians from across the chamber spoke with one voice in defence of our six infantry regiments. In that spirit, I am delighted to say that we can accept the amendments from the Scottish National Party and the Liberal Democrats this morning. However, I am both surprised and disappointed by the terms of the Labour amendment. I had hoped that we would have the support of Labour members this morning. I remind John Home Robertson that when he spoke in my members' business debate, he said: "I hope that my colleagues at Westminster will prevail against the military top brass, in this case General Jackson."—[ Official Report , 23 September; c 10640.] Similarly, Dr Elaine Murray MSP said: "I express my unequivocal support for the retention of the identity of the King's Own Scottish Borderers"—[ Official Report , 23 September; c 10648.] It seems that John Home Robertson has made a U-turn of his own. No doubt he will clarify shortly the reason for his Damascene conversion. I refer him to remarks that were made by a  spokeswoman for the First Minister, Jack McConnell MSP, and which were quoted in The Scotsman on 8 October: "The First Minister has always made his views clear ... he recognises the need to modernise the army, to meet the challenges of the 21st century. However he also thinks the identity of the six Scottish battalions is important, both to their local communities and to Scotland, and those identities should be protected within any new structure. He does not think that the suggestion to merge the Royal Scots with the KOSB serves that view." I hope that those words mean that Mr McConnell will support my motion and that his Labour colleagues should feel no compunction in so doing. We should be clear that retaining identity should not mean keeping cap badges as part of a super-regiment that will have one tartan and one regimental headquarters. We will settle for nothing less than the retention of six single-battalion Scottish regiments, and those who support our motion should be quite clear that that is what we mean. What makes this issue particularly poignant is the fact that the Black Watch has just returned this week from Iraq, having served with distinction. The regiment has lost five of its men, whose funerals we have seen conducted. What a betrayal it would be of the service of those fine men for their regiment to be amalgamated—in effect, out of existence—by the Government. The sight of Geoff Hoon in Iraq last week with the Black Watch was sickening. One moment he was patting the brave troops on the back, and the very next, he was prepared to stab them in the back with the proposed amalgamations. This Parliament can send a clear message today to Geoff Hoon and Tony Blair. We will defend our Scottish regiments; we will not have vandalism of our historic traditions; and we will not stomach a cut in our armed forces at this dangerous time. I move, That the Parliament notes the proposed cuts in manpower from the Royal Air Force, the Royal Navy and Army throughout the United Kingdom; further notes that this would mean the merger of the Royal Scots and the King's Own Scottish Borderers into one battalion and the amalgamation of all five battalions into a super regiment of five battalions and a reduction in jobs and operations at RAF Lossiemouth and Kinloss; believes that this will have an adverse economic impact on the areas affected by the cuts; further believes that the Scottish regiments are an important part of the tradition and heritage of Scotland; notes that the recent war in Iraq was the latest conflict which showed Scotland's regiments to be a modern, effective fighting force; believes that, in a time of increased commitments across the globe, our armed forces must have the necessary resources and structure to protect our country, deter aggression and safeguard our vital interests in the wider world, and, accordingly, condemns any cuts  and mergers and, in particular, believes that the six existing single battalion Scottish infantry regiments should be retained.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to develop children's services at Perth royal infirmary. (S2O-4440)

When listing the available services, the minister did not mention the fact that the 24-hour children's ward in Perth was cut this summer. That has caused some concern among my constituents in Perth and the surrounding area. For example, one parent contacted me with an horrendous tale about his teenage daughter who was taken to Perth in an emergency situation and had to wait for a paediatric nurse to be sent in a taxi from Ninewells hospital to provide treatment. Does the minister recognise that such arrangements pose dangers to youngsters in Perth? Will she take action to prevent the steady erosion of Perth royal infirmary's services?

There is a touch of hyperbole in Mr Raffan's comments. I did not say that things are infinitely better than they were under Saddam Hussein. However, let us be clear about the Liberal Democrat position. Do the Liberal Democrats believe that it is better in Iraq today than it was under Saddam Hussein or do they believe that it is worse?

I welcome this opportunity to debate Iraq, not least because we again have the chance to expose the nonsense that is being peddled by the Scottish Socialist Party and its fellow travellers. I am no supporter of Tony Blair or his Government, but we must be absolutely clear about one point. The people of Iraq are better off now than they were under the dictatorship of Saddam Hussein, who has an appalling record. He is awaiting trial, having been accused of, among other things, the Anfal campaign against the Kurds in the 1980s; gassing Kurds in Halabjah in 1988; the invasion of Kuwait in 1990; crushing Kurdish and Shia rebellions after the 1991 gulf war; killing political activists over a period of 30 years; massacring members of the Kurdish Barzani tribe in the 1980s; and killing religious leaders in 1974. He has a long history of murder, torture and oppression and is awaiting trial with the possibility of the hangman's noose in front of him. I can think of no better-deserving candidate for that in the modern history of mankind. Perhaps the Scottish Socialist Party would prefer Saddam Hussein to be still in power in Iraq.

I will let in Tommy Sheridan.

We will not take any lessons about supporting dictatorships from a party that parades its support for the dictator of Cuba, Fidel Castro, whose record on human rights abuses is as long as my arm. Mr Sheridan will be well aware that the great majority—95 per cent—of the arms that were sold to Saddam Hussein were sold by Russia and France. A small element of British armaments went to Saddam Hussein, but that was in our interests at the time, in the same way that our running the north Atlantic convoys to Stalin during the second world war and supporting that evil regime was in our interests at the time. We make no apologies for that. I do not for one minute underestimate the difficulties in Iraq today and the seriousness of the security situation, but there is the prospect of democratic elections in January and an on-going drive to create a stable peace for the benefit of all Iraq's citizens. The Iraqis now have one thing that they never had under Saddam Hussein: hope. They have been given hope for the future and we should not apologise for that. That is not to say that we should be uncritical of the Prime Minister's actions in the run-up to the declaration of war. I have no doubt that the Prime Minister misled the House of Commons and the British people about weapons of mass destruction. It is now clear that the situation was nothing like as clear-cut as it was presented by Tony Blair. The Government has a terrible reputation for spin and distortion of the truth, and the Prime Minister's conduct must be judged against that background. The Government can also rightly be criticised for its failure to set out a post-conflict strategy for Iraq with a humanitarian, economic and political impact. People in Britain will have the opportunity to make up their minds on all those issues in the near future, as we have the advantage of living in a democracy. That means that, in the coming general election, people will decide whether they want Tony Blair to remain as Prime Minister or whether they want to replace him. We have been trying to give the people in Iraq the same freedoms and opportunities that we have and we should not apologise for doing so, even though we might be uneasy about how we ended up in the current situation. Our amendment rightly refers to the involvement of British troops in Iraq. In particular, I pay tribute  to my local regiment, the Black Watch, which has now served twice with distinction in Iraq. The Black Watch made up the main part of the British contingent that was redeployed to the American military sector in Camp Dogwood, and the Americans there have paid tribute to the professionalism of the Black Watch. Of course, other British regiments, and not only the Black Watch, have served with distinction. Against that background and the background of increased military commitments by the Government, it makes no sense at all for the Government to consider cutting the size of our armed forces. I have argued that many times in the past and do so again today. For the Government to promote—as we believe that it is doing—the merger of the Scottish regiments into one super-regiment with the loss of one battalion is not only military madness, but a huge betrayal of those who have fought hard in Iraq and elsewhere on orders by the self-same politicians. We know that the Black Watch has suffered casualties and we have seen the funerals in Perth and Fife of those who died in Iraq. What a legacy for the families of those servicemen to know that the Labour Government's reward for the sacrifice of their sons is to merge the regiment out of existence. We should have no hesitation in saying that that is totally unacceptable. Notwithstanding what the SSP says, the people of Iraq are better off now than they were under Saddam Hussein. The professionalism of our British soldiers and our Scottish regiments deserves to be celebrated by the Parliament.

I want to return to the issue of non-domestic rates. It is noticeable that the competitive disadvantage of Scottish businesses relative to businesses in England and Wales—which was confirmed in the comparative study of business taxation that in-house Scottish Executive economists produced last year—remains in place. In his statement, the minister said that he would engage with the business community to consider the level of rates, depending on resource constraints. Given that, in the past four years, the revenue to the Executive from business rates has been £376 million more than anticipated, surely ample funds exist that could be returned to businesses, thus restoring the  level playing field that all business organisations want without impacting on the budget elsewhere.

Those are marvellous words from the minister, but why has it taken the Executive five years to get round to making such savings?

Would Alex Neil care to share with the chamber how much the privatised companies contribute in tax revenue to the Treasury compared with the subsidy that they used to receive from the Treasury when they were in public ownership?

We should start by congratulating the Executive on finally waking up to the fact that there are inefficiencies in the Scottish public sector; it is about time that it did so. Why has it taken it five years to get to this point? As my colleague Ted Brocklebank said, there has been a huge expansion in spending and staffing in the public sector over the past five years—and I do not mean in front-line services. The Executive's administration bill has increased by £50 million and it has an extra 1,057 staff. There are another 556 civil servants in quangos, on which an additional £137 million of funding has been spent. It would not be so bad if outputs in the public sector had increased, but that is patently not the case. Since 1999, recorded crime and the number of offences are up by 7 per cent. In the health service, the percentage of out-patients who are seen within nine weeks is down by 10 per cent; the number of people who are on a waiting list is up by 25 per cent; the percentage of in-patients who are seen within three months is down by 13.5 per cent; and the total number of hospital discharges is down by 9.9 per cent. I could go on. The number of workers in the public sector has increased by 8 per cent—by 50,000—whereas the number of workers in the private sector has increased by only 4 per cent, or half the public sector rate. That is a sorry tale and the Executive has nothing to be proud of. It is little wonder that Treasury officials in Whitehall last week talked about the Scottish Executive's toytown economics. If the Executive now admits—as it seems to—that we spend £745 million too much annually, what does that say about its spending in the past five years? In each of those years, we have spent that amount too much. In effect, an admission has been made of failure and inefficiency to date. The Executive admits that it has wasted more than £3.5 billion of Scottish taxpayers' money in five years. That should be a resignation issue for the minister. The situation is unacceptable. The Scottish Executive has missed the opportunity to use the money to reduce the public sector's size. The consensus is growing that the public sector is too large and is crowding out the private sector. Professor David Bell made that point to the Finance Committee on 2 November. Last night, a similar point was made at the Policy Institute debate that was led by Professor Sir Donald MacKay and Professor Donald MacRae, who are both eminent economists. The self-same point was made last week by Sir John Ward, who  was appointed Scottish Enterprise's chairman by the current Scottish Executive. Even the First Minister seems to accept the point. On 28 June, he said to the Fraser of Allander institute: "The size of Scotland's public sector, compared to the size of the private sector, is too big." We are all agreed. We have a consensus. Is it not marvellous? We can all sign up to it. However, when the opportunity arises to do something about the public sector's size, the Executive does absolutely nothing. Why is it missing the opportunity? Why does it not return some of the hard-earned money that it will save to our taxpayers? Why does it not use some of the money to cut business rates and council tax? Gordon Brown has announced that £1 billion will be used to reduce council tax bills in England. What is happening in Scotland to reduce council tax bills? Nothing. I know that we have devolution and that the Scottish Executive keeps saying that we do things differently in Scotland, but would it not be marvellous for Scottish council tax payers if the minister said that a little of the money would be used to reduce council tax bills? However, the Executive will not do that. What a shame and a disappointment for our council tax payers. I can go no further without commenting on the remarkable volte-face from the Scottish National Party, which now seems to favour—even if only half-heartedly—a council tax freeze. If the SNP wants lessons on cutting taxes, it has only to ask and we will be happy to assist.

Mr Monteith was commenting on the SNP's efficiency savings proposals, which is not the same matter. Only we have the commitment to reduce taxes, which is why we are the effective Opposition. The SNP offers no philosophical alternative to the Executive. It offers a change of passport, but not of policy. For all that I disagree with him, at least Mr Sheridan proposes with some conviction an alternative to the Executive's suggestion, as do we, but we are a real Opposition party and we do not reduce our opposition to proposing the amendment of one word in the Executive's motion.  The Executive admits that it has failed to make savings in the past five years and that it has wasted more than £3.5 billion of Scottish taxpayers' money. When it now seems to be saving money, it will give no relief to our businesses through their rates or to council tax payers. It is time for the Executive to start giving back some of the excess money, to tighten its belt and to reduce the public sector's size, which will boost the private sector and the Executive's oft-stated yet never-delivered-on top priority of growing Scotland's economy.

What about this side of the chamber?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will set a target for economic growth for Scotland. (S2O-4203)

I appreciate that there are other factors in play, but I cannot understand why it would not be possible to set a target relative to GDP growth in the rest of the UK. It is rather bizarre that, although the Executive seems to have targets for everything else under the sun, it refuses to set a target for what it calls its number 1 priority. Is it too cynical to suggest that the reason why it will not set a target is that it is afraid that it will not meet that target, which would expose the failures at the heart of the Executive's economic policy?

I am sorry that the member has difficulty in understanding simple concepts. The point of our amendment is that we welcome new jobs, but we do not want new jobs that simply replace other jobs. It is funny that the member does not understand that.

I was not entirely sure whether I was at the right debate when I was listening to Jim Mather. I thought that we were here to debate green jobs and not the future of the financial services sector, but never mind. The Scottish Conservatives welcome the opportunity to discuss opportunities for green jobs in Scotland. Indeed, there are many economic opportunities for Scottish businesses in green jobs in the future, some of which I will draw attention to shortly. However, I should say first that I was rather surprised that the minister's motion "encourages early publication of a finalised Green Jobs Strategy", because the minister has just told us that he is preparing that strategy. It is rather bizarre that a minister should lodge a motion in effect calling on himself to bring forward the green jobs strategy. Why does he not simply publish that strategy? What is the hold-up? Does he really require the Parliament to agree to the motion before publication? If so, that is most unlike the Executive's past record on such issues. One wonders what else the minister requires to ask the Parliament to ask him to do—perhaps whether he can have a haircut or buy a new suit. Perhaps he should explain his strange and uncharacteristic lack of self-motivation in the matter. He requires to ask the Parliament to ask him to take action. That is all very strange. As I stated at the outset, there are great opportunities throughout Scotland for green jobs. I was pleased to hear what the minister said about encouraging marine energy, as that is an important growth sector. Members will be well aware of the Conservative party's scepticism about large-scale onshore wind developments. Nevertheless, when the Enterprise and Culture Committee was conducting its inquiry into renewable energy, committee members—myself included—visited Campbeltown and the Vestas-Celtic Wind Technology Ltd factory, which manufactures components for wind turbines. It was interesting to discover from the management that they foresee offshore wind farms rather than onshore wind farms as the growth sector. I do not think that the Vestas jobs are at risk, even from our policy on onshore wind farms. It is important to note that, despite the fact that Campbeltown was an unemployment black spot and is in a remote area, jobs have been created there. I hope that that success continues and that those jobs are secure for the future. My colleague Alex Johnstone and I met BP representatives in Aberdeen last Friday. One of the issues that we discussed was future opportunities in the offshore oil industry. It is  widely understood that our oil reserves in the North sea are diminishing and that, although it is important not to overstate the case, we will see a gradual wind-down in activity in the North sea in the coming decades. As part of that, there will be a need to decommission the existing oil rigs and offshore structures. We heard from BP that there are, in fact, tremendous business opportunities in that. Although some derogations may be granted, the current default position is that all those offshore structures are to be removed. Dismantling those structures, transporting them to the mainland and breaking them up will be a huge operation. Although the scrap value will be considerable, it will not come close to outweighing the cost of decommissioning. Perhaps the fabrication yards that were involved in constructing those structures will have opportunities to win some of the business of dismantling and decommissioning them. We also heard from BP that there might be other opportunities for using the existing pipeline infrastructure under the North sea for carbon sequestration in the former oil reserves. That issue will be developed over the coming years and it is early days to talk about it, but it is an interesting possibility if we are discussing how to deal with CO 2 . I turn to our amendment—or, more technically, addendum—to the motion. One point must be borne in mind in the debate. We certainly do not see green jobs as morally superior in any way to jobs in traditional industries. Indeed, although economic development must be coupled with a responsible attitude to the environment, that must not lead to an excessive regulatory burden on business. As the Confederation of British Industry Scotland has pointed out, if the underlying cost base of Scottish firms is higher than that of competitors, they will be placed at an immediate disadvantage when they compete for new green business. When I intervened on the minister earlier, I raised the issue of green jobs in some cases displacing jobs in traditional industries. That point was well made in a report entitled "Effect of Recycling Paper into New Paper Products on the Economic Management of Forests", which has just been published by three University of Aberdeen academics—if the minister has not seen that report, I will lend him a copy. The report warns that state subsidies for recycling paper have made waste paper so cheap that forestry companies cannot compete, with the result that both the environment and the economic sustainability of Scotland's forestry industry are damaged. The wood that is used to make paper comes from the process of thinning—removing small trees in order to allow others to grow. Failure to do  that leads to forests becoming too densely wooded, which creates a poor habitat for animals and means that there is little chance for other plant species to grow. Accordingly, biodiversity is discouraged.

I am encouraged by Mr Gibson's expertise in the matter. I profess no expertise, which is why I am quoting from a report by three senior academics at the University of Aberdeen.

I would have thought that that was pretty obvious. I cannot imagine that Mr Gibson is an expert on every subject under the sun. Is he saying that we should disregard a report that learned academics have produced on a subject in which they are specialists? Is he saying that we should debate only issues on which we are experts? If that were the case, only Stewart Stevenson would be allowed to speak in any debate.

I am terribly sorry, but I did not hear what Sarah Boyack said.

Yes. Could she repeat that, please? I did not hear it at all.

I hear what the member says. I am not arguing against recycling paper per se; I am simply saying that we must be aware that, if we go down the road of recycling paper, the process will have side-effects on traditional industries.

The minister makes a fair point. I will pass on the report and he can study it and come up with a response. Learned academics who are involved in forestry are concerned about the impact of recycling on the industry. If we could create new markets for recycling, we would welcome that.

Presiding Officer, I profess no expertise in the matter.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I am obliged, although I am almost at the end of my speech. If recycling paper is damaging both our forestry industry and, in some cases, our environment, the benefits of the recycling industry must be questioned. The Scottish Executive must bear such issues in mind when it finalises its green jobs strategy. I look forward to reading the published document in due course. There are great opportunities for our country in the promotion of green jobs. The decline in the offshore oil industry and a greater emphasis on the environment mean that there must be new opportunities for the future. However, we have to protect our existing industries and ensure that the regulatory regime does not stifle many small businesses that are already struggling. I move amendment S2M-2049.2, to insert at end: "but urges the Executive to ensure that such green jobs are not created at the expense of jobs in other sectors of the Scottish economy."

What assurance can the minister give us that the jobs that are being created in recycling are not displacing jobs elsewhere in the economy?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is satisfied with the performance of NHS 24. (S2O-4078)

I thank the minister for that fulsome response. Despite that feedback, the minister should be aware of the widespread concern among my constituents about NHS 24's performance. In particular, there are concerns about the time that it can take to get a call-back response in a difficult medical situation. Those concerns were echoed by one A and E doctor at Ninewells hospital in Dundee, whom The Courier of 8 November quoted as saying: "things have changed and they have not changed for the better at the moment". Given that the demands on NHS 24 are bound to increase when general practitioner out-of-hours services are withdrawn in six weeks' time, can the minister assure us that NHS 24 will be able to cope?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is considering golden goodbye payments to encourage councillors to stand down at the next election. (S2O-4079)

Is the minister aware of the public anger at the suggestion that there will be pay-offs of up to £30,000 for retiring councillors? Is not the proposal a bribe of taxpayers' money for superannuated Labour councillors, to buy off their opposition to the introduction of the single transferable vote?

As my colleague Alex Johnstone said at the outset, we welcome part 1 of the bill, which would bring in a new regulatory regime, and part 3, which would give new powers to the coal authority to tackle coal-mine water pollution. However, we cannot support part 2 of the bill, which seeks to restrict competition and prohibit common carriage. As the minister said in his opening remarks, part 2 would reinforce the water monopoly that is held by Scottish Water. He used water quality as an excuse to justify the prohibition of common carriage, but there is not a shred of evidence that water quality is at risk from common carriage. As my colleague Brian Monteith said, the cryptosporidium scare a few years ago occurred in a public water supply in Scotland, not south of the  border. Therefore, there is not much to be learned in that context. Mr Purvis raised the issue of cherry picking customers, which Sarah Boyack raised. I remind him that exactly the same complaints were made when we proposed the privatisation of British Telecom and the power companies. All the voices of doom said that there would be cherry picking of customers and that costs would go up for the vulnerable and those living in remote areas. There is not a word of truth in that, as people must know by now. They were wrong then and they are wrong now. The fact is that privatisation delivers lower costs for every customer; that has been the experience in the past and it will be so again.

Mr Stevenson has not sat through the debate and has only just entered the chamber, but I will give way in the interests of debate.

I can tell the member that the real cost of telecom supply in my area is considerably lower than it was 20 years ago and that there is competition between suppliers. That is what delivers. Perhaps Mr Stevenson would like to confer with his colleagues on the front bench who, not so long ago, were pursuing a pro-enterprise agenda—but perhaps that has been abandoned under the party's new leadership.

No. I would like to move on and deal with some other points. Mr Finnie said that he is proud that water is in the public sector. Let us consider the record. Domestic customers in Scotland are paying more than their equivalents in England and Wales. Commercial customers are paying, in some cases, five to 10 times more than their equivalents in England and Wales. Other members have made the point that small businesses are paying greatly increased sums, and that includes charities, as Maureen Macmillan said. We have also had a much lower level of investment over the past 13 years, with £1 billion being invested in Scotland compared with £50 billion in England and Wales, and we have poorer water quality. Des McNulty said that it is all the Tories' fault for not privatising the water industry. We plead guilty. We should have privatised water when we had the opportunity and we would all be reaping the benefits now.  On funding, I remind Mr McNulty that, for most of the 18 years of Conservative Government, responsibility for funding water services rested with local authorities—the self-same local authorities that today complain about the funding allocation from the Executive, which is much tighter now than it was in the Conservative years. We do not need any crocodile tears from the likes of Mr McNulty on the issue.

That is exactly why the water industry should be in the private sector—to provide the investment that we have seen in England and Wales.

No, I need to move on. Development constraints have been raised by members of all parties and are the number 1 issue in relation to water services. Such constraints limit economic development and growth in Scotland, and organisations such as Homes for Scotland have made the case for the impact that development constraints have on the Scottish economy. They also have the potential for social impact. If there is an embargo on development in certain communities, it means that people cannot get on the housing ladder, house prices go up and young people are often forced to live in other communities or in sub-standard accommodation. Demands then start coming in for more affordable housing. If the development constraints and the embargo were lifted, we would probably not need so much subsidy for affordable housing, as house prices would be more realistic. Numerous communities throughout Scotland are affected in that way. Roseanna Cunningham referred to Alyth. I live in Alyth and I know all about the situation there. If I were being selfish, I would say that we should keep the embargo on house building there, as the price of my house would go up even more; however, being a generous-hearted soul, I want to see more house building, so that more people will have the chance to live there and to share the benefits of living in such an attractive  small town if they so wish. Nevertheless, developers cannot build there at the moment. To Roseanna Cunningham and her colleagues I say that, although we heard three speeches from Scottish National Party members, not once did we hear about the SNP alternative. We have proposed our alternative to the current situation. What is the SNP model for the water industry? There has not been a squeak. Once again, the Tories are the real Opposition, because we are the only ones with a real alternative. Perhaps Mr Lochhead will enlighten us when winds up. We cannot support the bill because it is a tremendous lost opportunity for Scotland. Clear benefits come from opening up competition and could come from moving water into the private sector. As I have said, there would be lower bills, better quality and higher investment. In particular, we must address the need to lift the development constraints that are crippling so much of our economy and society in Scotland. Because the bill fails to address those needs, it must be opposed.

What about John Swinburne?

Will the member give way?

If that indeed is his objective, why does the member not support legislation to require both smoking and non-smoking areas in licensed premises?

We have a smoking room in the Parliament.

The First Minister made it clear in his statement that he considers that issues of public health should take precedence over issues of personal liberty. Given that that is his stance, what other areas and aspects of human behaviour that are injurious to public health does he plan to legislate against?

The minister will be aware of widespread concerns in Perthshire about the proliferation of large-scale wind farm developments. Does he agree that more should be done to encourage the kind of small-scale developments that Robert Brown referred to in preference to the large-scale wind farms that are being built in rural Scotland with all the attendant impacts on the environment and landscape?

It is always a pleasure to follow Alex Neil. I will try to shatter the consensus that he has tried to establish. The Executive's motion talks about "the most comprehensive modernisation programme in Scottish schools for a generation". Quite apart from the hyperbole behind that statement, I welcome it, as it is a tacit admission that Scottish education has not been good enough over the past five years. It is right that there should be such an admission. As we have said before in the chamber, the comprehensive system fails too many people in our society. In fact, if we were setting out to devise an education system that was deliberately engineered to exclude the least well-off in society from educational opportunities, it would look pretty much like our current comprehensive system. We have heard about the choice between rural and urban schools. It should be remembered that Scotland is one of the most urbanised countries in western Europe and that most pupils in Scotland do quite well out of the comprehensive system—I accept that.

Not at the moment, but perhaps shortly. There is a section of society—and the people in it tend to be from less privileged backgrounds—that does not do well out of our current system. The people I am talking about tend to live in cities. Cities have a range of schools. There are good-quality schools, but, as Robert Brown said, some schools underperform. Access to good schooling in our cities tends to depend on people's means. It is all very well for the middle classes—they can buy their way out of state education by going independent, as around one in four parents in Edinburgh currently does, or they can buy their houses in the catchment area of good schools. We know that people do that. I heard what Elaine Murray said. She must be virtually the only house buyer in Edinburgh in the past 20 years who has not looked to see which catchment area the house that she was buying falls into. Any estate agent in Edinburgh or Glasgow will say that one of the first things that parents ask about when they come to look at houses is the catchment area that the house falls into. Of course, houses in the areas in question command a premium.

I had understood that Dr Murray lived in Edinburgh previously when she moved up from England.

Certainly, if someone is buying a house in one of our cities, they will look closely at the catchment area, as any estate agent will say. The minister might seek to defend that system, but it leaves people behind. That is why the Tory idea of extending choice is an opportunity for all those people who are excluded from the current system. It is all very well for the minister to take an I'm-all-right-Jack attitude, which is typical of the Labour benches. They think, "We're fine. We have our ministerial and MSP salaries. We can have the choice, but, sorry, you can't because you can't afford it. You can't afford to buy your way out. You can't afford to buy your houses in the catchment areas of good schools." That is deplorable.

It is clear that the minister was not listening because I said that the problem essentially relates to urban Scotland. The problem schools tend to be in urban Scotland. He is excluding people on the basis of their means and social background. The Executive should not champion such things. I want to move on to deal with specific proposals. I welcome very much the idea of extending vocational choices to education. The Conservatives have championed that in the past. A report from the Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning Department not so long ago concluded that the Executive's plans for stronger links between schools and colleges would be realised only through better management of the process to ensure that collaboration worked. Much more needs to be done, but we are moving in the right direction and that is welcome.  I welcome leadership training for head teachers. We should all congratulate Tom Hunter and be very glad that he has made the contribution that he has. However, giving leadership training to head teachers does not achieve much in itself. Head teachers need more powers and authority, especially over budgets and to deal with discipline issues. As the Association of Head Teachers in Scotland has said, we need more direct funding for schools and less interference from education directors. On the cash from Tom Hunter and Irvine Laidlaw, we should all be glad that there are philanthropic Scots who are prepared to put something back into the community. We should welcome not just their money, but their input. I welcome the fact that the Executive has a programme of encouraging education and entrepreneurship. When we have people who are entrepreneurs with experience as well as cash, we should be looking for their input into those courses and drawing on that. We should also have more specialist schools. If we can have specialist schools in sports, music and the arts, why can we not have specialist schools in modern languages, mathematics or science and engineering? If comprehensive schools specialising in music, the arts or sports can select pupils who have a particular aptitude in those subjects, why can we not extend that principle? What is so unique about those subjects that means that they can have specialist schools when other specialisations cannot? The Executive has taken faltering steps towards a better system. However, its failure to tackle some of the fundamental problems in the comprehensive school system is nothing to be proud of for an Executive that claims to be in favour of social inclusion.

Will the member give way?

When the member moved back to Scotland and was considering buying a house here, did she have an eye on the catchment areas of particular schools?

I commend Marilyn Livingstone for securing the debate on this important topic. I am starting to feel a bit concerned, because I have hardly disagreed with a word that anybody has said. As members will appreciate, that is an unusual position for me, but never mind. Robert Brown said in passing that he would not say too much about this building, but it is appropriate that an early members' business debate here is on construction. In my experience, people in the construction industry love and loathe the building in equal measure. They love it because, whatever one thinks of its aesthetics, it is a remarkable building. The quality of some of the work that has been put into it is evident for all to see. However, some loathe the building because the cost overruns were not a good advertisement for cost controls in Scottish construction. I dare say that we will get over that in time and that this building will become a monument to what is good about Scottish construction, once the costs have been forgotten. National construction week was about two weeks ago. It was one of the most successful yet, with more than 1,600 events taking place during the week throughout the UK. Thousands of young people had the opportunity to get involved and visit architectural practices and engineering consultancies as well as to try out traditional crafts such as painting and decorating, joinery, roofing, bricklaying and plastering. A number of events took place throughout Scotland, including some in my area. One such event took place in Rosyth on 11 October. It was an Army resettlement day, at which a presentation was given that outlined the career options in construction that were available  to men and women who were leaving the armed forces. Given the current uncertainty over the future of the Scottish regiments, some might say that there is something to be read into that, but that is a matter for debate on another occasion. Members have drawn attention to several key issues in the industry, and I would like to add a little to the points that have been made. First, there is the issue of the shortage of skills and labour. Sixty-nine per cent of existing vacancies are hard to fill, and there is no doubt that that causes difficulties for the industry. It is a particular problem for smaller businesses that employ 10 or fewer workers, which account for 96 per cent of the construction sector. There is a role for agencies to try to encourage more young people into construction. Some of us were present at a seminar that was given at lunch time by Careers Scotland, at which the question was raised of how we can encourage more young people into trades such as construction and engineering, as simply not enough people are going down that road at present. Agencies need to address that matter. Secondly, there is the question of continuity of work, which both Robert Brown and Alex Neil raised. We have a major issue with development constraints. There are numerous communities throughout Scotland where building projects could and should take place, both in house building and in commercial and economic development, but where they cannot take place because the water infrastructure is not there and Scottish Water is not making the necessary investment to allow construction to progress. That bottleneck could be dealt with if the political will existed. I urge the minister to take account of that when he responds to the debate. I refer briefly to construction licensing. There is a problem with rogue traders and firms that do not account properly for value added tax, national insurance and other statutory requirements. There is also a problem with rogue traders that rip off elderly people who live by themselves. However, we must be careful. There is a case for attracting new entrants to the building industry, and we should not build the barriers so high that we deter people who are genuinely trying to enter the industry, set up new enterprises and drive things forward. There are great opportunities for the Scottish construction industry. I hope that the minister is listening to the debate. With a few policy changes, the future will be even brighter.

To ask the Scottish Executive what the economic impact on Fife would be of Edinburgh introducing road tolls. (S2O-3749)

I will try to tease something out of the minister. Is he aware that many people who live in Fife commute in daily to make a valuable contribution to the Edinburgh economy and that for many of them public transport is not a suitable alternative? Does he consider it acceptable that under Edinburgh's proposals people who live in North Queensferry will have to pay a toll to enter the city while people who live in South Queensferry—who cause every bit as much congestion—will get off scot free? Will the minister make the strongest representation to the City of Edinburgh Council that that discrimination against Fifers is completely unacceptable?

I congratulate John Swinney on securing a debate on this very important subject and on the way in which he has managed to highlight the issue in the media over the past few days. My contribution will be relatively short: many of the points that I was going to make have already been well covered and I know that other members are keen to speak. A few weeks ago, with my colleague Margaret Mitchell, I had the pleasure of meeting the young carers group in Perth and Kinross. It was moving to hear the youngsters tell their individual stories about their caring roles. The young folk told us about looking after parents, grandparents and siblings who were disabled, had mental health problems or suffered from drug or alcohol addiction. Because of their caring roles, those young folk are missing out on school and—accordingly—on life opportunities. As Margaret Ewing said, because young carers have to continue in their caring role when they return home after their lessons have finished, they cannot engage in after-school activities such as sports or pursue  hobbies. They are unable to engage in normal social activities with their peer group and often have few friends of their own age. That means that their emotional development is adversely affected. The Perth and Kinross young carers project, which is run by the Princess Royal Trust for Carers, does a tremendous job in assisting those young people. The project offers a Duke of Edinburgh award scheme for youngsters, an 11-13 group with different activities and a homework club. Crucially, the activities encourage socialisation and help the young folk to deal with their problems of isolation. The project also runs a number of seasonal activities. A mapping exercise in the Perth and Kinross area revealed that that rural area could contain as many as 200 young carers. The number is huge and deeply worrying and the Perth and Kinross young carers project does not have the resources to deal with the present demand for its services. Although the young carers project in Perth is doing a wonderful job, it needs more resources to help it address this growing social problem. Throughout Scotland, the provision of services for young carers is at best patchy. I hope that today's debate will highlight the issues and help to push the needs of young carers up the political agenda. For too long, those young people have been hidden from public view.

I congratulate Helen Eadie on securing the debate on a subject that is dear to her heart. I was pleased to hear about her initiative of hosting the friends of Remploy event, which is a marvellous idea, and I look forward to hearing more about that in future. It is nice to have the Deputy Minister for  Enterprise and Lifelong Learning with us. He is earning his salary at the dispatch box this afternoon. As Helen Eadie explained, Remploy is the United Kingdom's leading supplier of employment opportunities for disabled people. In Scotland, it is leading the way in supporting disabled people in employment by employing them at one of its 10 sites in Scotland or supporting their employment in other organisations and at other venues. Remploy started with the noble and worthwhile aim of helping ex-servicemen who were disabled after injury in the second world war to gain useful employment, but it is still extremely important 60 years on. Remploy states that it is "working towards a society where equality of opportunity and the chance to live a full and independent life is available to all, regardless of any disability an individual may have." Remploy wants individuals to be able to get on with their lives without being held back by their disabilities and I am sure that we all fully support that objective. I agree with the essence of Helen Eadie's motion, which calls for the Scottish Executive to examine its procurement policies and decide whether it is worth while reserving contracts for supported employment organisations that work with Remploy and similar groups. Remploy is successful on the business front. Despite some continuing difficulties in UK manufacturing, its sales have grown by 4 per cent over the past year. Although Remploy is not involved in manufacturing alone, it is an important part of what the organisation does, and that growth is a tremendous achievement, especially because the figures for Scottish manufacturing that the Executive released today were not good. They showed that sales of Scottish-manufactured exports decreased by 8.2 per cent over the year to 2004 quarter 2. Against that background, the fact that Remploy is increasing its sales shows what a valuable organisation it is. Helen Eadie's interesting proposal that the Scottish Executive should examine its procurement policies bears further consideration. We need to weigh up various interests, such as those of Remploy's employees, of the company itself and of the taxpayer, because we have to have best value where public money is involved. It is important to note that Remploy's work is not only about winning contracts but about offering work that is worth while for disabled people. Most disabled people do not want to be seen as being given some sort of preferred status; they want to compete with others on a level playing field, which is important for their self-respect. However, if we find that current procurement requirements in the  Executive are hindering the employment of organisations such as Remploy and the people who work for them, that is uncompetitive and it is quite right that we should do what we can to assist. Helen Eadie pointed out that many of the procurement rules are now set by the EU. We could have another debate about EU directives and our influence over them, and it could go on for a very long time, but I am sure that we do not want to go down that road this evening. Helen is absolutely right to point out that aspect, however, and I am sure that, in its dealings with the EU and in its consideration of EU directives being implemented into Scots law, the Executive will bear that in mind. Remploy's training facilities and programmes are excellent, as Sandra White mentioned. I would be keen to hear the Executive's view of Remploy's work in providing training. We know that many of Scotland's colleges provide excellent courses and facilities for disabled users. I would be interested to hear about the collaboration between colleges and Remploy and I am keen to know what the Executive can do to encourage that. The Scottish Executive should examine its procurement policies with the interests of Remploy and similar companies taken into account. We should remember that decisions should be based on whatever is best for individuals. That is the philosophy of Remploy and I whole-heartedly endorse it.

Does Alasdair Morgan accept that although there is a number of relatively small-scale wind farm developments, we cannot judge what the impact will be on tourism of the new, much larger-scale wind farms that are likely to be constructed and which will have turbines that will be much higher than those that are currently planned?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I will try to keep to my time. I welcome the new Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning to his portfolio. I know that he takes a keen interest in energy matters, not least because of his constituency interest in the nuclear industry. I am sure that we look forward to debating the issues with him over the coming months. I join Mike Watson in thanking the clerks and the Scottish Parliament information centre for all their assistance in the preparation of the report. The report represents a substantial piece of work for the committee and took up some months in evidence taking and preparation. It is fair to say that all members of the committee came to the inquiry with varying degrees of knowledge about renewable energy. For my part, I had some knowledge of wind power, driven mainly by constituency concerns, but my knowledge of other aspects of renewable energy was very limited. I think that all members of the committee learned an awful lot during the inquiry. Given that we all came from different political perspectives and with different degrees of knowledge, it is remarkable that we were able to agree the report unanimously. That gives the report added weight. As the enterprise committee, we were keen to examine the economic opportunities for Scotland from renewables. We accept that some technologies are currently far from market and need to be incentivised. I believe that the conclusion of the report could be summarised in one sentence: we see great opportunities for renewable energy, but those opportunities will not be exploited given the current over-reliance on onshore wind energy. This afternoon I will concentrate on two points that arise from that conclusion. First, there is tremendous economic opportunity for Scotland to lead the way when it comes to developing new technologies, such as wave and tidal power, biomass and hydrogen cell technology. We know that construction jobs have been created in Scotland in relation to wind power—the committee visited the Vestas-Celtic Wind Technology Ltd plant in Campbeltown—but the fact is that the intellectual property is owned elsewhere, in particular in Denmark. Therefore, comparatively speaking, there is little economic benefit to us in pursuing wind power further. However, we can be world leaders in the new technologies.

Mr Lyon should listen carefully. I did not say that there was no economic benefit. When Mr Tom Pederson from Vestas-Celtic spoke at the cross-party group on the economy, I quizzed him on the issue and he said that he saw the growth industry for his factory coming from offshore wind farms. There is no question of Vestas-Celtic closing down as a result of our policy, about which I will say more shortly. The problem is that the renewable obligation certificate system creates a level playing field for different technologies and does not distinguish between them. As onshore wind is by far the cheapest technology to develop, an all-our-eggs-in-one-basket approach is being taken. We must increase the incentives to develop the new technologies, which means disincentivising onshore wind by comparison. The committee's recommendation is that the ROC regime has to be made more sophisticated to try to deal with that issue. I fully support that conclusion. The second key aspect that I will concentrate on is national planning guidance on the siting of onshore wind farms. Members will recall that I raised the issue in a members' business debate in November of last year. I said that there should be new national strategic guidance as local authorities throughout Scotland were complaining that they were unable to cope with the deluge of planning applications coming in throughout the country and that they felt that they were swimming in the dark to an extent. During that debate I was criticised by members from the coalition parties, including Alasdair Morrison, Nora Radcliffe and George Lyon, for questioning the planning regime. The then Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, Lewis Macdonald, said in responding to the debate that the "framework allows us to meet our aspirations and to maintain the high quality of the Scottish environment."— [ Official Report , 6 November 2003; c 3123.]  Time has moved on since then. The number of planning applications has multiplied and communities throughout rural Scotland feel that they are under siege from developers and are facing the prospect of 400ft-high wind turbines on our hillsides. It is interesting that all those who gave evidence to the Enterprise and Culture Committee's inquiry—whether they were objectors, representatives of local authorities, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities or power companies, or even developers—agreed that there is a lack of national, locational guidance. The committee  agreed unanimously that a national strategic framework for onshore wind farm applications is required. However, the Executive's response to the report says that it strongly believes that the existing guidelines continue "to provide a fair and robust method of assessing renewables projects, striking a fair balance between development and conservation needs". Given all the evidence that was presented to the committee and the committee's recommendation, the best thing that I can say about that response is that it is very disappointing. The Executive concedes that the guidance should be kept under review and says that it will publish its review in 2006. That is the equivalent of shutting the stable door once the horse has bolted, galloped over the horizon, found a nice field in which to make its home and died of old age. The current tranche of planning applications—more than 150 throughout Scotland—will have been determined by 2006. All the suitable sites are being snapped up now. We simply cannot afford to wait until 2006, which is why we must have a moratorium on planning applications for onshore wind farms until new strategic guidance is in place, with the important proviso that those applications must have generated a substantial body of objections. The current rush to develop onshore wind power will have a significant effect on our rural landscape and could have a seriously detrimental effect on our tourism industry. We cannot take a short-term view on such matters. A moratorium would give us an opportunity to pause and think and would allow time for new, national, strategic guidance to be published and for a national energy strategy to be considered, as the committee advocates. There would be no blanket ban on onshore wind, because the moratorium would apply only to applications in relation to which there was a substantial body of objections. That would be for local authorities to determine. Such a moratorium would offer a sensible compromise between competing interests in the field and I call on the Executive to give it consideration. I have gone over time, so I will close to let others participate in the debate.

Will the minister give way?

I press the minister on his point about wave energy. Will he tell us what projects are available, perhaps funded by the enterprise companies, to encourage entrepreneurs to perfect technology for wave energy? I ask that question specifically because a constituent who came to see me last week applied for SMART:Scotland funding for a wave energy project but was told that he could not have it because projects have to be demonstrably commercially and financially viable. Clearly, he cannot demonstrate that because it is an experimental project. Are other sources of funding available for people in that situation?

The minister will be aware that there is a higher level of sickness absence in the public sector, particularly in local authorities, than in private industry. Is he concerned by that? Will the Executive examine some of the reasons behind it, such as the work ethos among those who work in local authorities?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I am grateful to the member for giving way before he became carried away with hysteria. Will he explain why the document that was produced by Scottish Executive economists in October last year demonstrates that Scottish business taxation is 17 per cent higher than business taxation in England? Does he disagree with the findings of Scottish Executive economists?

Budget statements and budget debates in the Scottish Parliament are rather bizarre affairs. The minister comes along, announces his spending plans with great aplomb and proudly tells us how much he will do for the different sectors. However, with the exception of the business rate, which I will talk about, the minister has no control over the total size of his budget. All he does is divvy up the cake between the different spending departments. For all his pride in the sums that he has to spend, Mr Kerr can take no credit for the size of his budget. He is a bit like the small boy in the playground who runs around proudly telling his pals that he earns more pocket money than they do, because his parents reward him more generously. The amount of his pocket money has nothing to do with how good or bad a boy he has been; it is just the fact of the matter. It would make no difference if Mr Monteith or Mr Morgan were Minister for Finance and Public Services, rather than Mr Kerr.

I should have said that it would make no difference in terms of the amount of money that was available to spend. It is important to put all these trumpeted achievements in context. By 2008, the Scottish Government will, in terms of the amount of money that it has to spend per head of population, be the richest Government not only in Europe, but in the entire world—with one exception. That exception is, of course, the Vatican City, which has a population of 740, most of whom are clerical. I do not think that the Vatican City can be compared accurately with Scotland, not least because it does not have the same bills as we do for child care or pre-school education. If, by 2008, we have world-class expenditure on our services, will we have world-class outputs? Where is our world-class health service? Where is our world-class education? Where is our world-class transport? It is patently obvious to anybody who travels round Scotland that our outputs are nowhere near world class. The question for the minister and the Executive is: if so much money is going in, why is it not coming out at the other end? Why is it not delivering the world-class services that people would expect, given that we are very near the top of the expenditure league in Europe and, indeed, the world? As members know, I have raised the issue of business rates on several occasions previously, because it is the number 1 priority for people in business. As we all know, Scottish businesses are paying a rate that is 7 per cent higher than in the  rest of the United Kingdom. The minister said that the Executive would ask business for its views on the options for using business rates to incentivise company-driven growth and productivity. I ask the minister not to waste any time on that, because I can tell him what business people will say. They will say that they want a cut in business rates. Every representative organisation in the business community has been saying that for the past five years, ever since Mr Kerr's predecessor broke the uniform business rate. In an earlier intervention, my colleague Brian Monteith raised an important point. If one says that the UBR will be pegged to inflation, which inflation measure will be used? The retail prices index? The United Kingdom Government's preferred measure of inflation—the consumer prices index—is, in fact, much lower than the RPI. Therefore, if business rates go up with the RPI, businesses will be penalised yet further. We have heard previously from the minister that business rates work out the same north and south of the border because we have lower rateable values in Scotland. That claim is misleading for three reasons. First, as the minister is well aware, there is a move to equalise the basis of rateable value north and south of the border. That is an on-going process. Secondly, in a number of sectors, equalisation has already taken place—in fact, in a number of sectors, the basis of valuation in Scotland is already higher than it is down south. I will give two examples. In the hotel sector, medium-sized hotels are already rated more highly than their counterparts down south, so owners of those businesses are being penalised twice—first, with a higher rateable value and, secondly, with a higher rate poundage. For my second example, I am delighted to see that the minister is holding a glass of Strathmore water. Is he aware that water bore holes in Scotland are rated? Strathmore is paying business rates for the water that the minister is about to drink, whereas its equivalents down south are not rated. Ashbourne in Derbyshire pays nothing for its water supply. The minister is penalising Scottish business over and over again. The third way in which the minister is wrong is that his claim is disproved by his own study. The document "Comparative Study of Business Tax Revenue", which Scottish Executive economists published at the end of last year, assesses the level of business taxes as a percentage of gross domestic product. The study said that, as a percentage of GDP, business property taxation—that is, business rates—was 2.1 per cent in Scotland and 1.8 per cent in the UK as a whole. That demonstrates that business rates in Scotland are 17 per cent higher than they are in the rest of the UK and it disproves the minister's contention about business rates.  The minister will no doubt say that, if the study document is taken as whole, it shows that business taxation equalises across the UK. However, the flaw in that argument is that the document assesses business tax as a percentage of GDP. Because the public sector in Scotland is so much larger than that in the rest of the UK and because the private sector so much smaller, if business taxation is the same north and south of the border as a percentage of GDP, it will be higher for each and every business in Scotland. If the minister seeks to use that document to justify his business rates agenda, he is sadly mistaken. Let me say in closing that, for all the fine words of the Minister for Finance and Public Services, all he is doing is dividing up a cake. There is a woeful lack of delivery in public services and the minister has missed an opportunity to deal with business rates. If he is serious about growing the economy, he will have to listen to what business is saying and cut the rates.

On the arms plot, does the minister accept that the strength of the current single-battalion regimental system is that the regiment is treated as a family and that the families of those serving have strong social ties across the regiment? Does he also accept that the advantage of moving the regiment en masse is that the whole social network moves and people move with their friends? Does he further accept that, if we move to trickle posting, we will lose the social networks that make the regiments such powerful fighting units?

I thank members from all different parties who have signed the motion and have come to the chamber this evening to show their support for Scotland's regiments. I welcome to the gallery representatives from the save the Scottish regiments campaign and from the various regimental associations, some of whom have travelled long distances to be here today. That is appreciated. Members will be aware that General Jackson and the Ministry of Defence are proposing the loss of four infantry battalions from the British Army, which will involve the loss of one of the existing six Scottish battalions. The remaining five Scottish infantry regiments would then be merged into one or possibly two super-regiments, possibly with a Highland regiment and a Lowland regiment, or possibly one Scottish regiment. That proposal has led to a vigorous campaign of opposition throughout Scotland. I pay tribute to the regimental associations and to the save the Scottish regiments campaign for their energy and their vigour in highlighting the issue, and for their success in winning public opinion on to their side in defence of our historic regiments. I am sure that members will appreciate the fact that serving soldiers have effectively been gagged on the issue by the Ministry of Defence—they are unable to speak out. However, I believe that their views are well represented by the regimental  associations and by those who are here with us in the public galleries. I make no apology for speaking up in particular for the Black Watch, my local regiment, which recruits throughout most of the Mid Scotland and Fife region, which I represent. In so doing, I in no way wish to diminish the importance of the other five Scottish infantry regiments, and I would not wish the Black Watch to be preserved at the expense of any of the others. I am sure that other members who participate in the debate will speak up for their local regiments; I trust that they will forgive me for speaking up for my own. I pay tribute to the excellent campaign that is being run by local newspapers in my area, including The Courier and the Perthshire Advertiser . The newspapers have helped to galvanise public opinion in defence of the Black Watch, and they have been extremely effective in raising public awareness on the issue. Defence is, of course, a reserved matter. However, the Scottish regiments are important to the Scottish economy and to the culture of Scotland, with their military traditions and heritage. It is therefore only right that the Parliament should consider these issues. I believe that there are four principal reasons why the Ministry of Defence's proposals are wrong, and I am sure that members will wish to add to those reasons during the debate. The first reason is that, at a time of increased military commitments, it makes no sense whatever for us to reduce the size of our armed forces. Members will recall the options for change agenda of the 1990s, which resulted in the merger of the then Gordon Highlanders and the Queen's Own Highlanders. It is not my purpose to defend the options for change review, but I point out that it took place at a time when the Warsaw pact had collapsed, the iron curtain had come down and the cold war was over. It was felt that we were entitled to a peace dividend from those changes, with less reliance on our armed forces. The review took place against a background of increased use of high-technology weapons, pinpoint bombing from high altitude and so on, as we saw during the first gulf war in particular. Whatever one's view on options for change, I do not think that anybody could reasonably argue that the same conditions persist today. We live in a world that is as uncertain now as it has been at any point in my lifetime. The present Government has taken on an increased number of military commitments, including those in Afghanistan and Iraq. At the same time, the nature of our commitment has changed. Increasingly, we have to deal with counter-terrorist activities and peacekeeping roles. In such ventures, high-technology weapons are of no use whatever. We  require infantry—highly trained and on the ground. As we have seen in the course of the engagement of the Black Watch in Iraq and elsewhere, the British Army is second to none in such roles, and I have no hesitation in saying that Scottish regiments are the best part of the British Army. To seek to reduce the size of our infantry against that background appears to be absolute madness. The second reason is that, if we cut one of our regiments and merge the others, we will lose an important part of our military tradition and cultural heritage. The regimental system, which is a real strength of the British Army, allows geographical areas to be linked to individual battalions. Strong bonds exist between communities and the battalions from them and that undoubtedly helps recruiting, as different generations of the same family sometimes join their local regiment. In the continuing drive towards modernisation in all aspects of life, some people might think that traditions are unimportant. I believe passionately that traditions are vital, and that they are what bind communities together. The strength of the public response to the save the Scottish regiments campaign shows that the public, too, value those traditions. The Black Watch has existed since 1739, recruiting from Tayside and Fife. That connection with the local area ensures that the regiment is held in affection, even by those who have no direct military connections. The American and Canadian military forces, which would give their right arms to have the esprit de corps of the British infantry regiments, look on in disbelief as we consider ending our regimental tradition. It must be preserved. The third reason why we must defend our regiments is that, once the regimental link with particular areas has been broken, it will be much easier for the Ministry of Defence to make cutbacks in the future. I understand that, under one of the scenarios that are being proposed, the new Scottish super-regiment or super-regiments would have battalions identified with some of the existing regiments, so that we would have, for example, the Highland Regiment (First Battalion, the Black Watch). However, experience elsewhere shows that such attempts to preserve regimental identity simply do not stand the passage of time. Once the link between the regiment and its geographical recruiting area is broken, it is only a matter of time before the individual identity of the regiment is lost. The best example of that is what happened with the Royal Anglian Regiment, which was formed more than 30 years ago from local regiments in the east of England. It started off as seven battalions, each of which was identified with a particular area—Lincolnshire, Suffolk and so on— but once the local ties were severed, it became much easier for the Ministry of Defence mandarins to target the regiment for cutbacks. From seven battalions, the Royal Anglian Regiment now has merely two. I fear that that will be the fate of the Scottish regiments if we do not make a stand now. I do not wish to take up more time, because I know that many members wish to contribute to the debate and have their own points to make. I shall simply close on my fourth and final point, which I feel is the most compelling of all. As we gather here, Scottish soldiers are serving in Iraq, with the Black Watch back in Basra for the second time in a year. Soldiers are putting their lives at risk daily on the orders of politicians in this country. Both the Black Watch and the Royal Highland Fusiliers have already lost young men who have made the supreme sacrifice. It would be an act of the most supreme betrayal for politicians at home to decide to extinguish the very regiments whose men are risking their lives in defence of our interests. For all the reasons that I have set out, but particularly for that last reason, I believe that we must defend our historic Scottish regiments. The Scottish Executive should make urgent representations to the Ministry of Defence against those proposals, and the Scottish Parliament should say with one voice to Geoff Hoon and to General Jackson, "It's time to go home and think again."

To be fair to the Executive, following the recent disruption to the A85 and the A9, BEAR Scotland moved swiftly to repair the damage. However, the same cannot be said for local roads in the same area, which are local authorities' responsibility. Some of those roads remain unrepaired. Perth and Kinross Council has told me that even with the Bellwin formula, it will still incur a bill of £250,000 to repair those roads. Will the Executive consider providing additional assistance to local authorities to fill that gap and to ensure that those roads are repaired more rapidly?

It is personal debt.

rose—

Will the member give way?

I welcome the opportunity to speak for the Conservatives in today's debate on growing Scotland's economy. It is more than a year since the previous full Executive debate on the economy and, given that we are always told that the subject is the Executive's top priority, I am a little surprised that it has taken so long to get round to the debate. However, I am glad that we are having it at the start of the new term. During a lecture given in 1755, the great Scottish economist Adam Smith, who is buried just up the road in Canongate kirkyard, said: "Little else is requisite to carry a state to the highest degree of opulence from the lowest barbarism but peace, easy taxes, and a tolerable administration of justice: all the rest being brought about by the natural course of things." The Executive must learn some lessons from one of Scotland's greatest sons. It is noticeable that Adam Smith did not say that what was required was a central economic strategy running to 32 pages, with a supporting document of some 106 pages that is updated every few years, no doubt at great public expense. Sadly, we are a long way from the "highest degree of opulence" to which Adam Smith referred. Despite the fact that the Executive subtitled today's debate "Building on Progress", there has been precious little progress in the past five years on which to build—or so people in business in Scotland are forever telling us. On almost every conceivable level, we lag behind the rest of the UK. Economic growth was just 1.6 per cent in the year to quarter 1 of 2004, which trails the UK rate of 2.3 per cent. That is even with the Executive's recalibrated figures. New business VAT registrations are at 28 per 10,000 of the population, compared with 37 per 10,000 in the UK as a whole; 3.1 per cent of Scottish adults are trying to start their own business, compared with 4.1 per cent in the UK; and whereas 10.9 per cent of adults in the UK call themselves business owners or managers, the figure in Scotland is only 9.1 per cent.

The enterprise in education strategy is an element in turning round our performance, but the Executive could be doing  many more things, to which I will come in a moment. Another factor that has been referred to is population decline. We have a net loss of people aged 16 to 34 to the rest of the UK and the population is due to dip below 5 million by the end of the decade. It is clear that something is wrong and that we suffer from a competitive disadvantage. Much of the blame for the sorry state of affairs lies squarely with the Executive, whose policies have done little to help and much to hinder economic competitiveness. The findings of the IMD "World Competitiveness Yearbook" are absolutely crucial because, in the category of the extent to which Government policies are conducive to competitiveness, Scotland ranks 39 th out of 60, which puts us behind countries such as Estonia, Ireland and China—which we might expect—but also behind the Slovak Republic, Columbia and Jordan, which are hardly economic giants. Most worrying of all, the IMD report ranks Scotland some 10 places behind the rest of the UK in that category. That is illuminating because we have the same macroeconomic factors and the same corporate tax regime as the rest of the UK. Therefore, it can only be the Executive's policies that are leading to Scotland's comparatively poor position. We in the Scottish Conservatives have been saying that for years and it gives me no satisfaction to see our opinions confirmed by independent international observers.

If that report is not acceptable to Mr Macdonald, perhaps he will listen to the recent report from the University of Glasgow, which measures Scotland's economic performance against the Executive's strategic objectives. It says: "The overall picture which emerges is of a relatively low output, high emissions economy characterised by ... business sector underperformance". It goes on to say, politely: "much remains to be done to achieve the vision of A Smart, Successful Scotland ." To go back to the IMD report, I was interested to note that the SNP amendment says: "the case has now been made ... and internationally-proven in recent competitiveness indices for more powers for the Parliament". I read the IMD report and I saw nothing in it that argues for constitutional change. The report  argues for a change of policy and for the Executive to be more competitive, but that does not make a case for more powers to be granted to the Parliament.

I have visited many countries in the world and I have visited regions such as Catalonia and Bavaria, which have very successful economies without being independent countries. To say that somewhere can only have a successful economy if it is fully independent is absolute nonsense and it is not borne out by the factors used in the report. We need a change of policy, rather than a change of passport, which is what the SNP is offering.

I am sorry—I need to make some progress. I will perhaps give way in a moment if I have time. The Executive needs to start listening to the people who know best: the hard-working people of Scotland. They have made it clear that they want action. On the FEDS document, which is yet another glossy document bursting with rhetoric yet bereft of substance, the Scottish Chambers of Commerce remarked: "The good intentions in this document are somewhat undermined by other policies which have added to the regulatory burden and costs on business." The Executive's motion refers to the broad welcome for the FEDS update. For that, the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning deserves to win this week's Peter Peacock award for having the brightest brass neck in the Executive. The time has surely come to move beyond trite statements such as those made in the framework document. It is plainly absurd to call for economic growth "through greater competitiveness", as the document does, without taking action to reverse those policies that have made us uncompetitive. It demeans the Executive to talk about "the creation of new enterprise and a positive, risk-taking attitude to enterprise" when its policies actually hamper business growth. What is to be done? First, as the Institute of Directors, the Confederation of British Industry and the Scottish Chambers of Commerce have made clear, we need to start reducing the burdens on business. Business rates must at least be cut to the level that applies in England. If we speak to  anybody in the business community, the first thing that they say is that we need to cut the taxation rate to make businesses more competitive. That would reverse the inexcusable competitive disadvantage that is crippling Scottish business.

Surely the point is that, when we were in power, we had a level playing field with the rest of the United Kingdom. The Executive has created a system whereby we now have a competitive disadvantage compared with the rest of the UK. That applies not just to business rates, but to water charges. On the whole, water charges for business are substantially higher in Scotland than they are south of the border. We must move Scottish Water out of the public sector so that it can start being responsive to its customers and start reducing bills. Businesses cannot understand why it should be the role of the Executive, via Scottish Enterprise, to pick winners. Let us refocus Scottish Enterprise on providing skills, vocational training and business advice and use some of the savings from its budget to cut business rates and improve the transport infrastructure. There is much more that I could say about the size of the public sector, but I will close by saying that we can only guess what Adam Smith would have made of this new Parliament building of ours. I am sure that he would have been deeply ashamed of the way in which the first Scottish Government in 300 years and a so-called Liberal enterprise minister have done so little to promote economic growth. Surely it is time for the Executive to re-embrace the teachings of Adam Smith, which have been adopted the world over, yet have been shunned here in his homeland. It is time to concentrate not on glossy strategies but on the simple recipe that Adam Smith identified 250 years ago, which is still appropriate today: "peace, easy taxes, and a tolerable administration of justice." I move amendment S2M-1695.1, to leave out from first "welcomes" to end and insert: "notes the continuing underperformance of the Scottish economy relative to the United Kingdom as a whole, despite the economic strategies of the Scottish Executive over the last five years; further notes with concern that Scotland was ranked 36th out of 60 countries in IMD World Competitiveness Yearbook 2004 , some 14 places behind  the United Kingdom as a whole; recognises the broad consensus of the business community in response to the Executive's recently published framework for economic development in Scotland, that action rather than words is required from the Executive to grow the Scottish economy, and calls upon the Executive to take immediate steps to create a more business-friendly environment by reducing business rates and water charges and cutting red tape, thereby encouraging business development and boosting Scotland's economic competitiveness."

The most interesting aspect of the IMD report is the section on the extent to which Government policies are conducive to competitiveness. In that area, our rank is the lowest: we are down at number 39 out of 60. In fact, we are 10 points behind the rest of the UK. What Executive policies does the minister think are contributing to that lack of competitiveness in the Scottish economy?

In common with my colleague Ted Brocklebank, who opened the debate for the Conservative party, I welcome today's debate and the Finance Committee's report. It is perhaps apt that we debate relocation today, given that the Parliament itself has recently relocated to its new home. I hope that future job relocations will be somewhat more successful than ours and will take a little less time to put into effect. At the outset, let me say that the Conservatives are in favour of the principle of job dispersal. It is entirely right and fair that the whole of Scotland should benefit from public service jobs. Relocation can act as a catalyst for areas in which regeneration or development is not occurring. That is why our 2003 manifesto contained a commitment to job dispersal. However, I fear that the Executive fails to realise how important the issue is to the people whose jobs are being moved. It has failed in its duty to carry out job relocation in an open, sensible and sensitive manner. That point is made crystal clear in paragraph 89 of the committee report, which states: "the Committee believes that the full potential of relocation is not being realised, because of flaws in the Executive's existing approach." No one would disagree that that is a damning statement about the Executive's record. The report  goes on to say, in paragraph 90: "Given the serious objections expressed about the Scottish Natural Heritage decision, there is a perception that the current debate on relocation is crisis-led, rather than being strategic or about what is best for Scotland." The SNH saga, which several members have mentioned, perhaps summarises the problems that we face with job relocation. We must make decisions that make economic sense, that benefit all parts of Scotland and, most important, that take into account the role and function of the jobs being relocated and the people who will be affected thereby. In many ways, the impact on individuals is the key issue, as Rob Gibson mentioned. I can best illustrate it by recounting an anecdote about a recent conversation that I had with someone who worked for a large public sector body in Edinburgh—I will not say which—that was up for relocation. She told me, "Look, I have a senior role in the organisation. Given my background and training, if the job were to move far away, I could not find another job in Edinburgh in which I would fulfil the same function. But I cannot move. I am married and my husband is a partner in an Edinburgh legal firm. We have kids who are settled in school. We have family networks in the area. It is simply impossible for me to up sticks and move my family 150 miles. I could just about manage the relocation if it was to a place that was within commuting distance of Edinburgh, such as somewhere in the central belt, or the Borders, Perthshire, Tayside or Fife. However, I simply cannot cope with relocating 150 miles away." That human aspect is important not just because it affects those who work for the organisation, but because it means that organisations such as SNH—when, or if, it moves to Inverness—will lose all the people who are qualified to do those jobs. How will those people be replaced?

I accept the minister's point. I am not arguing against relocation, but I say that it must be done sensitively and in a way that takes account of the human factors. Of course, the public sector in Scotland has grown like Topsy over the past five years, and when we are setting up new agencies it is far easier to locate them outwith Edinburgh, because that does not involve relocating people, as happens with existing agencies.  Another point on which I want to dwell is the need for all parts of Scotland to benefit from job relocation. Both Perth and Kinross and Angus have a below-average share of public sector jobs. On top of that, no public sector jobs have been transferred from Edinburgh to either of those areas, although many other areas have benefited. I find it difficult to understand why Perth and Kinross has not benefited from any job dispersal, for example, given that it offers a mixture of beautiful rural countryside and the greater range of facilities that are available in the city of Perth. Furthermore, Perth and Kinross is close to the central belt as well as being on the doorstep to the Highlands. Surely it is a prime location for civil service jobs. Many of the difficulties associated with the SNH relocation would have been solved if the decision had been made to go to Perth—which was considered—rather than Inverness, for the simple reason that Perth is commutable from Edinburgh for the people with family and roots here, to whom I referred a moment ago. Perhaps Perth and Kinross has been unsuccessful because of an apparent lack of transparency in the Executive's policy. I have discussed that important issue with Perth and Kinross Council, and the committee's report touches on it. The Executive must be more open and transparent when it welcomes bids for jobs that are to be relocated. That is essential, so that when councils invest resources in making bids they are not wasting time, money and effort. Discussions that I have had with Perth and Kinross Council show me that time and resources are being invested in bids on the smallest amount of information. Essentially, the council is shooting in the dark. It believes that the information that the Executive makes available is insufficient and that councils cannot create a specific and better-tailored proposal for relocation of jobs. When making a bid, councils are wasting their time guessing. It is impossible for bids for relocation to be completed satisfactorily, as not all the criteria are known. I ask the minister to address that specific issue when winding up and to seek to improve the information that is available to councils and enterprise agencies, so that they can make proper bids that are more likely to be successful.

In my winding-up remarks for the Conservatives, I will address parts 1 and 2 of the bill; not much has been said about part 2. Part 1 has clearly been the controversial part of the bill. It has been said by my colleague Lord James Douglas-Hamilton and many others in the chamber that part 1 of the bill is unnecessary. There is no evidence that local councillors are not taking HMIE recommendations seriously. If they were not, there are existing powers in section 70 of the Education (Scotland) Act 1980 to help deal with such a situation. As we heard from the minister, those powers have been used only once since they were introduced. However, members do not have to take our word for it. Let us listen to the words of some Labour-controlled councils. In its evidence, South Lanarkshire Council said: "Since 1996 there have been no occasions where HMIE have advised that schools and the authority have failed to make satisfactory progress on all recommendations contained in their reports. In these circumstances the proposals set out within the consultation paper for new Ministerial powers would seem unnecessary." Perhaps Kenny Macintosh might want to listen to East Renfrewshire Council, which said: "there is to date no demonstrable evidence which would suggest that such intervention is necessary or indeed desirable". There we have it. The fact is that existing legislation is sufficient to deal with such matters. As Brian Adam said—and several other colleagues from across the chamber—the bill is simply a waste of parliamentary time. It is a classic example of the Executive wasting time on an irrelevant matter when there are so many other education matters that we have heard about, such as the problem with discipline in schools and the lack of parental choice that we could and should be dealing with.

That has not happened; it is not likely to happen; and if it did happen, the existing powers are almost certainly sufficient to deal with it. I will respond to Jamie Stone's philosophical point. I was concerned to hear that he has sleepless nights worrying about what is going to happen in such a situation. He clearly believes that ministers do not have enough powers. If we in this Parliament had unlimited parliamentary time and resources, we could pass bills to deal with every possible contingency under the sun. We might pass a bill to say what would happen in the event of Jamie Stone miraculously becoming a green elephant overnight, which I do not think is likely. When there are demands on parliamentary time and resources, it is right that Parliament should make choices about what we spend our time and resources on. This bill is simply not a priority.

No, I am sorry but I need to make some progress. It is not just a question of the bill being unnecessary. The bill might even be worse than that because it undermines local accountability. In its evidence, COSLA said that it "has consistently argued against the Executive taking an increasingly interventionist approach to local government and local government services ... COSLA's main concern is that the increasing taking of powers of intervention goes against the presumption of subsidiarity and establishes a trend towards centralisation". The bill is not just unnecessary; it is part of a centralising agenda. I move on to part 2 of the bill, which deals with independent schools. As well as providing choice for parents, independent schools make a valuable contribution to the Scottish economy. In Perth and Kinross, which falls within the Mid Scotland and Fife region, independent schools provide some 700 jobs and contribute some £13 million per annum. They are a major earner of foreign revenue. Times have not been easy for independent schools in recent years; as a result of rising cost pressures a number of schools have closed, including Rannoch School and Croftinloan School, and there have been mergers, such as that of Kilgraston School with Butterstone School. The Scottish Council of Independent Schools has no strong objections to the bill, but there is  concern that it might give rise to additional costs and a significant additional administrative burden. At a time when there is already concern about rising costs, any additional burdens must be resisted. The bill comes on top of the new cost of care commission inspections, about which a number of independent schools have contacted me. Here, as elsewhere in the economy, rising bureaucracy might be costing jobs. Ministers must take account of those factors in developing new laws and regulations. SCIS has recommended changes to the bill at stage 2; I hope that the minister will listen to what it says as the bill proceeds. I was pleased to hear in Mr Peacock's earlier comments that he is inclined to consider changes at stage 2 to accommodate some of those concerns. In conclusion, the best that can be said about the bill is that it is unnecessary. At worst it is centralising and will undermine local accountability. We should spend our time on more pressing matters.

Will the minister tell us how many times his existing powers under section 70 of the Education (Scotland) Act 1980 have been used?

I welcome the Deputy First Minister's statement and I am obliged to him for providing me with an advance copy. As he knows, we have been pressing for answers to the issues for some time  and we were told that we would get them in early summer. It does not feel like early summer today, but technically I think that it is. I welcome the Deputy First Minister's attempt to address the serious issues, which are, I accept, not of the Scottish Executive's making. However, I fear that the solution that is being proposed today might create more problems than it solves. I have four questions to put to the Deputy First Minister. First, the Executive proposes to subsidise the student loans that are provided to Scottish students who go to English universities to pay their fees. Does the Deputy First Minister accept that, in effect, Scottish taxpayers will subsidise English universities? Does he accept that Scottish universities will find it bizarre that money will go from the Scottish budget into the coffers of English universities even though the Scottish sector already faces disadvantage due to the additional income scheme that is being created for their competitor institutions south of the border, with all the implications that it has? Secondly, on the converse situation, as there will be a fixed fee in Scotland but variable fees south of the border, does the Deputy First Minister accept that in some cases Scottish universities might be more expensive than their English counterparts? Does he accept that there will therefore be a disincentive for English students to come to some Scottish institutions, perhaps those lower down the scale? Thirdly, English students who come to Scottish universities will, uniquely, have to pay higher fees than Scottish or EU students. Only the English students in a lecture room will pay the higher level of fees. What message does the Deputy First Minister think that that sends to students in England about Scotland as a place to study? Is not the message entirely at odds with the strategy, outlined in the fresh talent initiative, to encourage talented young people from outwith Scotland to study here and to stay on after they have graduated? Finally, is it not the case that the problems that the Executive is struggling with have been caused entirely by the UK Labour Government forcing through an unpopular policy without considering its likely impact on Scotland? Is it not the case that the only solution to the problem is to scrap top-up fees in England? That will be delivered only by the return of a Conservative Government.

Does the minister accept that there is concern in the university sector about some aspects of the draft Tertiary Education (Funding etc) (Scotland) Bill, which its representatives see as being centralising and taking more powers for ministers? Will the minister assure us that he recognises the autonomy of the universities, that he values their independence and that he will not seek to centralise more powers within his department?

To ask the First Minister what discussions the Scottish Executive has had with Her Majesty's Government in respect of the G8 summit at Gleneagles in 2005. (S2F-924)

I warmly thank the First Minister for his response. I am pleased that he is joining local representative organisations such as the council, the local chamber of commerce and the  local tourist board in welcoming the summit to Gleneagles, with its potential spin-off benefits for the local economy. I am sure that he is looking forward to welcoming world leaders to Gleneagles, including, of course, our Prime Minister, Michael Howard. However, the First Minister should be aware that there are local concerns about the disruption that will be caused by the summit and the additional pressure that will be put on infrastructure in the area. The Executive has just published its report on the A9 junctions that serve communities such as Blackford and Auchterarder, which sets out a case for upgrading some of those junctions. In light of the summit and the extra traffic, will he examine the junctions report closely with a view to the early implementation of some of its recommendations so that we minimise local disruption and the risk of traffic accidents caused by extra congestion on the roads at the time of the summit?

I declare an interest in that, despite my racking cough today, I am not a smoker and I do not like being in smoky environments. When I go into a restaurant or pub, I go to the no-smoking section. If no such facility is available in the establishment and if I am bothered by the smoke, I simply go elsewhere. I am perfectly happy with that situation. It is called having a choice. Unlike some members in the chamber—for whom the word "choice" is an expletive—I think that choice is a wonderful thing.

I will in a moment, but let me develop this point. Choice is a wonderful thing and it must be protected. That is why I oppose utterly a ban on smoking in public places. What constitutes a public place is another important issue that I must address. Contrary to what many members believe, pubs and restaurants are not public places but private places. They are owned by people who, at their discretion, allow customers entry to their premises. A restaurant or a bar is no more public than somebody's house, so let us put that myth to bed right away.

I will give way in a second. The owner of a pub or restaurant should have the right to choose their own smoking policy without interference from the state—many do so already. Figures related to the 2003 Scottish voluntary charter on smoking in public places show that three in five businesses already make provision for non-smokers. Indeed, many businesses have banned smoking altogether. As has been mentioned, the Pizza Hut chain has banned smoking and the Federation of Small Businesses in Scotland, representatives of which I met this morning, says that many of its members are considering extending provision for non-smokers and no-smoking areas. McKirdy's Steak House in Edinburgh is experimenting with a smoking ban. I am very happy with that situation, but others who like to have a cigarette with their fillet steak will be unhappy. McKirdy's might lose a few customers, but it will probably pick up some new ones. That is  called having a market. That nice concept, which was developed by Adam Smith many years ago, has provided untold benefits throughout the centuries and around the world and I am happy to champion it.

Mr Stevenson wants to start a very interesting intellectual debate, but I would need to get my head round the idea that he has mentioned. I would rather deal with why he wants to remove people's choice whether to smoke. I have never had problems finding a pub or restaurant that meets my needs as a non-smoker. If I had a problem, there would doubtless be others like me who would create a demand that would be met in due course. That is how the market operates. In his opening remarks, the minister highlighted how the Phoenix bar had been a great success because it had banned smoking. We do not need a law banning smoking in order to make a success of pubs that have non-smoking areas. I hope that we will see many more non-smoking pubs throughout the country as a result of the success to which the minister referred. We do not need legislation. The reality is that the proposed ban on smoking is just another excuse for the politically correct people in Parliament to boss around ordinary people and tell them how they must live their lives.

I will give way in a second. I have some sympathy for one thing that John Reid said. We are not natural bedfellows, but I agree that there are too many people in this country who seek to tell others how to live their lives. He is right: those who disapprove of fox hunting want to ban it for everyone; those who disapprove of parents smacking their children want to make criminals out of those parents who do so; and those who are concerned with obesity want to ban or tax fatty foods. The nanny state is alive and well. I am sure that it is only a matter of time before the Executive appoints a smoking tsar to go with the tsars that we already have for children,  transport, discipline, culture, racism in football, equality, food and even berries.

I have no problem with the minister consulting people; I am more interested in what he will do with the consultation. We cannot legislate by referendum because we would then have capital punishment and birching for antisocial hooligans. I suggest that that is not something that the minister is about to propose. We in Parliament should speak up for individual responsibility. I do not smoke and I do not like sitting next to smokers, but that should not give me any more right to ban smoking than I have to ban "Big Brother" from our television screens because I regard it as puerile and morally degrading entertainment. If ever there were a time that we should remember what it took and what it means to be free, it is now. In the week in which we have been celebrating the 60 th anniversary of D-day, what would Winston Churchill, that great champion of freedom, have made of a ban on smoking? I do not think that he would have had much time for it. In a week in which we have seen the death of that other great champion of freedom, former President Ronald Reagan, let us remember that freedom is hard fought for, hard earned and hard kept. I value the freedom that the people of this country enjoy, but I wonder why so many other people in the chamber are so desperate to give it up.

Does Stewart Maxwell accept that there are already restaurant chains, such as Pizza Hut and others, that have introduced a voluntary ban on smoking? Is not that the way to go? Why do we not let the market decide whether we should have smoking and non-smoking places, so that people have a real choice?

Will the member give way?

As the minister and others have acknowledged, the question of civil partnerships for same-sex couples is one of the most controversial issues that Parliament has debated. I appreciate that there are strong opinions on all sides about whether such partnerships are the right way forward; I have severe reservations about whether the introduction of civil partnerships exclusively for same-sex couples is the right way in which to approach the problem.  I have listened with great interest to the debate and to the comments that have been made, and I have no doubt that there are areas of genuine social concern relating to cohabiting same-sex couples. Issues such as the law of succession, inheritance tax law and the lack of hospital visiting rights are often cited. I have a great deal of sympathy for people who are affected by those issues. Some social conservatives—in this instance, the word conservative has a small "c"—believe that the law should be used like a dam to hold back changes to society, but I do not share that view. We must accept that society changes, albeit that there will always be some people who are uncomfortable with the way in which that happens. When society changes it is important that the law reflect those changes in order to avoid the development of anomalies. My view is, therefore, that matters such as the rules of succession, inheritance tax rules or rules on hospital visiting rights not allowing for same-sex cohabiting couples should be addressed by changes in the law. That is not to say that I accept the principle—at least as currently proposed—of civil partnerships. It seems to me that the current proposal will, in effect, create a shadow of marriage that is exclusively for same-sex couples. However, other family relationships face the same problems as same-sex couples. What about cohabiting heterosexual couples for whom marriage is not an option? What about people who are in loving non-sexual family relationships that are characterised by interdependent support, such as unmarried siblings who share the same house and elderly parent who lives with a single caring child?

I am sorry, but I do not have time. Should not people in such circumstances be given the protection of the law and the same rights as are currently being proposed for cohabiting same-sex couples? The Civil Partnership Bill is therefore a missed opportunity at best and for that reason, I do not think that it deserves our support. What we are discussing today is a Sewel motion that both endorses the principle of civil partnerships and seeks to pass to Westminster responsibility for the legislation. It is a sad day when the Scottish Parliament is not considered to be mature enough properly to discuss such issues and legislation on it in so far as it is devolved. It looks as though the Scottish Executive is running scared of public opinion on the issue, which is deeply regrettable. Surely Parliament is capable of debating the issues maturely and  responsibly and of avoiding the calls on the one hand of sin and darkness and, on the other hand, of bigotry and homophobia. That Parliament seems to be unable to do that must be a matter of regret for us all.

Will Mr Ruskell enlighten us as to where in Perth and Kinross he would be prepared to support wind farm development?

Especially not Mary.

As an expatriate Highlander, I always welcome the opportunity to debate the economy of the Highlands and Islands. As members have said, the Scottish Highlands and Islands is one of the most sparsely populated areas of Europe: it has a distinctive economy with unique challenges and needs. For centuries, the story of the Highlands and Islands economy was one of decline. Traditional industries such as farming, forestry and fishing have seen a continual downward pressure on income and a loss of jobs. As we know, the population declined as young people in particular left to seek better employment opportunities elsewhere. As much of the Highland economy is dependent on tourism, for many of those who remained in the Highlands and Islands, jobs were often low paid, seasonal and insecure. Of course, the turnaround in the Highland economy since 1990 happened largely under a Conservative Government. Perhaps the most important factor in that turnaround was the substantial transport infrastructure investment that that Government made. As Jim Wallace acknowledged, transport infrastructure is a key element in economic growth. Large-scale improvements to the A9 opened up the Inverness area in particular to the central belt. The Kessock bridge was constructed, creating a new economic area to the north and west of Inverness and reducing considerably the journey times from the north and north-west to the south.

I appreciate that throughout Scotland there were many heavily subsidised industries during the 1980s that were no longer able to compete in the marketplace. As the minister acknowledged, the economy has turned around. Does Maureen Macmillan not agree with what the minister said about the economic success of the Highlands and Islands? That is the message that we have heard this morning from the coalition front bench. The Skye bridge was constructed under a private finance scheme, which ensured that it was built long before it would have been had it been paid for under traditional methods. There is no doubt that the tremendous economic expansion that has taken place in Skye, to which the minister  referred, is a direct result of the construction of the bridge. I could go on. I could list the Dornoch bridge, the Kylesku bridge and all the many transport improvements that the Conservative Government funded. The contrast to that long list is the story of the past seven years. How many new bridges have been constructed in that time? Where is the list of roads that have been made into dual carriageways in that time? I am struggling to think of one—what a contrast to our record in government.

I will, of course, have to disagree about the method of funding. I want to make it absolutely clear that the people of Skye are far better off with the bridge—even a toll bridge—than they would have been if they had continued to have to rely on the ferry. As the minister acknowledged, there is no doubt that the economic success of Skye is a result of the bridge.

I am interested to hear the minister's list of achievements in the islands. What about the economy of the mainland Highlands, however? What about the important road links? After all, most businesses depend on roads to get their goods to market.

I am sorry, but I need to make progress. The Highland economy was assisted not only in relation to transport infrastructure. The Conservatives also created Highlands and Islands Enterprise, which, despite its faults, is a considerable improvement on its predecessor, the Highlands and Islands Development Board.

I am sorry, but I will make some progress if I may. Highlands and Islands Enterprise's decentralised structure is particularly suited to the diverse and geographically scattered Highland population. The Conservatives also made an  historic investment in the Gaelic language; that investment assisted in the regeneration of Gaelic, which benefited not only the Highlands but Scotland as a whole. Moreover, the Conservatives established the UHI Millennium Institute to provide university-level education in the Highlands and to help to reduce the number of young people who had to leave the area at 17 or 18. The result of all those initiatives was that the economic decline of the Highlands and Islands was reversed. In turn, as we have heard, the historic population decline was also reversed. Indeed, between 1991 and 2001 the population of the Highlands and Islands actually grew. That was a huge turnaround on the historic position. Not everything in the garden is rosy. Serious challenges continue to face the economy of the Highlands and Islands. Many of the Executive's initiatives have had, at best, a minimal effect in helping the situation. For example, although the Executive's land reform legislation, which was intended to rejuvenate rural communities, has undoubtedly resulted in changes in ownership in some remote and island areas, it is highly questionable whether it has had any long-term impact on economic growth. Indeed, many would argue that it deters investors from elsewhere in the United Kingdom and overseas from putting money into Highland properties.

I have no wish to denigrate the success of Gigha. I am happy to see the encouragement of entrepreneurial spirit wherever it happens. All that I would say is that, if the people of any community in Scotland were given the equivalent of £40,000 each, I am sure that that would make a substantial difference to their economic outlook. Let us take the example of the island of Eigg. Again, I do not wish to denigrate what has been achieved in such communities, but the jobs that have been created on Eigg are, almost without exclusion, funded by the public sector—they are funded by grants, either from Highland Council and HIE or from other public bodies. The serious question is whether that is a proper use of public money and why we are not properly encouraging private sector entrepreneurship. The fishing industry, which is still hugely important in the Highlands, particularly in the  north-west, continues to suffer from our membership of the common fisheries policy. Moreover, farming has had a number of years of difficulty; although incomes are now improving, the outlook cannot be said to be secure. The development of renewable energy, about which we heard from the minister, offers opportunities, but it is absolutely vital that the Highlands and Islands does not become one giant wind farm to provide power for the rest of Scotland. It would be far better, both from an economic point of view and in the interests of our vital tourist sector, to look at new technologies such as wave and tidal power, which the Highlands and Islands have in abundance. That is where the Executive could be putting its energies. Of course, the problem with the current regime of renewables obligation certificates is that it does not distinguish between technologies. That means that all the investment is going into onshore wind production, because that is the cheapest system.

The minister's problem is that the current regime of renewables obligation certificates incentivises the development of wind power, because wind power is far cheaper for power companies to develop than any of the new technologies. Rather than blanketing the Highlands with wind turbines, which is what the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning seems to want to do, we have to examine that regime and ensure that the market delivers new offshore technologies.

I am sorry, but I need to make progress.

Above all, we need to remember that economic growth is the product not of Government action, but of the activities of people in the business community. If we are serious about the growth of the Highlands and Islands economy, we have to ensure that businesses there at least compete on a level playing field with the rest of the United Kingdom. It is worth remembering that, to a far greater extent than in the rest of Scotland, the economy in the Highlands and Islands is built on small firms.  As elsewhere in Scotland, businesses in the Highlands and Islands face higher business rates than those down south—a factor that regularly tops the list of concerns in surveys of business people. They also suffer from the impact of excessive regulation, because quangos such as the Scottish Environment Protection Agency and Scottish Water stand in the way of economic progress to an extent that does not happen south of the border. Businesses need to be able to move goods to market, which is where transport infrastructure becomes vital. The major strategic link between the central belt of Scotland and the north is the A9. On numerous occasions in the chamber I have raised the need for the upgrading of the A9 between Inverness and Perth. Not only does the road have a high accident rate, but it is the economic lifeline of much of the Highlands and Islands. Inverness has held the title of Europe's fastest-growing city and traffic on the A9 is now as much as five times what it was when the dualling programme began in the 1970s.

In a second. In the long term, our objective must be to dual the A9 in its entirety between Inverness and Perth. In the meantime, safety improvements need to be considered urgently. Nothing will do more to hamper the economic growth of the Highlands than if the Executive drags its feet on that. In light of that, I was dismayed to read the First Minister's comments recently in an interview with The Press and Journal , to the effect that he did not consider the upgrading of the A9 to be a priority. Although I accept that roads such as the A96 and the A82 are also in need of improvement, there can be no doubt that the A9 is the major strategic link between the central belt and the north of Scotland. The First Minister's comments show just how out of touch he is with what is happening on the ground in Scotland.

I am sure that if the First Minister listened to what people in Inverness were saying he would hear the clear message that, although improvements to the A96 and A82 would be welcome, the major link between Inverness and the Highlands and the south is the A9. That is the road that most people use and it is the one that needs to be upgraded.

Mr McGrigor will be winding up the debate, when George Lyon will have the opportunity to address the question to him. The one other point that I want to touch on, to which the minister referred, is the UHI millennium project. People in the college sector are somewhat depressed at how little progress has been made in the past seven years. It would be interesting to hear from the minister when he winds up what plans there are to ensure that the project progresses, so that UHI is granted full university status. It was an exciting project when it was first launched, but that was more than 10 years ago. It seems to be dragging along at a snail's pace. It would be interesting to hear what the Executive intends to do to encourage it along. The economy of the Highlands and Islands has come an awful long way. Investments made by the Conservative Government, especially in transport infrastructure, laid the groundwork for much of the success that we have seen, but much more needs to be done. The Executive needs to start ensuring that businesses throughout Scotland, not just in the Highlands and Islands, compete on a level playing field with those in the rest of the United Kingdom. Moreover, it must tackle the remaining transport infrastructure problems, which most of all means committing to the upgrading of the A9. I move amendment S2M-1395.1, to leave out from "congratulates" to end and insert: "acknowledges that the long-term economic decline of the Highlands and Islands was reversed under the last Conservative government; believes that strong businesses are essential in bringing about further economic growth in the Highlands and Islands; notes with concern that businesses in the Highlands and Islands continue to be hampered by high business rates, excessive regulation and poor transport infrastructure; recognises, particularly, the need for improvement of the A9 as the major strategic link between the central belt and the north, and calls on the Scottish Executive to improve the business environment in the Highlands and Islands by lowering business rates, cutting regulation and investing in transport infrastructure improvements."

Is the member aware that there are concerns about EMAs, not just among people in my party but among many people in the teaching unions, who fear that the allowances will create two tiers of students in classrooms and in further education colleges?

I welcome this morning's opportunity to debate the  importance of skills and learning to the Scottish economy. The Executive's motion is correct to identify "the vital contribution that skills and learning make in helping to stimulate sustainable economic growth and to close the opportunity gap". If we are to have a successful economy, we need a properly trained work force. An important element in that is the modern apprenticeship scheme, which, as the motion says, has been a tremendous success. As I am sure the minister will wish to acknowledge, that scheme was established by a Conservative Government, back in 1994. Notwithstanding the progress that has been made, we still have skills shortages and skills gaps in particular areas. The survey of employers that was carried out by Futureskills Scotland in November 2003 contains some immensely useful information on the views of Scotland's wealth creators. According to the survey, one in four workplaces reported a skills gap. Skills gaps affect 187,000 employers in Scotland, or 9 per cent of the entire work force. Worryingly, just under half of workplaces that were recruiting school leavers thought that they were well prepared for work in terms of their core skills. The good news is that that figure rises to 74 per cent for FE colleges and to 82 per cent for university leavers. Of particular concern to employers is the lack of soft skills, to which Fiona Hyslop referred in her speech. By soft skills, the survey meant planning, problem solving, customer handling and team working. All too often, employers find that school leavers are ill equipped with those soft skills. Certainly, most of the employers to whom I speak in my role as my party's enterprise spokesman are looking for school leavers to have basic skills such as the ability to read, write, count, turn up on time in the morning and communicate with customers and other employees in more than just a series of grunts. We also need to remember that 20 per cent of the Scottish work force has no qualifications at all. That is a major gap that needs to be filled if we are meet our economic potential. If we are to improve the situation—as we must—the role of the further education colleges in Scotland must be central, and I was pleased to hear the minister refer to that in his remarks. I had the pleasure of sharing a platform with speakers from the Association of Scottish Colleges and the Federation of Small Businesses at the Scottish Conservative conference in Dundee last weekend—and a highly successful fringe meeting it was too. There is no doubt that the 46 further education colleges in Scotland, which deliver education, training and skills to more than 500,000 people every year, are the essential component in delivering skills. The good news is that enrolments  to colleges are on the way up and we are seeing increasingly large numbers of enrolments from women, the over-25s and those accessing courses part time. Our colleges are responsive to the economy's needs: they help to fill the skills gap by providing courses in areas such as engineering and construction, in which we know that there is demand for jobs. One anecdote comes to mind: we always hear that it is impossible for anyone who lives in a Scottish city to get a plumber, but such has been the publicity about plumbers allegedly earning £50,000 a year that all the plumbing courses are oversubscribed. The market works in response to such situations. I know from visiting colleges in my region that the standard of education that they provide is high. I was delighted to see last week that Lauder College in Dunfermline was the subject of a superb report from Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education, and I pay tribute to the staff and students whose work helped to achieve that. I have also visited Glenrothes College—which is shortly to merge with Fife College of Further and Higher Education—and Perth College, which provides a huge variety of courses and is an academic partner of the UHI Millennium Institute. Perth College has a number of interesting initiatives. It has an air training centre, and students from all over the world, including a large number of students from the middle east, come to Perth to learn civil aviation, which makes an important contribution to the local economy. I have also been to Angus College in Arbroath. Each of those colleges is a local college, serving its local community and providing an ever-higher standard of access to further and vocational education. At the moment, it is Scottish Enterprise's responsibility to deliver skills and training. In the past, I have suggested that responsibility should be passed directly to the FE sector, which in practice delivers most of the courses. That would surely cut out a tier of bureaucracy and cost and would allow more resources to be allocated to front-line services. I put that point to the First Minister at First Minister's question time on 20 November last year. He replied: "That is not a ridiculous suggestion and I am sure it deserves debate."— [ Official Report , 20 November 2003; c 3476 .]  I put the same question to Lewis Macdonald at question time on 25 March this year. He replied: "I am surprised to hear Murdo Fraser suggest that. We include the enterprise networks in the design and management of apprenticeships precisely because of their understanding of the industrial sectors for which we are training people. All of us who believe that business should influence the training of apprentices, and that such training should meet the needs of the real economy, want to see a continued link between the enterprise networks, the private  sector and further education colleges in the delivery of apprenticeship training."— [ Official Report , 25 March 2004; c 7119 .]  All of us believe that, except, it seems, the First Minister, so perhaps the minister would like to clarify what exactly the Executive's policy on the matter is.

I am grateful to the minister for trying to dig himself out of that hole, because the answer is perfectly simple. FE colleges are already extremely responsive to the needs of the businesses in their communities, as I am sure the minister recognises. The point is that, because they deliver the service at the coalface, they should be responsible for it. Do we need to involve the enterprise networks in taking such strategic decisions and managing the budget?

That is an interesting debating point from Robert Brown, but I am not convinced that the local enterprise networks are more in tune with the needs of local business than the further education colleges are. However, I am delighted that we are having a debate on the matter, which is what the First Minister said we should have. No doubt we can develop the point further in future. I was pleased to hear from the minister that the Executive will accept the Conservative amendment. Members will be aware that, in the past, we have spoken up for our Conservative policy of allowing 14 and 15-year-olds greater access to vocational training at further education colleges. A number of such schemes operate already, including one at Angus College, which I have seen in operation. It appears to have been a great success, so the Conservatives would like such opportunities to be increased. That would create a win-win situation, because we have far too many youngsters at school who are disengaged from academic subjects. As we know, we have a high truancy rate and high levels of disruption in the classroom—indeed, I believe that the National Association of Schoolmasters Union  of Women Teachers is launching a new campaign about indiscipline in schools today. I am not suggesting for a minute that greater access to vocational education is the solution to all problems of indiscipline, nor am I suggesting that we should dump all pupils who cause problems in FE colleges, but the simple fact of the matter is that we have pupils who are not interested in academic subjects but who would engage with a more vocational type of learning. Why not give such pupils the opportunity to access more vocational training at FE colleges? That has been tried in a number of pilot schemes, in which pupils are on day release. When I visited Angus College, I saw that the pilot scheme was successful: those pupils who engaged with it had a much higher attendance rate, and their attendance rate at school improved considerably—

I will in a second.

My apologies.

I doubt it. The school attendance rate of pupils in the scheme improved considerably because of the reward of going to college daily. Our proposal would benefit those in school who want to engage in academic subjects and would benefit the youngsters who accessed the vocational training, because it would keep them engaged with education and ensure that they left formal education at 16 not without qualifications, as so many of them do at present, but with a first step on the ladder towards employment. It would also, of course, be good for the economy. I am pleased to hear that the Executive supports the proposal, and I hope that it will roll out such programmes and develop them further. I welcome the Executive's motion. We require an educated and skilful work force if the Scottish economy is to grow, and that growth will be enhanced if increasing numbers of 14 and 15-year-olds are able to develop vocational skills within the FE sector. I move amendment S2M-1340.2, to insert after "gap,": "urges the Scottish Executive to increase the opportunity for school pupils across Scotland to access courses in further education colleges from the age of 14,".

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive is satisfied with the growth of the Scottish economy. (S2F-857)

Even the Executive's recalibrated growth figures, which came out last week, show that Scotland's growth continues to lag behind that of the UK as a whole. Given that we have now had five years of the Executive's economic policies and five years of consistent economic underperformance, what policy changes will the First Minister introduce to turn round that serial underperformance?

I congratulate Dennis Canavan on securing this debate on an important subject that is of interest to his constituents. I say to Carolyn Leckie that I was smiling at her proposal that the company be taken into public ownership. I admire her idealism. Her solutions, however, are quite unrealistic. Carolyn Leckie's way has been tried in this country and in other countries, and in every case it has failed.

I am sure that I do not need to give Mr Neil a list of the nationalised industries that went under or that survived only because they were subsidised with billions of pounds of taxpayers' money. I do not think that he or his colleagues behind him would wish us to go down that road. Let us return to TransBus International, because it is an important subject. Dennis Canavan was right to highlight the history of decline and the serious concern over the circumstances that led to the TransBus situation. There was a share warning at the end of February and the value of Mayflower on the stock exchange plummeted by 80 per cent. It announced an accountancy error on 29 March, which saw its share price fall by another third, and shortly thereafter it went into administration. I echo Dennis Canavan's call for a proper inquiry into what has happened. He is absolutely right. It is a matter for the Department of Trade and Industry to investigate, not the Scottish Executive. The slightly more encouraging news is that the administrators are looking for a buyer. As Alex Neil said, the prospects might be encouraging,  because TransBus was a successful company. We keep our fingers crossed that there is good news for the remaining 800 employees. I will make two points. The first of which is on the wider context of the Scottish economy. We have seen a serious decline in manufacturing in recent years. Since 1997 we have had 71,000 job losses in the manufacturing sector in Scotland. The latest growth figures, which came out yesterday, show that although the Scottish economy is growing—only just, but it is growing—manufacturing continues to suffer. The sector has serious problems. The Executive is fond of talking about growing the Scottish economy, but we need a turnaround in manufacturing if there is to be a reversal of the trend of recent announcements about the manufacturing sector. As Alex Neil pointed out, it is particularly galling that even though there is a background of difficulties in the manufacturing sector, TransBus was successful and had a good future until it was brought down by corporate governance failures. We should do what we can to save the remaining manufacturing companies in Scotland. The events at TransBus do not affect only the employees; they have a knock-on effect on suppliers and other companies and individuals throughout Scotland. I received a letter from a constituent in Fife, from which I will quote. She writes: "my main point is the state I find myself in today, on the verge of petitioning to become bankrupt through no fault of my own ... I became one of the innocent victims of that collapse as my cleaning company was left with a debt of £138,000 with no hope of seeing one penny of this ... As a sole trader, who has worked honestly and hard, it is a very bitter pill to know that exceptional circumstances are not recognised in the eyes of the Inland Revenue or Customs and Excise ... I will carry the stigma of insolvency, aware that at the ripe old age of 56 years, it will be extremely difficult to climb the credit ratings once again. Is it right? I say NOT!" My constituent's company is going under as a knock-on effect of the events at TransBus. If a company goes into receivership, the Inland Revenue and HM Customs and Excise are preferred creditors, which means that they get first call on the company's assets. However, the Inland Revenue and HM Customs and Excise still chase suppliers for the money that they owe, despite the fact that the suppliers lose their income because the Government bodies have first call on any assets of the company that is in receivership. That seems to be grossly unfair. I appreciate that that is a matter for Westminster, but the concern needs to be highlighted for the benefit of our constituents. What has happened at Mayflower affects not only people in Falkirk and Larbert, but people throughout Scotland. I am grateful to Dennis  Canavan for giving us the opportunity to raise these important issues.

It is important that I reiterate at the outset what my colleagues Phil Gallie and Jamie McGrigor said during the debate about what precisely we see as being wrong with the new EU constitution. The SNP is right to identify the problem with fishing, but that is only one of a number of issues that require to be addressed. First, we object to the very principle of an EU constitution. When free and sovereign nation states deal with one another, they enter into bilateral or multilateral international treaties: they do not enter into constitutions. A constitution is in the nature of the nation state itself; the principle of having a European Union constitution is therefore wrong. The detail of the constitution indicates that EU law will have primacy—

No, not at the moment. The constitution indicates that EU law will have primacy over domestic law and that, for the first time, the EU will have a single legal personality and will determine the rights of citizens on their arrest.

I will in a second. For the first time there will be a near-permanent EU president and an EU foreign minister determining foreign policy. Shared competences will be extended, for example on energy policy, under article 13.2.

No. Sit down, Mr Raffan.  All those measures are wrong, but only we are prepared to say so. If there is any doubt as to where British interests stand, let us consider the ICM poll of company chief executives. Only 18 per cent of the chief executives said that the EU constitution would be good for their businesses, while 59 per cent said that it would be bad. That is a clear message from businesses. I listened closely to what Nicola Sturgeon said—it was reiterated by Linda Fabiani—and I put to her directly the question whether fishing is the only red-line issue for the SNP. The answer was clear—yes, fishing is the SNP's only red-line issue. Therefore, the very principle of having an EU constitution has been surrendered; the primacy of EU law has been surrendered; citizens' rights on arrest have been surrendered; the creation of an EU president and an EU foreign minister has been surrendered; shared competences have been surrendered; and our energy policy has been surrendered. That is the message from the SNP. As my colleague Alex Johnstone said, I cannot imagine that it will go down well in the north-east of Scotland that the SNP is selling out the energy industry to Europe by giving up our interests. I do not often agree with Mr Sheridan, but he is absolutely right: the SNP represents a sell-out of our national interest.

That goes nowhere near far enough for my party. If Mr Crawford's party is satisfied with that, it is very disappointing.

I am obliged to Mr Sheridan for that helpful contribution. I will deal with a couple of points that have been raised. Mr Kerr and his colleagues on the Labour benches made the point—we have heard them make it before—that to campaign for a no vote would mean that we wanted to pull out of the EU. That is absolute nonsense. When the Danes voted against the euro, were they being anti-Europe? When the Irish voted against the Treaty of Nice,  were they being anti-Europe? No, they were not. We can vote against the constitution and still be in favour of involvement in the EU: that is a perfectly legitimate position. The SNP has been running around this week saying that Labour needs its help to win the vote in the referendum. What arrogant self-delusion the SNP shows, believing that it alone can sway Scottish opinion. How foolish it is for Labour to go down the road of pretending that there is any legitimacy to the SNP's position, saying "Mr Kerr objects, but what about Mr Straw's conversations with Mr Salmond?" Labour is being sucked in.

No, thank you. Mr Raffan was right on this point: the SNP vote is in decline and the party is shedding MSPs like leaves off a tree in a November gale. Poor Mr Martin is sitting in splendid isolation across the aisle from his colleagues—Campbell Martin should not worry; they will soon be coming to join him, one by one. That is the SNP that Labour seems so keen to sign up. I hope that Labour has learned its lesson. Let us be clear about the myth that people in Scotland are pro the proposed EU constitution. The ICM poll said that 71 per cent of Scots are against the constitution and only 18 per cent are in favour of it, in comparison with a UK figure of only 68 per cent against. The Scots are even more anti the constitution than people in the rest of the UK. That gives the lie to the myth that somehow the Scots are more signed up to the euro project than people in the rest of the UK. The SNP is betraying Scottish interests. It is out of touch with public opinion and it is swimming against the tide. It wants exclusive competence on fishing to be removed from the EU, but it will swallow everything else hook, line and sinker. The SNP is not to be trusted; only the Conservatives can be trusted.

Will Nicola Sturgeon give way?

I have listened with great interest to all that Nicola Sturgeon has had to say about fishing, and I absolutely agree with her principle of calling for the repatriation of control over fishing. She will know that we have supported that for years. However, what other issues around the draft constitution concern the SNP? Is everything else about it acceptable, or are there  other red-line issues, about which we have heard nothing from Nicola Sturgeon?

We will tell you.

I welcome the opportunity to debate the Executive's policy on renewable energy and to highlight its current policy failures. We also have the opportunity to expose the gaping black hole at the heart of Executive policy, which is the lack of any forward energy strategy. We have heard a lot from the Executive about its targets for renewable energy—18 per cent by 2010 and 40 per cent by 2020. However, the Executive must be aware of growing scepticism about the achievability of those targets. Some weeks ago, the former Labour energy minister, Brian Wilson MP, questioned whether the targets were achievable. In the briefing for today's debate, Unison, the trade union that is most involved in the energy industry, says that it does not believe that the 40 per cent target is achievable. The United Kingdom's leading engineer, Sir Alec Broers, who is the president of the Royal Academy of Engineering, has said that the UK targets are unrealistic. Notwithstanding the public scepticism, the Executive seems hell bent on rushing ahead with its current strategy. However, that strategy is not, sadly, a renewables strategy at all. All it seems to be about is building wind farms right across rural Scotland. In the Deputy First Minister's speech, there was hardly a mention of wind energy, yet he must be aware of the widespread public concern  about the development of wind farms. My colleague Ted Brocklebank tells me of a plan in north-east Fife to build on Clatto hill 17 wind turbines, each of them, at 93m, approximately the height of the statue of Liberty. We know that there is a great deal of concern across the country. Last week, a group of 11 Perthshire ladies made a unique protest against what they regarded as over-scale wind farm developments in their area. They performed "The Full Monty" strip for the cameras. Now, it takes some courage to take one's clothes off in Perthshire in April and I think that that shows the strength of feeling on this issue.

We are always glad to hear from the Deputy First Minister about the new technologies but I am surprised that he did not address what seems to be at the core of the Executive's current strategy, which is to develop onshore wind power. My criticism is not exclusively of the Executive. I listened with great interest to Roseanna Cunningham. It is extraordinary that the SNP is calling for an increase in targets that others are saying are likely to be unachievable. All that increasing targets will do is to increase pressure for more wind farms in rural areas. I cannot believe that Roseanna Cunningham's constituents in rural Perthshire will welcome the prospect of yet more wind farm applications. The Executive is trying to meet its targets exclusively from onshore wind, and is using its planning policies to stamp on local opinion.

In a second. The deputy minister, who will be responding to the debate, is fond of quoting surveys at me that show that the public are generally in favour of wind power. I have no doubt that, if I were to walk down a residential street in Morningside and knock on the doors, I would find almost unanimous support for wind power. However, if I were to propose building a wind farm on the top of Arthur's seat or the Braid hills, I could guarantee that that public opinion would shift overnight. It is all very easy for Labour members, in the main representing urban constituencies, to support the building of wind farms in rural Scotland—they do not have to  answer to their constituents for that. May I suggest that, before those Labour members become too enthusiastic about wind turbines, they speak to people living in rural communities?

If that means that the member will join me in opposing large-scale rural wind farm developments, I am delighted to hear it.

The member is shaking her head. Sadly for the Executive, its single-minded approach to developing onshore wind is already looking out of date. The tide is starting to turn against onshore wind development. Last month's report from the Royal Academy of Engineering was extremely sceptical about the benefits of wind power, making the case that wind generation is two and a half times more expensive than conventional generation. It is more expensive than nuclear energy, even if the cost of decommissioning is included. Tonight, the David Hume Institute is launching Professor David Simpson's paper, which is another contribution to the debate. It, too, argues that nuclear power is half the price of wind power and it maintains that the drive to establish onshore wind represents a stealth tax. I know that there are economic benefits from wind generation and I would not rule it out completely. I have seen the jobs that have been created at Campbeltown and elsewhere. The sad fact is, however, that all the focus on onshore wind is leading to neglect of other renewables technologies. Like other members, I would like a greater focus on hydro power, on tide and wave power and on biomass. There are opportunities to develop those technologies if we tweak systems such as the renewables obligation certificates. Even if the Executive meets its ambitious targets, there is now serious doubt about whether its programme is achievable without blanketing the entire countryside in wind turbines. We still have a black hole at the heart of the Executive's policy. Every existing conventional power station in Scotland is coming towards the end of its natural life. We should be planning now for the next generation of non-renewable power generation. That means power from gas, coal and nuclear. It is not often that I agree with Unison, but in its  briefing for the debate it made the excellent point that the Scottish Executive should be adopting a balanced energy strategy, which includes a mix of generating capacity. That would include a larger element of renewables, when proven capacity can be delivered, together with gas, coal and nuclear power. Unison is absolutely right. The Executive's current strategy is seriously flawed. Unless it is prepared to consider the issues that I have highlighted, the lights will be going out across Scotland because of the lack of energy production. It is time for the Executive to work with the Westminster Government to produce a proper and sensible energy strategy for our future. I move amendment S2M-1185.2, to leave out from "endorses" to end and insert: "notes the increasing scepticism about the achievability of the Scottish Executive's targets for renewable energy from a number of sources, including former Energy Minister Brian Wilson MP and UNISON; further notes the publication of reports from the Royal Academy of Engineers and Professor David Simpson of the David Hume Institute on the costs of wind power generation as against other generation methods; regrets the current rush to develop onshore wind capacity to the exclusion of other technologies such as hydro, wave, tidal and biomass, and calls on the Scottish Executive and Her Majesty's Government to work together to develop an energy strategy for Scotland which will include a mix of generating capacity, with components from renewables, gas, coal and nuclear power."

The Deputy First Minister will be aware that the Portuguese Government has stimulated the market for wave technology by means of tariff subsidy. Is the Scottish Executive prepared to consider a similar scheme to bring such new initiatives to the marketplace here?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to improve rail services between Perth, Fife and Edinburgh. (S2O-2012)

The minister will be aware of the importance of good transport links with the capital for economic development in those areas. He is probably also aware that there is deep dissatisfaction among people in Fife about the level of service between Fife and Edinburgh. It is equally unacceptable to people in Perth that it can sometimes take two hours to get from Perth to Edinburgh. In the context of the renewal of the ScotRail franchise, will the minister outline what discussions he has had with the relevant authorities about driving up the service that is available to people in Perth and Fife?

As my colleague Phil Gallie said when he opened the debate for the Conservative party, we welcome the expansion eastwards of the European Union and the potential benefits that it will bring. The opportunity is there for higher economic growth; we will have a new single market of 500 million citizens; we will see increased stability and security in the eastern part of Europe; we hope to level up economic conditions throughout Europe; and we hope to ease the pressure of economic migration.  We hope that the new countries that will come into Europe will be prepared to stand with us and seek reform of EU institutions, many of which are sadly in need of reform. As my colleague Jamie McGrigor said, we are dealing mainly with countries that were, not so long ago, under the jackboot of communist dictatorship. Having so recently thrown that off and experienced freedom and democracy, I do not think that they will move quickly to fall under the imposition of European institutions. They will want to retain their independence, integrity and freedom to act. I envisage opportunities for the UK because we will have alliances. I listened with great interest to Margo MacDonald speaking to her amendment. Much of what she said was interesting and many of her points were well made—I agreed with some, but not all, of them. I do not want to be ungracious, but it seemed to me that the opening of her speech was more about kicking her erstwhile colleagues in the SNP than about making positive points. However, she made a number of important points highlighting the fact that enlargement is not just about opportunities for Scotland and that there are threats too. She was right to comment on the potential loss of jobs to countries such as Poland. At the same time, we should not forget that we are losing jobs to Bangalore and Mumbai in India. Jobs will move not just within Europe but right across the globe. My hope is that by bringing other countries into our economic sphere, we will increase salaries and wealth in those countries, and that will benefit us. If we can break down some of the restrictive trade practices of which the EU is so fond and which penalise people in the third world, we can help people in Bangalore to increase their salaries and so remove the threat of jobs migrating away from us.

That is indeed a point to be addressed. It is important for us not to have a closed-shop Europe but to seek to build free trade across the globe—that is the way in which we will drive up standards in places such as Bangalore. I will pick up on a few other points that were made. I listened with great interest to Nicola Sturgeon's contribution about the Scottish National Party positioning itself as possibly for and possibly against the new EU constitution. It is interesting  that the SNP remains firmly in favour of the euro; I am surprised that it takes that view, which is out of tune with the Scottish people. If I were to offer some friendly advice to the Scottish National Party, I would say that it should be more Eurosceptic. When I meet SNP voters, I find that they are among the most Eurosceptic people I could meet, yet their party seeks to promote a policy of so-called independence in Europe. I offer that advice to the Scottish nationalists with great confidence that they will not accept it, which delights me. If we had joined the euro as the SNP, and indeed other parties, proposed at the time of its launch, it would have been a disaster for our economy, given the growth rates in the euro zone during the past four or five years. I need to move on to deal with other points. Mike Watson and several others mentioned the referendum on the EU constitution. Strictly speaking, that is not a topic for the debate, but several members mentioned it. The Prime Minister has performed the most remarkable U-turn. A few weeks ago, he described the constitution as a minor tidying-up exercise, yet now we are to have a referendum on something that is trivial and irrelevant. He is wrong in two respects. We should not delay a referendum until 2005. If the matter is so important that we need a referendum, we should hold that referendum no later than this autumn.

I will do so in a second. It is entirely wrong to paint the debate about a referendum as a debate between those who are pro and those who are anti our involvement in Europe. Saying that we are in favour of Britain being involved in the European Union but against an EU constitution that could—we do not yet know precisely what it will say—be a further centralising force is a perfectly legitimate position. Different views are held on how Europe should develop. Saying that to oppose the EU constitution is to oppose Europe per se is wrong and false. When Mr Scott winds up the debate, I will be interested to hear whether his views have changed since we last debated Europe, when he said: "There is a huge difference between having an informed debate on the future of Europe and having a referendum ... In a referendum, the debate would be polarised and the issues would be narrowed and squeezed so that they could be projected in black and white."— [ Official Report , 25 September 2003; c 2063.]  We have heard from Mr Raffan that the Liberal Democrats welcome the referendum, so we should hear whether his ministerial colleague agrees with him.  We have a clear and positive vision of the EU's future as a partnership of nation states that work together for their mutual benefit. That will be enhanced by Europe's expansion. Going ahead with the constitution would be to Europe's detriment.

I am interested in what the member says about Estonia. He will be aware that Estonia has a flat rate of tax. Does he think that there is a lesson in that for Scotland?

Does the minister recognise that the large-scale development of onshore wind farms is causing concern in many rural communities, including in areas of Perth and Kinross, which I represent? If we were able to encourage more wave power developments, by mechanisms such as those that the Portuguese have put in place, that would alleviate some of the public concern that, in developing onshore wind only, we are putting all our eggs in one basket.

I welcome the minister's references to the centrality of economic growth. She will be aware that business organisations are concerned about the third-party right of appeal; I think that businesses are equally concerned that the planning system, as it is reformed, should become less cumbersome, less time consuming and less expensive for all. Can the minister assure us that those principles will be built into any necessary reform?

I welcome the Deputy First Minister's statement and appreciate advance sight of it. I should also  declare a family interest: I am not a Standard Life policyholder, but my wife is. The Deputy First Minister was correct to pay tribute to the strength of Standard Life as a company and I hope that that situation will continue. I also echo the concerns that have been expressed about the jobs lost in the Edinburgh economy. The finance sector is the jewel in the Scottish economy. Manufacturing has been in recession for a number of years, with thousands of job losses, and the growth in the finance sector has taken up much of the slack. We are now starting to see a contraction in that sector and, although it is important that we do not exaggerate the problem, that is rightly of concern to everyone who has an interest in the Scottish economy. I have two specific questions to put to the Deputy First Minister. First, does he agree that the way in which Standard Life is structured is entirely a matter for Standard Life, its members and its directors? Does he agree that it is not for politicians to interfere or seek to dictate whether Standard Life should be a mutual company? Secondly, does the Deputy First Minister agree that what we are seeing in the financial sector is, to a large extent, a consequence of the policies of the Chancellor of the Exchequer, with his £5 billion per year raid on pension funds and his massive expansion of the means test? Those measures have seen the savings ratio—the amount of money that is being saved in the economy—at an all-time low, and they have a knock-on effect on the financial services sector. The Parliament voted to send a clear message to the Treasury in defence of another vital industry—the whisky industry—but does the Deputy First Minister agree that the Scottish Executive should make the strongest representation to the chancellor, who needs to examine his policies and the damage that they are doing to Scottish financial services?

Will the minister be prepared to publish the communications between him and the Economic Secretary to the Treasury so that members who are interested in the subject can see the representations that the Executive has made in response to today's motion?

Does Jackie Baillie agree that the Treasury must also consider the security of strip stamps, an aspect that she has not touched on? The stamps are valuable items; an A4 envelope can, I believe, contain £50,000-worth.

The Scotch whisky industry, one of the vital contributors to the strength of the Scottish economy, today faces one of its most serious threats in years in the form of the introduction of tax strip stamps, as proposed by Chancellor Gordon Brown in his budget on 17 March. It is essential that the Scottish Parliament sends a clear message to the chancellor today that we view the introduction of tax stamps as unacceptable and that we press the chancellor to overturn his decision, or at least to introduce appropriate mitigating measures to minimise the impact on that vital industry. I had the pleasure of spending this morning in the company of the Edrington Group Ltd, which makes the Famous Grouse brand, at the Scotch Whisky Heritage Centre, just up the road beside the castle. The centre is an excellent facility. I know what members are thinking, but I assure them that I resisted the temptation to overindulge in the product on offer. I did not wish to come to the chamber and do an impersonation of the late Alan Clark, or perhaps of more recent political leaders. However, I hope to make up for that omission later this evening. The Famous Grouse is one of many internationally recognised whisky brands. The Scotch whisky industry accounts for some 40,000 jobs in Scotland and it is worth some £2 billion annually in overseas trade. It contributes around £1.6 billion in tax revenue to the Exchequer. The industry is a major revenue earner for the United Kingdom Government and a major component of the Scottish economy. We have had two debates in the chamber on strip stamps. The first of those debates, which was on a motion in the name of my colleague Annabel Goldie, was held just over two years ago on 7 March 2002. At that time, the arguments against strip stamps were well set out, and members from all parties expressed their concern about the impact that the proposal would have. A more recent members' business debate, in the name of my colleague Brian Monteith, was held on 5 February. Again, the arguments against strip stamps were well rehearsed.  Accordingly, I do not intend to spend much time this afternoon setting out the arguments against strip stamps. I am sure that other members will deal with those arguments in their speeches. We all know that the argument for strip stamps is based on unreliable fraud estimates from the Treasury, that they will place a heavy burden on legitimate traders and that there are serious doubts about their effectiveness. I hope that the argument that strip stamps will damage the Scotch whisky industry will not be challenged from any part of the chamber this afternoon. Even the First Minister said at First Minister's questions on 18 March that the Scottish Executive was disappointed with the announcement. However, what concerns me more is what action the Executive will take to protect the vital Scotch whisky industry. What has the Executive done to speak up for Scotch whisky? When strip stamps were proposed, did the First Minister travel to London to meet the chancellor and impress on him the need to withdraw this damaging proposal? No, he did not. Did he perhaps send the Deputy First Minister and Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning to meet the chancellor and make representations? No, he did not. Did he perhaps ask the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, Mr Macdonald, to speak to the chancellor? No, he did not. Instead, the totality of the First Minister's action in defence of this vital Scottish industry was to have Mr Macdonald write a letter to the Economic Secretary to the Treasury. I have no wish to denigrate Mr Macdonald's contribution; however, given that a vital industry was at stake, the Scottish Executive should surely have worked a little bit harder.

I am grateful for that clarification and, as I said, I have no wish to denigrate the minister's involvement in the matter. However, given the industry's importance to Scotland, I am sure that he will acknowledge that the First Minister or the Deputy First Minister should have been involved. The Executive now has the opportunity to make up for its past failings. As a result, I am delighted to see the wording of the Executive's amendment, which is very close to the text of our motion. Indeed, because I am so pleased that the Executive has come over to our position and will  unite with us in the whisky industry's defence, I can say that we have no problems with accepting its amendment. However, we will not accept the Scottish National Party's amendment. Instead of concentrating on the important matter of the threat to our whisky industry, the SNP would rather indulge in political posturing in favour of independence. That is not in the interests of the whisky industry, and I urge the SNP to withdraw its amendment to ensure that the Parliament speaks with one voice on the issue and sends a clear, unambiguous message to Gordon Brown.

Mr Mather will know that, in 1996, the Conservative Government froze the duty on spirits, which was the first time that any UK Government had done so. We need no lessons from the SNP about our commitment to the whisky industry. That said, its members are to be congratulated; I see that they managed to spell the word "whisky" correctly in their amendment. If, after the Executive has made the representations that we have called for, it is clear that the chancellor's mind is absolutely made up and he is unwilling to reverse his decision, the UK Government must put in place a properly funded and comprehensive package of measures that will minimise any damage to the industry. The industry has already made a number of proposals in that regard. For example, the Government has said that it will consider duty deferment arrangements to prevent increased cash flow costs. Details of those arrangements remain uncertain, but we need a properly worked-out plan. The Government has also said that it will examine the likely security costs, but again no details about that have been provided. In relation to necessary capital investment, a £3 million assistance fund has been proposed, which will be specifically targeted at small firms. However, that is a drop in the ocean when compared with the industry's costs, which are calculated at £23 million in capital costs in the first year alone and an estimated additional £60 million to £70 million a year in running costs for each year thereafter. It has been suggested that European Union state aid rules will apply, which will limit the total amount payable to £3 million. Given the scale of likely costs to the industry, that is quite unacceptable. If the Government is prohibited from paying any additional sums, it must reverse the tax stamp decision or it will do irreparable damage to our vital industry.  As the Scotch whisky industry is vital to Scotland, we cannot afford to have it threatened in this manner. Today, the Scottish Conservatives have once again taken the lead on this issue and I am pleased that the Executive is falling into line behind us. I trust that, today, the Parliament will speak with one voice in support of Scotch whisky and send the Treasury a clear message that it is time to think again about the damaging imposition of tax stamps. I have the pleasure to move, That the Parliament welcomes the Scottish Executive's commitment to the Scotch Whisky industry as set out in A Toast to the Future - working together for Scotch whisky , particularly the Executive's commitment to a fair tax regime for the industry; notes with disappointment the announcement by Her Majesty's Government in the 2004 Budget of the introduction of tax stamps on whisky and other spirits; recognises that the compliance costs associated with the measure will introduce a heavy burden on the Scotch whisky industry, thereby adversely affecting both it and the wider Scottish economy; believes that the £3 million compensation package announced by HM Treasury is wholly inadequate, given the estimated cost to the industry of some £60 to £70 million per annum, and accordingly calls on Her Majesty's Government to reverse the decision to impose tax stamps and, failing this, to ensure that a properly-funded and comprehensive package of measures is put in place to minimise the damage caused to the industry.

In the main, training in modern apprenticeships is delivered by further education colleges, but the schemes are administered by Scottish Enterprise. Would not it make more sense—and save money—if the administration of, and responsibility for, apprenticeships were passed down directly to the colleges, and Scottish Enterprise were removed altogether from the scheme?

Given that the Scottish Consumer Council poll showed that nearly a third of Scots—a percentage that is growing—would now support Scottish Water being in private hands and that the privatised water companies in England have delivered 50 times the infrastructure investment that Scottish Water has delivered, as well as lower charges to consumers and higher water quality, why is the First Minister taking such a dogmatic approach by ruling out moving Scottish Water to the private sector?

I commend Des McNulty for his motion and congratulate him on securing the debate. I was attracted to participate in the debate because, like Dennis Canavan, I have visited Rwanda, albeit much more recently than he did. I was there last summer and although the physical evidences of the genocide have now gone, there is clearly still a shadow hanging over the country. I must say that I found Rwanda to be a scary and depressing place to visit. The people are manifestly poor, few have enough to eat, they are ill clothed, many are without jobs and there is still an overweening military presence on the streets. Indeed, it is hard to imagine the presence of as many AK-47s in one place as there are on the streets in Rwanda. There is a fundamentally gloomy and depressing atmosphere across the country. As I walked down the street, people would not meet my eye, but shuffled on by—there is a general sense of depression. It was singular to see working at the roadsides doing jobs such as clearing the verges groups of people who were dressed in what appeared to be pink pyjamas. We asked our guide who those people were—most were youngish middle-aged men—and we were told that they were prisoners, some of whom had been convicted but many of whom were still awaiting trial nine and a half years on from the genocide. It seemed to me that they were poorly guarded, with perhaps one or two guards for 30 or 40 men, so we asked our guide why that was. He explained that, if they tried to escape, the chances were that they would be caught and lynched by the mob, such was the strength of feeling nine and a half years after what happened. It was notable that we had crossed into Rwanda from Uganda, coming overland across the border. The contrast between the two countries was absolutely striking. Uganda has not been without  its share of problems over the past 20 years or so, but it has been fortunate in that for the past 10 years it has had stable government and political stability, it has enjoyed the rule of law and—comparatively speaking—it has seen economic growth, which has provided jobs. The people in Uganda were generally well fed, well housed and well clothed and appeared to be happy. When we met them in the street and spoke to them, they would be happy, smiling and self-confident. The contrast between Uganda and Rwanda was most depressing. The countries are similar in terms of geography, but because of the different experiences that they have had and because of different political systems, one is so much better than the other. We have to address the contradiction between aid policy and trade policy. Everything that we give in foreign aid is taken away by unfair trade. For every dollar that western taxpayers give to poor countries, we take away two dollars through unfair trade practices. The injustice that is being suffered by the third world is not a result of ill fortune, bad weather, defective infrastructure or national disasters. It is not an accident, but a direct result of the deliberate policy of many Governments in the west—a shameless and shameful policy—that directly causes oppression in those countries. It is in our own hands—in our country and in other countries in the west—to address the problem of unfair trade. That is exactly what we should be doing within the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. I will address briefly one final point. Des McNulty rightly refers in his motion to the Government. However, let us not forget that we as citizens also have a duty to give personally. It is right to set targets for Government giving, but many voluntary organisations that give aid to the third world welcome donations from private citizens. We should encourage people to fulfil their duty to their fellow citizens by giving generously from our own pockets. Many charities that work well in the third world will benefit from such donations. I hope that, if we can do that, we will see more countries that are like Uganda and fewer that are like Rwanda.

In my remarks, I will address two points: first, the reason why I believe in principle that proportional representation is objectionable; and, secondly, the reason why I believe that the form of PR that is proposed in the Local Governance (Scotland) Bill is doubly objectionable. On the more general point, there are two fundamental objections to PR. First, proponents of PR fundamentally misunderstand the purpose of elections. The purpose of an election is not necessarily to determine a legislature that exactly replicates people's opinions on the day of the election. The purpose of an election is surely to deliver an Administration that has a programme for government and the authority to put that programme through and to make it law. That is where people who support PR go wrong.

Not at the moment, as I want to develop my point. I will give way later. The other fundamental reason why I object to PR is that it delivers more power to politicians at the expense of the voters. Let me give an example. In the elections to the Scottish Parliament that were held last year, the largest number of votes and the largest number of seats went to the Labour Party. The Labour Party could have done a deal with the party that had the second highest number of votes and seats, which was the SNP, but it did not. It could have done a deal with the Conservatives, who had the third highest number of votes and seats, but it did not. It did a deal with the party with the fourth highest number of votes and seats. What is democratic about that?

In a moment. PR means that parties have to do deals on policy. People might have voted for the Liberal Democrats because they were strong supporters of, for example, the Airborne Initiative. Such people listened to the Liberal Democrats, who said in their manifesto that they supported that  initiative. What happens? As the result of a dodgy deal that was stitched up, those people were betrayed by the Liberal Democrats when that party went into government.

In a moment. People might support the Liberal Democrats because they are opposed to genetically modified crops, but what happens? When the Liberals are in power, they do another dirty deal and ditch their supporters. Of course, the process might happen the other way round. I believe that we have a proposal from the Liberal Democrats to legalise pornographic pictures of 16-year-old boys and girls. I cannot imagine that many Labour members would support such a proposal. Let us say that that proposal goes into the Liberal Democrat manifesto at the next election, that the outcome of the election is the same as the outcome of the previous one and that the Liberal Democrats insist on that policy in their coalition talks. People who voted Labour to oppose such a policy might end up having it imposed on them. That is what is wrong with PR—it is all about deals stitched up in backrooms. It is not about giving people a say.

I accept that political parties are coalitions of interest, but I disagree with Mr Harvie in that I think that, when a party stands on a manifesto, people can see exactly what it believes in and they know that, if it keeps its promises, certain measures will be delivered. The problem with the current system is not only that people get at best half the manifesto, but that they get policies that they did not vote for and that they do not want. STV, in the form that is being proposed, is not a proportional system, as we heard in evidence to the committee from, for example, John Curtice and Professor David Farrell, who said: "the proposed system would be the least proportional of all the current STV systems of which I am aware".—[ Official Report , Local Government and Transport Committee , 9 December 2003; c 387.] As other members have said, the system would break the ward-member link. I appreciate that that  is not a big issue in most cities, but it is a huge issue in rural areas—in many remote and rural areas, the local councillor is a person in the community to whom people across the board can go. I live in an area that is represented by an SNP councillor and I would like to think that, if I went to him with an issue relating to the council, he would represent me and take forward my concerns, regardless of my political views. Such a link is vital and should not be broken. As we know from Ireland, the other problem with STV is that it gives more power to the political machine.

In a moment. We should want to give more power to the people rather than to the political machines. In the recent elections in Northern Ireland, for example, Sinn Féin was able to maximise its votes through having a disciplined system of running elections. That cannot be in the interests of democracy. I say to Labour members that the effect of the bill would be simple. Multimember wards with three or four councillors would, in fact, do the Liberal Democrats few favours; indeed, such wards would probably not do us terribly many favours, either. The main beneficiaries would be the Scottish nationalists. By voting for the bill, Labour members would vote for replacing Labour councillors with, in the main, Scottish nationalist councillors. They should examine their consciences. I believe that a majority of members are against the proposal. The Conservatives oppose it and Labour opposes it. I say to Labour members that they should stick to their consciences. They should screw their courage to the sticking post, vote against the proposal and stick up for the people rather than for the politicians.

Does Mr Adam agree that, even if we were not a unitary state, the problems would still be there? Because of our geography, we would still have cross-border flow between Scotland and England of academics and students. Brian Adam would like Scotland to be an independent country, but that would not solve the problems of Scottish higher education.

Aw.

I start by echoing the thanks that the convener gave to other members of the Enterprise and Culture Committee for the constructive way in which they approached the report and to the committee clerks for all their hard work and assistance in the inquiry that led to the production of the report.  The committee's inquiry was thorough—we took evidence from all the major stakeholders in Scottish higher education. Furthermore, the report was unanimous, as it was supported on a cross-party basis by all committee members. In light of those facts, the report must be seen as an authoritative statement of where Scottish higher education stands in relation to the threat of top-up tuition fees south of the border. The report makes a number of serious criticisms about the relationship between the Scottish Executive and the UK Government. One of the consequences of devolution is that we will have Administrations of different political persuasions north and south of the border that will have to learn to work together. At the moment, we are in what might turn out to be a unique situation, in that the same party is in power north and south of the border, although it is governing in coalition north of the border. If we cannot get the two Administrations to work together in that situation, how much harder will it be when, as will inevitably happen, two different parties are in power? The committee sensibly recommended that new protocols and practices should be developed to address those concerns. In considering the level of funding of higher and further education in Scotland, the committee recognised that, even if top-up fees were not introduced south of the border, there would be an argument for further investment. As the Deputy First Minister acknowledged, it is worth noting that funding per student has fallen since the advent of this Administration. In 1998-99, funding per student was £5,123 but, last year, it had fallen to £5,024. The figures that have been announced show that funding per student will fall still further to £5,012. That is a continuing decline and the figure is now less than it was under the Conservatives. I accept that, as a percentage of our gross domestic product, we spend a fair amount on higher education. However, the percentage of students in Scotland is higher than it is in the rest of the UK, which means that the figure per student is not quite as impressive as the headline figure.

Alex Neil makes a fair point. The SNP is fond of citing the Irish example as a panacea. Ireland spends much less on higher education than we do, but that does not seem to  affect its economic performance. However, the general point is interesting. The committee is unequivocal on its key point. Paragraph 147 of the report says: "the proposals in the White Paper, if implemented in their current form, will have an adverse impact on Scottish higher education, particularly on its research sector." That, in a nutshell, is what the report is about. Top-up fees will result in an additional income stream for higher education in England. If top-up fees down south cannot be halted, we have to find additional funds for Scottish universities to make up the difference. The Executive has been slow to respond to the concerns of not only the committee but the higher education sector as a whole. In the debate on 22 January, referring to the phase 3 report of the Executive's higher education review, the Deputy First Minister said: "it would be wrong to prejudge that report or have a knee-jerk reaction to it before we have seen it".— [ Official Report , 22 January 2004; c 5055.]  At First Minister's question time on 15 January, the First Minister said that the phase 3 review would report in February and added: "we will act very quickly thereafter."— [ Official Report , 15 January 2004; c 4874.]  We now have the phase 3 report, but we still have no clear proposals from the Executive on what it will do about it. When I asked the First Minister about that at First Minister's question time last week, he replied: "We are currently considering the report and intend to publish our initial response shortly."— [ Official Report , 11 March 2004; c 6573.]  The dithering on the part of the Executive is not good enough.

The Deputy First Minister may have been consistent in his view, but on 15 January the First Minister said: "we will act very quickly thereafter."— [ Official Report , 15 January 2004; c 4874.]  We are still waiting.  It is wrong for the Executive to suggest that the Higher Education Bill will have an impact in Scotland only from 2006-07. Academics and lecturers might already be looking at their prospects; they might be tempted to leave posts in Scotland in order to get a sharp pay rise if they go down south in two years' time. Moreover, students who will begin university in the academic year 2004-05 might be persuaded to apply to English institutions, as those universities might be better funded when those students are in their final years of study. Conversely, there might be increased pressure on places at Scottish universities as students seek to avoid paying top-up fees at English universities. All those things are starting to happen already, which is why the Executive must act quickly to allay the concerns of people in the sector—it must issue its response and deal with those concerns. We must ensure that Scottish students are not penalised. The First Minister has said that the Executive will rule out fees, but he has not ruled out an increase in the graduate endowment. Whether the graduate endowment is a fee, a contribution, a tax or an endowment, what Scottish students want to know is that they will not be asked to pay more for their education as a result of the First Minister's political colleagues at Westminster. The problem has been created by a Labour Government at Westminster that did not pay sufficient attention to Scottish higher education and the impact that its actions would have. It is up to the Labour and Liberal Democrat Executive to try to resolve the issues. The report demands a serious and intelligent reply from the Scottish Executive and we are waiting for one.

Will the minister confirm that, even given the announcement today, since the Administration came to power in 1997-98, funding per place has fallen from £5,123 in 1998-99 to £5,012?

To ask the Scottish Executive what support it gives to the development of the bottled spring water industry. (S2O-1434)

The minister will be aware of the economic contribution that is made by companies such as Highland Spring Ltd, in Blackford, Perthshire, and the Strathmore Mineral Water Company Ltd, in Forfar, which produces the wonderful water that we drink in the chamber. Can he tell us why he allows a situation to persist in which Scottish spring water producers are assessed for business rates on their boreholes, whereas bottled spring water producers in England are not? What is he going to do to address that competitive disadvantage for Scottish spring water producers?

To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Executive's response is to the phase 3 report of its review of higher education. (S2F-723)

The First Minister said in reply to a question about the publication of the review: "we will act quickly thereafter to outline our plans for the years ahead".— [ Official Report , 15 January 2004; c 4875.]  We look forward to that with interest. If I were a school pupil today, looking at my university options, should I be worried about the prospect of paying a higher fee, tax contribution or endowment at a Scottish university? Or will the First Minister take this opportunity to rule out any such increases?

I suspect that the reason why I was asked to open this debate for the Conservative group is that I am its youngest member and therefore the furthest away from retirement, so I could not be accused of having a partisan interest. I am pleased that John Swinburne has given us the opportunity to debate pensioner poverty this morning. Despite the Executive's fine words and its usual self-congratulatory amendment, its record is not a happy one. Between 1997-98 and 2000-01, the number of pensioners in Scotland who live in households with less than 50 per cent of mean income rose from 170,000 to 180,000. That figure represents 20 per cent of all pensioners in Scotland. We know that free personal care is being underfunded, with gaps in certain areas, and that hospital waiting lists are getting longer in many cases. Health is a major consideration for older people, so those problems impact disproportionately on their quality of life. However, we cannot say that we are going to eradicate poverty, as Mr Swinburne's motion does, without proposing some measures for doing so. Our amendment seeks to do that. We recognise that many of the issues that relate to pensioner poverty are reserved to Westminster. The Labour chancellor, Gordon Brown, has dramatically increased the use of means testing. According to the House of Commons library, when the pension credit began in the autumn, 59 per cent of pensioners were eligible for means-tested benefits. The Institute for Fiscal Studies has calculated that the proportion of pensioners on means-tested benefits is expected to grow to 73 per cent by 2025 and 82 per cent by 2050. As Mr Swinburne acknowledged in his opening comments, that extension of means testing brings its own problems. Many pensioners are reluctant to claim means-tested benefits as they regard it as demeaning to do so. Therefore, pensioners end up losing out and living in unnecessary poverty.

That is a fair point from Mr Rumbles.

My colleague ungraciously said "Unusually", but I will not share in that comment. We must reduce means testing and consider  pensions being paid as of right. A higher basic state pension would be the single most effective weapon in helping to reduce pensioner poverty. That is why our colleagues at Westminster have a policy to re-establish the link between pensions and earnings, which would be of direct benefit to every pensioner in Scotland and the United Kingdom.

I am sorry. I am very short of time this morning.

As Mr Swinburne acknowledged, it is interesting that the Adam Smith Institute, the free-market think tank, said yesterday that it proposes a substantial increase in the state pension, albeit funded by an increase in the pension age, which we do not find quite so acceptable. Clearly, that increase has a cost, but it is generally acknowledged that it is much less desirable to have means-tested benefits than to have a basic state pension available to all. The great majority of those who retire—some 90 per cent—do so with some sort of private or occupational pension. In the past few years, those sectors have been under constant attack from the Labour Government. A huge part of the problem was Gordon Brown's decision in his first budget to levy a £5 billion per year tax on pensions by abolishing dividend tax credits. The result of that was to make private pensions much less attractive and, accordingly, people are stopping saving for their retirement. When that is added to the increase in means testing, it is little wonder that the savings ratio is at an all-time low. The take-up of stakeholder pensions since their introduction has been poor. We must encourage people to start making provision for their old age again, and we must make it attractive for them to do so. Otherwise, pensioner poverty will continue to be a problem. Fundamentally, we should not consider pensioner poverty in isolation from questions of the wider economy. It is only by having a strong and growing economy that we can provide wealth for all in our society, including our pensioners. Conservatives believe in a free economy with a light touch in the form of regulation and lower business taxes. That is the way to close the opportunity gap and to make our society wealthier, healthier and happier. I move amendment S2M-1020.1, to insert at end: "; acknowledges that the increases in means testing for pensioners introduced by the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Gordon Brown, adversely affect many pensioners who are reluctant to claim the benefits to which they are entitled;  supports the re-introduction of a link between pensions and earnings as proposed by the Conservative Party at Westminster, and recognises that a growing, dynamic economy through lower tax and regulation is the best way to address the problem of poverty for all, including pensioners."

Of necessity, this will be a rather brief contribution. I declare an interest as a former company lawyer. Company law is largely reserved to Westminster. I pressed my request-to-speak button on the assumption that the SNP members would oppose the Sewel motion, and I intended to take issue with them on that. Tricia Marwick has rather shot my fox, if she will pardon the expression, in the debate. As other members have said, the only provisions of the bill that are relevant to Scotland are those that would create the new community interest companies. There is a possibility that charities in Scotland may want to convert to CICs. My Conservative colleagues at Westminster have broadly welcomed the idea of community interest companies, but we have expressed the wish to scrutinise the proposals to ensure that adequate care is given to delivering benefits to the voluntary sector, which all of us want. The provisions dealing with CICs are a small part of the bill. We have reserved judgment on the costs involved and some of the additional burdens that may be placed on business if the bill is agreed to. It is vital that the changes strike a balance and fine tune a system of strong controls, rather than overburdening business with yet more unnecessary regulation. We will test the proposals to ensure that they genuinely increase the confidence and trust of companies. The bill deals largely with matters that are reserved to Westminster, as is the case for company law generally. We are happy to support the Sewel motion today.

I want to pick up some of the points that have been made during this wide-ranging debate. I turn first to children with special educational needs, which Mary Scanlon and others mentioned. I want to highlight a particular matter that is causing some concern to members, which is the nursery nurses' strike that I believe is due to start next week. I do not deny that nursery nurses have the right to go on strike, but such action will have a specific impact not just on children in nurseries but on children with special educational needs, who get the assistance of nursery nurses even though they might not be in nurseries. Parents of such children are extremely concerned that, in those circumstances, their children will not be able to access education. When school janitors went on strike in 2001, schools that treated children who have special educational needs were given an exemption from industrial action. I urge Unison to think again and to consider exempting special needs schools and classes from all-out strike action, for the sake of the children and parents concerned.

I am reassured by the fact that Mr Sheridan says that the workers are aware of parents' concerns about the impact that their action could have. In the area in which I live, Perth and Kinross Council has already reached an agreement with the nursery nurses and the same is true of a number of other councils. I do not believe that a national settlement to the dispute is necessary. I do not want to get involved in discussing the detail of the dispute, but it would be helpful and considerate if the workers and the union were to exempt special needs schools and classes from action. I want to consider the wider issue of the key role of public services—which the minister mentioned—and their interface with schools, which is the priority for most young people. As my colleague Lord James Douglas-Hamilton said, in many cases there has been a serious failure by the Executive to reach attainment targets. Levels of truancy and violence in schools have been unacceptable. Scott Barrie and Ken Macintosh referred to our schools passport policy, the point of which is to widen choice. At the moment, there is choice in education only for those who can afford it. We are talking about extending choice so that everyone will have it, not just those who can afford it. I would have thought that that was a pretty good socialist principle. Labour members such as Scott Barrie are always saying that people should support their local schools and that we would have an excellent comprehensive system if only they did that. I wonder whether he has said that to his Labour colleague who is the leader of Dundee City Council, who does not send her children to a state school run by Dundee City Council but opts out of the state system altogether by sending her children to an independent school. The word for that is "hypocrisy", which we hear all too regularly from Labour members in Parliament. There must be acknowledgement that parental rights are central to any discussion about children and young people. There is a danger of the state's interfering too much in what should be the private lives of individuals. We remember from the previous session of Parliament the debates about the previous Executive's plan to criminalise parents for smacking their children—a policy that I am pleased to say was withdrawn. We heard much from the minister today about the philosophy and ethos behind the Executive's approach. Family breakdown is a major social ill and a primary cause of poverty, social exclusion, susceptibility to crime and ill health. All the statistics show that families that are headed by a married couple provide greater stability and support for children than do families that are  headed by other relationships. That is not a moral point; it is backed up by statistics. However, the Executive is forever telling us that we should not smoke because it is bad for us, that we should eat healthily, that we should not eat fatty foods and that we should take exercise. It is forever giving us those moral messages, but it is very coy and quiet when it comes to talking about the stability of families. The Executive must give more thought to the matter. A number of members referred to criminal justice. Robert Brown referred to funding for youth activities, which I have raised in Parliament often in the past. My friend Donald Gorrie has often talked about funding for Youth Clubs Scotland, which provides diversionary activities for young people and helps them to stay out of crime. I am sorry that the funding for Youth Clubs Scotland was cut by the Executive to below the level that was set by a previous Conservative Government. The SNP amendment concerns the Airborne Initiative. I have heard the concerns that have been expressed in the chamber, although I am no expert on the subject. However, I understand that there are concerns that the Airborne Initiative is an expensive way of keeping people out of crime, but I suggest that it is probably not as expensive as locking them up in prison for many years. The SNP amendment is moderate and well worded and asks the Executive simply to reconsider the funding issue. We are therefore able to support it. We agree that much has been done, but much more needs to be done to ensure a bright future for all our young people.

We all agree that we want all schools to be excellent, but the sad fact is that many schools are not. How does Scott Barrie respond to the members of his party who move house to live in the catchment area of a better school?

I welcome the First Minister's commitment to tackling the issue of population decline, although whether his measures will be effective remains to be seen. I have a specific question for him on visas for foreign students, which is something about which my colleague David McLetchie asked him, although the First Minister did not answer the question. How many of the 13,000 eligible students does he believe will take up the offer? Given that the Executive is keen on targets, will he tell us what is his target for the number of foreign students who will wish to stay on in Scotland?

I was just reflecting on "The Great Escape", to which Wendy Alexander referred. She may remember that the fate that befell the escapees at the end of the movie was not a happy one. Of course, if Andy Kerr is Steve McQueen, I wonder who Wendy Alexander considers herself to be—perhaps Gordon Jackson, or Richard Attenborough, or the camp commandant. We can reflect on that. The debate has been good and I agree with something that Jeremy Purvis said, which I am sure will do him even more damage with the Liberal whips. I agree that we need more time to discuss the financing of the Executive's budget, which is a fundamental matter, and I am sorry that more time was not available. However, I will pick up on a number of important points in the brief time that I have. First, there is the question of the business growth figures, to which Brian Monteith, Stewart Stevenson and others referred. What we have seen is a miraculous turnaround. If the figures are to be believed, they mean that Scotland has had higher growth than the G7 countries. I am sure that that will come as a great surprise to many people in the business community, because they do not seem to have experienced such growth. Stewart Stevenson referred to other statistics, such as those on bankruptcies and VAT de-registrations, which suggest that the recalibrated figures for business growth must be looked at rather closely. Even if we accept the business growth figures as correct, they disclose that the service sector is booming and the manufacturing sector remains in serious trouble. However, the service sector is booming on the back of a credit explosion and rising house prices. As my colleague Ted Brocklebank said, the real expansion has been in the public sector. Fifty-two per cent of the Scottish gross domestic product is consumed by the public sector. That situation cannot be sustainable in the long run, if we want a growing economy. I heard Professor Donald MacRae, of Lloyds TSB, saying this morning that we must recognise that we have low growth in Scotland and that there is nothing to be complacent about. Let me touch on the question of council tax increases. Today we have seen, across Scotland, council tax increases that average 5.2 per cent,  which is substantially ahead of inflation. That has been the continuing trend over the past few years. There is a great deal of unhappiness about the council tax and its perceived unfairness. I have some sympathy for people on low incomes—perhaps they are retired—who live in a large property, but do not wish to move. Because their council tax is assessed on the value of their house, they must pay a sum that is not proportionate to their income. For many people, of course, the only fair tax is one that somebody else pays. A great deal of unhappiness is generated not so much by the structure of the council tax as by the increases. Where Conservative councillors across Scotland have been able to offer an alternative budget, their projected increases would have averaged 2.8 per cent compared with 5.2 per cent, which would be an average saving of £46 per annum for band D householders across Scotland. Therefore, Conservative councils would be offering lower council tax charges than the current administrations. The budget is a missed opportunity to make a difference to the economy of Scotland and a missed opportunity to tackle council tax bills. Unless the Executive does better next year, the real great escape that we will see will be yet more of our people leaving Scotland to seek work and careers elsewhere.

I am delighted to take part in this debate. I congratulate my colleague Brian Monteith on securing it and on his motion, which is remarkably similar to a motion that I lodged a few weeks ago. I am grateful to all the members who signed that motion, too. I, of course, defer to my colleague in this debate on his motion. I was a little confused by Jackie Baillie's assertion that Gordon Brown does not want to introduce strip stamps. If he does not want to do it, it is perfectly clear what he can do—he can withdraw the proposal. I am not convinced that he is being dragged reluctantly towards imposing tax stamps, especially given that this is not the first time the suggestion has been mooted—it is the second time at least. If he does not want to introduce the stamps, no one is forcing his arm. One of the most pleasurable aspects of this job is the opportunity to visit distilleries. I have visited quite a number in my region and have, on occasion, sampled the wares. In highland Perthshire we have Edradour, Blair Athol and Aberfeldy distilleries, all of which have expanded in recent years and provide year-round and seasonal jobs. They have also developed visitor attractions to meet the demand for high-quality visitor centres and to act as showcases for our national drink. Another good example of that is the Famous Grouse experience near Crieff, which has been developed as an award-winning major visitor attraction and is gaining an international reputation and attracting a great number of visitors each year. Both the distillery and the visitor centre there are major contributors to the economy of the Crieff area. We have heard from other members about the contribution that whisky makes to the Scottish economy as a whole. The Parliament must do all that it can to support this vital industry, so that areas that often have few other sources of income  as stable and secure as that from whisky continue to benefit from the jobs and tourist pounds that come into the area. I agree with everything that has been said about the introduction of strip stamps, which will undoubtedly put additional costs on the Scotch whisky industry. Those costs will have to be passed on somewhere and I have real concerns that they will lead to job losses and prevent companies from continuing with the level of investment in distilleries that they have made in recent years. All distillers have made the case that they are fully committed to fighting fraud and working with the Government to defeat fraudsters. They have also indicated that they do not believe that strip stamps are the way of achieving that. Everyone to whom I have spoken in the industry believes that the proposal is based on unreliable statistics. The incidence of spirits fraud is less prevalent than has been claimed and seems to be falling. The ineffective and inefficient measure of strip stamping should be opposed by members of all parties that care about the long-term future of the Scotch whisky industry, so that the jobs of all those involved in the industry directly and indirectly in areas such as highland Perthshire are protected.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress it is making in the implementation of its national strategy for golf. (S2O-1221)

The minister might be interested to know that, despite the promise in the golf strategy to make available business strategy training packages for golf clubs, when I carried out a survey of clubs in my area I found that only 18 per cent were aware that such a service existed and only 16 per cent said that their views on developing the sector had been sought. What is he doing to ensure that the golf strategy is more than just another glossy initiative and delivers real benefits to clubs at grass-roots level that are operating in a rather difficult economic environment?

Does the minister think that a third party right of appeal would make the planning system more or less business friendly?

Does Fergus Ewing appreciate that throughout the 1990s we steadily reduced the business rate year on year until we achieved a level playing field with England? Will he give credit where it is due?

Does Mr Lyon appreciate that at the time of the elections in 2003 the vast increases in water charges that have taken place since then were not the political issue that they are now? What does he propose to do to reduce the burden of water charges on small business? The Executive's proposal is described by Bill Anderson as "the sort of thing that gives politicians a bad name".

In England.

We have already heard from him.

I am grateful for Jamie Stone's concern about my ambitions, but is he aware that we have devolution? Business rates are a devolved matter, and it is up to us in Scotland to decide how we fix them. What does he say to people such as Professor Sir Donald MacKay, former chairman of Scottish Enterprise, who says that cutting business rates is the most effective thing that the Executive could do to help economic growth?

I will move the motion in my name on the important subject of the Scottish economy with a sense of disappointment, not just because I did not make it on to the parliamentary "University Challenge" team, but because, despite the Executive telling us that growing the economy is its top priority, this is the first debate on the economy that we have had since the beginning of September, nearly six months ago. I can understand why the Executive does not want to debate the subject in Parliament. If it takes a Conservative debate to drag a minister, kicking and screaming, into the chamber to answer for the Executive's record, so be it. I am pleased to see the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning in his chair, ready to lead the debate for the Executive. I have a great deal of respect for the deputy minister, who I believe is one of the more competent ministers in the Executive, with an excellent command of his brief. I see that the Deputy First Minister is here too, although I do not know whether he intends to participate in the debate. However, he is very welcome to this country. The Executive amendment demonstrates its rather complacent attitude over the state of the economy. The Executive talks about Scotland's competitive position in the global economy. In fact, Scotland's gross domestic product lags behind that of the rest of the United Kingdom. In the year to quarter 2 of 2003—the last quarter for which we have the statistics—Scotland's GDP grew by only 0.5 per cent, while that of the UK as a whole grew by 1.8 per cent. That is not an unusual position; it has been the situation for some years. The outlook is little better when it comes to our population. The Registrar General for Scotland has indicated that the Scottish population is likely to fall below 5 million by 2009. That has serious implications for us all. All the international evidence shows that population growth is inextricably linked to economic opportunity. If the Executive is serious about reversing the decline in population, it must be serious about improving our economic performance.

If Mr Sheridan were to check his facts, he would find that the population of the UK as a whole is on the increase. The problem that we have here is that the Scottish population is falling, while that of the UK is increasing. I will explain why I believe that that is because of higher tax rates, particularly on business in Scotland.

Not at the moment, thank you. What is to be done about the current situation? The Scottish National Party, in its amendment, comes up with its usual solution of fiscal freedom. I am not without sympathy for the idea that the Parliament needs greater financial accountability. However, the SNP is missing the point completely. What is worse, it gets the Executive off the hook completely. We do not currently have the powers for the tax cuts to which the SNP refers, and that gives the Executive a get-out clause. As usual, the SNP's approach is tactically inept. The Executive has the powers that it needs to deal with the problem, although it will not use them. All the international evidence says that a low tax regime and economic growth go hand in hand. We should look at Ireland, New Zealand, Estonia and the United States of America: they have low taxes and high economic performance.

Mr Mather must be aware that business rates in Scotland are higher than those in the rest of the UK. That is a business tax that we could cut now. Business rates are a more effective weapon than corporation tax. Only one in four businesses in Scotland pays corporation tax, while virtually every business pays business rates. If we must choose a weapon to use, business rates are far more effective. We have high business costs in Scotland, and we wonder why our economic performance lags behind that of the rest of the UK. Our business rates are higher; our water charges are, in some cases, excessively higher; our businesses are more strictly regulated than businesses down  south; and we have a poorer transport infrastructure. We even heard a suggestion from the Executive at the weekend that business rates might have to go up to pay for higher education spending. We do not want to hear from the Executive that we are competitive as far as business costs in Europe are concerned. We must compare ourselves with the rest of the UK, where costs are lower and economic growth is higher. Those facts speak for themselves. The Executive should be reducing business rates at least to the uniform business rate, thus restoring the level playing field with England that the last Conservative Government established. Our ambition would be to go further and to give Scotland a competitive business rate compared with the rest of the UK. We suffer because of our geography and our poor transport infrastructure. Why not compensate for that with a lower tax regime? Why not have an Executive that really fights the corner for Scottish business and wants to give it a leg-up rather than forever trying to pull it down?

The member will not be too surprised to hear me disagree with Robert Crawford on that issue, as on other issues. I wonder how many businesses Mr Crawford has run. I remind the member that, at the last but one meeting of the cross-party group on the Scottish economy, Professor Sir Donald MacKay, the former chairman of Scottish Enterprise, came along with a powerful case that cutting the business rate was the most effective tool the Executive could use to increase growth in the Scottish economy. I will touch briefly on regulation. I call on the Executive to support my proposal this week for a new test on how legislation will affect economic growth. At the very least, that would concentrate minds within Government on how its plans will impact on the economy. If the Executive is serious about its top priority being growing the economy, it should have no problem backing my proposal. The Scottish economy underperforms that of our neighbours in England. We are losing our population, and the Executive seems unwilling to take any action to reverse the situation. The Scottish National Party is no better, being so obsessed by constitutional issues that it cannot see real solutions. In contrast, I have set out clear Conservative proposals on business rates, on regulation and on reducing water charges. Those proposals will make a real difference to the performance of our economy, and they will help to reverse our population decline. It is time for the  Parliament to treat the economy seriously, and to back measures that will see Scotland flourish once more. I move, That the Parliament notes with concern the consistent underperformance of the Scottish economy relative to that of the UK as a whole; recognises that the burdens of higher rates, water charges and regulation faced by businesses in Scotland are factors contributing to this underperformance, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to take immediate steps to create a more business friendly environment by reducing business rates and water charges and cutting red tape, thereby encouraging business development, improving the outlook for economic growth, and contributing to a reverse in Scotland's trend of population decline.

Energy is an area that is largely reserved, but of which specific aspects are devolved. The UK Energy Bill deals with matters that affect the UK but impact on Scotland. We believe that, as we have an effective single energy market throughout the UK, it makes sense for measures to apply equally north and south of the border. We therefore have no difficulty in supporting the principle of the Sewel motion on the bill. For the same reason, we will oppose the Green amendment. I take issue with what Shiona Baird said about our having no say in what is going to happen. We still send members of Parliament to Westminster to represent Scottish interests. I appreciate that that may be an uncomfortable fact for the Greens and the Scottish nationalists, who wish that situation to come to an end, but it is a fact that we have members of Parliament at Westminster to represent our views, and that will continue to be the case. Nonetheless, we have some reservations about some of the proposals in the bill, and I will take a moment to draw members' attention to those. The largest fault with the bill is a fault of omission in the serious lack of a clear energy strategy for the future of our country. We know about the Government's target for renewable energy: 40 per cent by 2020. It is interesting that even the former Minister of State for Energy and Construction, Brian Wilson, is now questioning whether that is achievable. Up and down the land, local communities are faced with the threat of large onshore wind farm developments on their doorsteps, which will potentially radically alter our rural landscape. I am sure that all members have received concerns in their mailbags about those developments. However, even if the target is met, the real question for the Government is, where will the other 60 per cent come from? Virtually every conventional or nuclear power station in Scotland is expected to have reached the end of its life before 2020. How will we generate the other 60 per cent to keep the lights on and keep us warm? Will it come from fossil fuels? If so, where will new gas-burning stations be built? Will it come from nuclear power? If so, what are the Government's proposals to extend the life of Torness and  Hunterston or to replace Chapelcross? We heard from British Nuclear Fuels Ltd at the Enterprise and Culture Committee yesterday that the last nuclear plant in Scotland will close by 2023 at the latest.

I hear what the minister is saying, but a serious supply gap needs to be addressed. The evidence that we heard at the committee yesterday was to the effect that decisions need to be made now and that the threat of nuclear waste is much diminished, in comparison with what it was in the past. A gap must be filled and the Government must plan now to fill that gap, otherwise we will not have energy for the future.

No. I am sorry, but I am short of time. The bill talks about creating a nuclear decommissioning authority. Radioactive waste policy is devolved and responsibility for its implementation lies with the Scottish Environment Protection Agency, so there is a case for Scottish input into the completion of the legislation. Let us not forget that there are economic opportunities from decommissioning and that we have skills in Scotland that can be used, not least at Dounreay. We have also heard about BETTA and I welcome what the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning had to say about that matter. However, I say to him that he has some way to go to convince the renewables industry that the situation is as he pointed out. There is still widespread concern out there about the impact of the new arrangements. In the north of Scotland, the hydro subsidy is to go as a result of changes in European Union rules. I am pleased that, in the bill, the Government recognises the need to share the higher transmission costs in the north of Scotland across the rest of the United Kingdom. We are entering a period when the north will contribute even more than its fair share of generation as the renewables industry develops, so it seems only fair that there is no financial disadvantage to customers there. The bill raises important issues that affect Scotland, but as energy policy needs to be considered across the whole of the UK—not just in Scotland in isolation—a Sewel motion is the correct way forward. Nevertheless, I hope that the  points made in the debate will be taken on board by the DTI and that, in particular, we will see a real commitment to a sensible energy policy to meet our needs in the years to come.

Will Jeremy Purvis give way?

I have no shame in aligning myself with Mr Reagan on many issues. Can Jeremy Purvis tell me why the economy of the United States has shown 8 per cent growth over the past year? Is it not as a direct result of tax cuts?

I am sure that we all wish Mr Stevenson a speedy recovery from whatever ailment besets him. Stewart Stevenson made a point about the famous budget surplus over 18 years. Interestingly enough, if we consider the figures, Scotland was in surplus in three of those 18 years because of the high oil price at that time. For the remaining 15 years, Scotland was in deficit. However, why pick those 18 years? I appreciate the fact that they correspond to the term of office of the previous, great Conservative Government, but that period is entirely arbitrary. Why pick 1979 to 1997? Why does Stewart Stevenson not take the period from 1950 to 1997 or from 1901 to 1997? I suspect that the reason is that, across the piece, Scotland would have been in deficit for the majority of time during those periods.

I would never make the argument that Scotland could not be independent. Of course Scotland could be an independent country. We may have a deficit, as many other countries do. I am rather disappointed that the SNP keeps raising the issue about the balance of payments between Scotland and the rest of the United Kingdom. For me, the question whether Scotland should be independent is nothing to do with finance. It is about our place in the world, our culture, our history and our trade links to the rest of the UK. Anyway, I am digressing from the subject of the debate.

Do not worry; I am not digging a hole for myself. I am sure that, when the people of Scotland are asked to judge, they will vote to remain part of the United Kingdom, as they have done consistently when they have had that opportunity. I listened intently to the minister's opening speech, which I enjoyed, so I was pleased to hear him say that the bill provided a budget for economic growth. Indeed, that reflects the partnership agreement, which states: "Growing the economy is our top priority." I also agreed with much of what Des McNulty said about the need to achieve further economic growth in Scotland. The budget should be about doing that. Let us consider, therefore, what the Executive is doing to achieve economic growth. I appreciate that there is only so much that the Executive can do, because many of the economic levers are not in the control of this Parliament but lie elsewhere. It is well known that I have some sympathy for the argument that this Parliament should perhaps have greater economic powers. Although the Executive's powers are restricted, it has power over business rates. The minister mentioned that business rates had been frozen for the current year. That was welcomed by the business community, but it is pretty disappointing that the Executive will increase business rates next year. Albeit that the business rate poundage will increase by just 1p—up from 47.8p to 48.8p—that is still an increase, and it is being made at a time when the business community would be much happier with at least another freeze. Let us remember that, under the unified business rate, businesses in Scotland used to pay the same rate poundage as businesses south of  the border. However, when a certain J McConnell Esq was Minister for Finance, he broke away from the UBR that the previous Conservative Government had worked hard to establish and he increased Scottish business rates to a level that is higher than that for the rest of the UK. I have heard all the minister's arguments about how the situation can be accounted for by the fact that the basis for rateable value in Scotland is different from that which applies down south. However, if the minister listens to business organisations, he will find that they often take issue with that. Certain sectors of the economy—for example, small and medium-sized hotels—are already disadvantaged by the basis for rateable value in Scotland before we come to the question of the rate poundage. Even if, for the sake of argument, we accept that the minister is correct on that issue, why did he freeze business rates? If business rates are not the issue, why were they frozen? Surely the minister is arguing against himself. Secondly, even if businesses in Scotland are not paying more in rates than businesses in the rest of the UK, why does the Scottish Executive not have the ambition to give Scottish businesses a competitive advantage against businesses south of the border? Scotland is already disadvantaged by our distance from markets, our relatively poor transport infrastructure and our disparate population. Many Scottish businesses trade with the south of the UK or with Europe, so they are further away from those markets than businesses down south are. Scottish businesses start at a disadvantage, so why not try to give them a leg up? Why not give them a hand by cutting business rates to at least the level that applies in the rest of the UK, if not lower than that? That is the challenge for the Executive. I am sure that every member in the chamber has received letters from businesses about the rise in water charges in the current year. In many cases, charges have risen by 300, 400 or 500 per cent. We proposed a relief scheme for small businesses that would ease the pain of those increases in charges. The scheme would have cost around £10 million a year over the next three years. That is not a substantial sum of money—it is easily affordable in the context of the Executive's annual overspend. If we are serious about growing the economy and having a budget for business, why cannot we have a water charge relief scheme and a reduction in business rates? That would prove that when the Executive says that growing the economy is its top priority, those are not just words. Action is also needed.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the minister outline what steps the Executive is taking to widen access to vocational training at further education colleges for 14 and 15-year-old school pupils?

Participating in education debates is always a pleasure. I always enjoy hearing the Minister for Education and Young People, Mr Peacock, not least because he is probably the most brazenly partisan member of the Executive in the way that he misrepresents the record of the previous Conservative Government and seeks to represent the position of his own Administration. I imagine that he spends the morning before such debates polishing his brass neck, so that he can come down to the chamber and show it off. Let us examine the Executive's record. Money has indeed been spent on education. Spending is up but, despite that, attainment levels remain well below Labour's manifesto pledges. In 1999, Labour pledged that 80 per cent of children would reach the appropriate standard in reading, writing and arithmetic upon leaving primary school. The latest figures show that the percentage of P7 pupils attaining level D or more was just 68.6 per cent in maths, 72.4 per cent in reading and only 60 per cent in writing. There is clearly a long way to go. On discipline and behaviour in schools, what do we see? Permanent exclusions are up, as are temporary exclusions and truancy. Most damning of all, violence against school staff is up sevenfold compared with 1997. There is now an attack on a teacher roughly every 15 minutes during the school day. That is quite unacceptable.  I see that the minister is making a rapid exit from the chamber—that is unsurprising, but I think that he needs to reflect on the Executive's record the next time he attacks ours. The most concerning thing about the Executive's approach is its lack of ambition for the Scottish education system and its failure to consider some of the wider issues. We have heard from the minister that we should not have a two-tier system, but that is what we already have. As Lord James Douglas-Hamilton said, some people can afford to buy their way out of the state system and choose to do so. Further, many other people whose children are in the state system have incomes that allow them to obtain large mortgages and buy houses in the catchment area of our good schools such as Jordanhill in Glasgow or James Gillespie's in Edinburgh. I do not want to start naming names, but I am sure that we are all aware of members of the Labour Party who have bought houses in the catchment areas of good, successful schools while denying access to such high-quality education to people who are less well off than themselves. What needs to be done? The Executive could start by examining what has been done in other countries. In England, which has a Labour Government and a Prime Minister who says that he is committed to comprehensive education, there is much more diversity in the state system. City technology colleges have been established and there has been a huge expansion in the number of schools specialising in music, sport and science, which offer variety and diversity in education. Those initiatives are driving attainment levels upwards. In Scotland, however, we have seven specialist schools and the Executive seems to have no plans to create any more. Why does not the Executive look south of the border? What is working there will probably work here as well. Denmark, Sweden and the Netherlands—like Scotland, small European countries with a history and tradition of egalitarianism—have no problem with the idea of parents setting up their own schools or of funding education by means of a voucher system similar to the passport that we are proposing. In those countries, groups of parents are allowed to come together and, if there are enough of them, draw support from the state for a school that, rather than opting out of the system, will opt into the system. If that works in those other small countries, why would it not work here? More or less, that is what we are proposing with our schools passport. We want to give real choice to parents—not just to the favoured few who are fortunate enough to be able to afford independent education or to afford nice houses in the catchment areas of good schools, but to all parents, especially those whom the system has  trapped in the catchment areas of our not-so-successful schools. Like Alex Neil, I condemn the self-congratulatory tone of the Executive's motion. There is a lot that we can learn from England, northern European countries and elsewhere. Above all, we need to move away from the idea that a one-size-fits-all approach is best and that uniformity is to be strived for. Let us have a more diverse system with choice for parents and opportunity for all. That way, we will drive up standards and deliver a truly excellent system.

I commend the First Minister for the stance that he has taken on the issue by trying to attract foreign workers and for facing down criticisms of that policy from those whose motives are, I suspect, little short of racist. However, does the First Minister accept that it is really economic opportunity that attracts immigrants and that, unless his Executive takes steps to improve Scotland's economic performance, all other measures are simply window dressing?

Does the member agree with the former Minister for Children and Education's authoritative comment that the claim that tuition fees have been abolished is merely a con?

Will Alex Neil give way?

I welcome the opportunity that this debate provides for the Conservative party to set out its opposition to top-up tuition fees north and south of the border. I also welcome the opportunity to expose the shameless opportunism of the SNP on this issue. We have always opposed the introduction of tuition fees and top-up fees in Scotland and in England, and Michael Howard and his Conservative colleagues in the House of Commons have been leading the opposition to them. Top-up fees might deter students from less well-off backgrounds from applying to universities. The previous Conservative Government had an excellent record in extending higher education to all and we think that top-up fees could reverse that trend. One of the reasons why the Scottish Conservatives oppose top-up fees in England and Wales is that we recognise that they might have a detrimental impact in Scotland. I am a member of the Enterprise and Culture Committee and other speakers in the debate have referred to the committee's report, which makes that point perfectly clear. There is concern that universities in England and Wales have higher incomes and that they will therefore be able to pay higher salaries. They might attract staff from Scotland and might have a higher status in the eyes of overseas students.  There is a growing political consensus that top-up fees might have a detrimental effect on the Scottish sector. That is why our amendment calls on the Executive to respond to the bill by bringing forward proposals to address the impact on Scottish universities and Scottish students, whether they study here or elsewhere in the United Kingdom.

That is a fair point. Universities have the opportunity to offer additional support packages to academics, so the base salary is not always the most important factor. The support of other parties and the Labour rebels is welcome, but it is the Conservatives who will lead on the issue at Westminster so that we can—as we must—defeat top-up fees. The stance that the SNP has taken on the issue is both hypocritical and politically opportunistic. The SNP supports an independent Scotland. If Scotland was independent, no one in Scotland would have any say whatsoever about what happens in the English higher education sector. Even if we were an independent country, there would still be a knock-on effect on Scottish education because we have a single market in the UK with cross-border flows of students and staff—that would remain the position in an independent Scotland. The SNP proposes a policy under which we would have even less say on the impact on Scottish universities than we have at the moment. The SNP's real agenda is now apparent. It has no real interest in supporting higher education in England or even, I suspect, in Scotland. It is trying to ensure that MPs who represent Scottish constituencies vote on an issue in which they have no direct interest, and it hopes to encourage an English backlash that will destabilise the current constitutional settlement. No unionist, of whatever party, should have any truck with such an approach. The SNP approach is not just politically opportunistic but tactically inept. It would have made much more political capital if its Westminster MPs had decided to abstain and had shown up Labour MPs on the issue. Typically, the SNP has not had the wit to see that political opportunity but, given its past record, we should not be surprised about that.

I am sorry, but I am in my final minute. In contrast to the SNP's opportunistic stance, the Conservatives have a principled stance and our Scottish MP, Peter Duncan, will abstain from the vote on the issue. We recognise that the current constitutional settlement is imperfect. In an ideal situation, the Speaker would certify which of the bills that are before the House of Commons apply to England and Wales and which affect the whole of the UK. MPs who represent Scottish constituencies would vote only on the latter. Until that happens, there is a judgment to be made on all pieces of legislation and Peter Duncan is quite right not to vote on this particular issue. Unlike the stance that has been taken by the SNP, which picks and chooses when to have principles, our stance is consistent. I urge MPs who represent Scottish constituencies to follow Peter Duncan's lead and abstain from the vote on tuition fees in England. I have no doubt that if they do so, the damaging proposal of top-up fees will be defeated and we will avoid the dangerous consequences to the UK of this unpopular and unwanted policy being carried through for England on the back of votes from the Labour MPs who represent Scottish constituencies. To conclude, I contrast the principled stance that we have taken with the opportunistic and tactically inept stance of the SNP. We want tuition fees to be defeated both north and south of the border. If all the MPs who represent Scottish constituencies follow our principled lead, I have no doubt that top-up fees will be defeated. I urge them to do so. I move amendment S2M-803.3, to leave out from "will" to end and insert: "imposing top-up fees may have an adverse effect on Scottish higher education; calls on the Scottish Executive to set out its proposals for dealing with any consequential impact on Scottish universities and on Scottish students if top-up fees are introduced in England; rejects the politically opportunistic stance of the SNP on this issue which is intended to destabilise the Union, and calls on all Scottish MPs to follow the lead of Peter Duncan MP, Shadow Secretary of State for Scotland, and abstain from voting on this Bill and, indeed, all Bills that relate only to England and/or Wales."

Principle.

Will the minister give way?

I return to the issue of planning guidance. If current planning guidance is so perfect, why has the Enterprise and Culture  Committee received representations on the issue from across the board—from bodies as diverse as power companies and Argyll and Bute Council, which at our meeting yesterday indicated that it believed that planning guidance was not sufficient?

I commend Christine May and her motion, and I welcome another opportunity to discuss the important issue of renewable energy. Members will recall I lodged a motion, which was debated last November, on the slightly different, but related, issue of planning policy for wind farms. That debate attracted a great deal of public interest. I therefore start with wind power, the issue that is covered in Christine May's motion. Members will be aware that concerns have been raised throughout Scotland about the proliferation of planning applications for wind farms. During the November debate, I called for a moratorium on the granting of planning applications for wind farms where there was local opposition to them until  such time as new planning guidance was issued. There seems to be a growing consensus that we need better planning guidance on the issue. The Enterprise and Culture Committee has heard from people from all different sectors; not just objectors but those involved in the development of wind power.

I am terribly sorry but I have only three minutes. We have heard evidence that the existing planning guidance is inadequate because it does not take account of the cumulative impact of wind farms, and there is no opportunity for the development of local strategies. There are issues that have to be addressed. I am delighted to see that some Liberal Democrat councillors in Aberdeenshire now support my call for a moratorium, which I am sure will give the Liberal Democrat members present something to think about. The motion is about the economic potential of renewable energy, which I acknowledge. The Enterprise and Culture Committee visited the Vestas-Celtic Wind Technology plant in Campbeltown, and it is indisputable that the plant has created jobs in what was an economic and employment black spot. However, I have two caveats. I suspect strongly that if there were no subsidies, no one would be building any onshore wind farms, because there are question marks over their efficiency. There is also concern about the potential economic downside to wind farms and about the possibility that widespread development of wind farms in scenic areas will do nothing for our tourism industry, which is a vital part of our economy. There are, of course, wider issues. As Christine May acknowledged, there are other technologies such as wave and tidal power. I am little bit concerned that by concentrating too much on wind power, we might miss economic opportunities in the other technologies. Although we have factories producing wind farms for Scotland, the technology for them was developed elsewhere, so we are left simply with production jobs. I hope that we can learn from that, so that Scotland can be at the forefront of developing other forms of renewable energy, such as tidal and wave power. Given our great natural resources, we have the opportunity to be ahead of the game. Let us not put all our eggs in one basket. Let us consider how we can develop other technologies and ensure that it is not just onshore wind farms that are the priority. I could raise many other matters, but time does not permit it. This has been a welcome opportunity to debate the issues once  more and I am sure that this will not be the last word on the matter. I look forward to the conclusion of the Enterprise and Culture Committee's report on renewable energy.

If the First Minister's constituency counterpart at Westminster, Frank Roy MP, were to come to him and seek his advice on how he should vote on the bill on tuition fees, how would the First Minister advise him to vote? Would he advise him to vote in favour or against, or would he advise him to abstain?

While we are on dry credentials, perhaps Mr Scott can tell us whether he agrees with Denis MacShane's comment at the European and External Relations Committee last week that to withdraw from the CFP would mean withdrawal from Europe?

This debate has been a welcome opportunity to discuss some very important issues relating to Europe. I disagree with Frances Curran, who seemed to indicate that she believed we should be discussing other matters. Having said that, I agree with much else that she had to say about the European Central Bank and the euro. However, enough about that for the time being. It is interesting that we are conducting this debate against the background of a rather bizarre situation, to which John Home Robertson and Phil Gallie referred. The European Commission is threatening to take the Council of Ministers to court over the breach of the stability pact. It is now perfectly clear that the Government under John Major was entirely right to negotiate an opt-out from membership of the euro in the Maastricht treaty. There are a number of concerns about European proposals. I will touch briefly on two of those. Last month, I lodged a motion on the threat to the Scottish wild game industry from a European proposal that a suitably qualified person should have to certify that all meat entering the food chain is fit for human consumption and that the animals from which it comes have been humanely killed. Clearly, if a couple of wild rabbits or a brace of pheasants that someone buys for dinner must be accompanied by a certificate from a qualified vet, the whole industry will become uneconomic, which would be quite ridiculous. Proposals of that sort simply discredit European institutions. Similarly, this week we learned of another idea—that all products made in the EU should have to be labelled "Made in the EU". Scotch whisky, shortbread and sporrans might be labelled "Made in the EU" and the distinctive branding "Made in Scotland" that contributes so much to their sales might be lost. The same applies to Scottish salmon. I associate myself with Alasdair Morrison's remarks about the salmon industry. My colleague Ted Brocklebank referred to the fishing industry and was absolutely right to do so in this context. When Denis MacShane appeared before the European and External Relations Committee last week, Alasdair Morrison asked him about withdrawal from the common fisheries  policy. Mr MacShane said that withdrawal from the common fisheries policy would mean withdrawal from Europe. That is nonsense. Treaties can be renegotiated. Just as we can negotiate an opt-out from the euro, we can negotiate an opt-out from the CFP. [ Interruption. ] I hear laughter from Liberal members. It is interesting that one member of the Scottish Parliament who has raised the issue of withdrawal from the CFP is the Deputy Minister for Finance and Public Services. I am sure that no one would accuse him of seeking withdrawal from the EU. At issue is what is the best way forward for our country. Many other excellent points have been made. Pauline McNeill made some very good points about the impact of the EU on our criminal law. We should be proud of the justice system in this country, which is different from the system that applies in most of Europe. We have a system that is adversarial rather than inquisitorial. It is not necessarily better because of that, but it is different and works well. We should be cautious about harmonisation for the sake of harmonisation rather than in order to improve our system. In the few moments that remain to me I will deal with the issue of the EU constitution, which was raised by Keith Raffan and a number of other members. Her Majesty's Government has said that that is simply a tidying-up exercise, but it was contradicted by Gisela Stuart, MP for Birmingham Edgbaston and the UK representative on the praesidium of the convention. She said that, despite being someone who was contributing to the writing and development of the constitution, she opposed it and believed that it would be wrong for Britain to sign up to it. Gisela Stuart is not anti-European, by any stretch of the imagination, but she saw the dangers of the proposed constitution nonetheless. In the current edition of "The European Journal", Václav Klaus, the President of the Czech Republic, writes: "I am convinced that if we accepted this document"— the draft European constitution— "as it stands today, if we remained silent or falsely loyal, we would participate in the decision to set off from the current crossroad of European history in the clearly federalist or even supra-nationalist direction. We should all consider it again. And if we can define our own position, do not let us be shouted down for being anti-European. We may be against the European superstate but we may strongly support a reasonably integrated, free, and productive Europe." The President of the Czech Republic is by no means anti-European, but he has reservations about the draft EU constitution. Quite rightly, he believes—as we do—in the need for a referendum to be held on that constitution.  Major issues affecting our integration and involvement in Europe have arisen in this debate, which has provided us with a welcome opportunity to discuss them. To raise concerns about some of those issues, as the likes of Gisela Stuart and Václav Klaus have done, is not to be anti-European or even anti-EU—it is to take a reasonable, realistic stance on what is in our national interest and to speak up for it. I urge the Scottish Executive and Her Majesty's Government to do just that.

I commend Susan Deacon for her motion, which I was happy to sign, and I congratulate her on securing the debate. Four of the five Scottish racecourses have been mentioned this evening and the remaining one is Perth, for which I am delighted to speak up as I drive past it every day on my way to Parliament. The recent success of the racecourse in Perth is something of which the city of Perth and the whole of Scotland can be proud. It was recently voted the best small course in Scotland and the north-east  by members of the Racegoers Club and annual turnover has climbed from £100,000 to £1 million in the past 10 years. The focus on attracting sponsors and providing high levels of prize money has seen Perth climb to 14 th place on the British Horseracing Board merit table. In addition, the racecourse plays an important role in the civic and economic life of Perth and the surrounding area. It manages to draw average crowds of 3,000 people per race day, which is the highest at any of the Scottish racecourses. It is also a popular local tourist attraction. Families in particular enjoy the Perth gold cup day in June—Scotland's biggest family race day, which attracts more than 10,000 visitors. Families also enjoy the family fun race meeting in August, which has a range of activities for all. In light of its recent successes, the racecourse was recently awarded two new race days—2 and 3 July—which coincide with the Game Conservancy Scottish fair at Scone, which gives a massive boost to the local economy. The Perth gold cup has been supported for the past few years by a grant from the partnership administration on Perth and Kinross Council. Far be it from me to introduce a partisan note to proceedings, but it is rather regrettable that the SNP opposition on Perth and Kinross Council has consistently opposed that grant. I say as gently as I can to SNP members that, in the interests of consistency, they might wish to have a word with their party colleagues on that council to suggest that they reconsider their opposition and support the horse racing industry. The racecourse in Perth has also been successful in reaching out to the business community. Its excellent private facilities ensure that the racecourse remains high on the list of corporate opportunities. It provides a corporate outing for more than 200 companies, with more than 4,000 guests every year. Furthermore, the new owners and trainers suite, which is regarded as one of the best in Britain, provides excellent facilities for exhibitions and conferences on non-race days. Perth racecourse is a model of success that shows what can be done and it matches other members' experiences of racecourses throughout Scotland. Members have referred to the OFT ruling, which is a concern for the Scottish racing industry. However, it is not the only concern and other problems face the industry. A constituent who wrote to me recently identified the small number of Scottish thoroughbred horses that are racing. He wrote that our racing is almost totally dependent on horses coming from England and Ireland to keep it going. On the day of the Scottish grand  national meeting at Ayr last April, the six jumping races featured just four Scottish-trained horses. Much more must be done to promote the industry—it is not simply a matter of the OFT ruling. The Executive should work with the industry to identify opportunities to promote and develop the industry right across the board. For that reason I welcome the debate and I commend Susan Deacon for her motion.

Debates on youth justice are always worth participating in, partly because we always have the enjoyable sight of the usual spat on youth justice issues between the Labour Party and the Scottish Socialist Party. Apparently, this is one of the rare occasions when, compared with some of the speeches from the Labour side, I and my Conservative colleagues look like a bunch of pinko liberals, which I am pleased to say does not happen often.

Swift denials from my left, I see. I want to comment on a number of points that were made in the debate. First, I will touch on the issue of diversionary activities for young people, which was raised by a number of members, including Donald Gorrie and Robert Brown. I recently visited in Blairgowrie in Mid Scotland and Fife an initiative called thrillseekers, which was set up to provide an alternative for young people who hang about street corners, and which encourages participation in a wide range of activities. The project was launched in 2001 and has gone from strength to strength. It involves police officers,  youth workers and volunteers from local youth organisations. The project was set up following concerns about the volume of youth-related calls to the police at weekends. As is pretty much the same in any rural community in Scotland, the police in Blairgowrie received calls about under-age drinking, antisocial behaviour and vandalism. Specific groups of young people were identified as being most likely to be involved in those problems and it was agreed to develop activities that would keep them otherwise engaged on Friday evenings and at weekends. What has been encouraging about the experience of the thrillseekers project is that there has been an impact on crime figures, with a dramatic reduction in youth-related calls at the weekends. When I visited the project recently, I saw for myself some of the activities that it runs, which include sports, dancing, disc-jockeying and trampolining. I was impressed by the commitment of all those who are involved in the project and by the range of activities. The thrillseekers project has been successful in addressing the problems of young people's boredom in the rural communities in Strathmore; it has led to a reduction in residents' calls to the police about antisocial behaviour and vandalism involving young people and, importantly, it has improved relations between the police and young people in the area. I understand that the project has been shortlisted for an award in the crime and disorder reduction category of the UK Tilley award scheme, and I wish it well with that. I was pleased to hear the minister announce cash for diversionary activities and I hope that projects such as the one that I have outlined will be given the support that they need to continue and encourage more young people to get involved. Robert Brown mentioned voluntary and uniformed organisations and the difficulties that many of them have in operating. The problem for many such organisations is not one of resources as such, but of getting adult volunteers to support the organisations.

Robert Brown makes a fair point; that is certainly part of the situation, but there is still a problem with getting people to volunteer in the first place because of the way that society has changed. For a start, adults have less free time than they once had and there is also a fear among some adults that, if they work with children, they  might expose themselves to certain risks, of which we are well aware. I will pick up on some of the other points that have been made. Colin Fox and a number of others said that it is important not to stigmatise young people. I agree with that absolutely; only a very small minority of young people are involved in crime. Nevertheless, we must acknowledge that young offenders create a problem for many people in our communities—members of all parties have referred to that—and it is important to note that many people have lost confidence in the youth justice system because they see persistent offenders committing offences time and again and either do not see action being taken or do not see it being taken quickly enough. That is why the fast-track children's hearing that the Executive announced previously and an extension of that pilot are so welcome. The fast-track hearing will help to speed up the process, but there is a need for matters to be dealt with not only quickly, but effectively. My colleague Annabel Goldie referred to the report that was published in December on some of the delays that have been encountered in the children's hearings system throughout Scotland. I am sure that the minister agrees that many of those delays are unacceptable and I appreciate her comments that she realises that they are. We need more consistency, but we also need a wider range of disposals for children's hearings, such as electronic tagging. We also need youth courts—my Conservative colleagues have already referred to them—not only for 16 and 17-year-olds, but for 14 and 15-year-olds. The young people who persistently reoffend, whose behaviour the children's hearings system is not addressing properly and who seem to cock a snook at the justice system and children's hearings system, should be sent to youth courts. The children's hearings system is not working for them, which is why we need youth courts. We must restore public confidence in the youth justice system. As far as they go, many of the Executive's proposals are welcome, but the Executive must acknowledge the centrality of the children's hearings system. We need to speed up justice, deal more effectively with offenders and deal very effectively with persistent offenders. That will mean setting up new youth courts for 14 and 15-year-olds who are at the core of the problem. Those measures would make a real difference to reducing youth crime and would restore public confidence in the justice system. I am pleased to support the amendment in the name of my colleague Annabel Goldie.

I am pleased to contribute in support of Clackmannanshire Council's bill to promote the new railway line from Stirling to Kincardine via Alloa. I commend Bill Butler and his colleagues on the bill committee for the work that they have put in—work that is evident from their speeches this afternoon. The construction of the new railway line will be of considerable benefit to my Fife constituents who live in the area and to people further afield, because the railway line will, in due course, become part of the national network. Not only will the development of the railway be of direct benefit to individual constituents, but it will make an important economic contribution. If the economy is to thrive, Government has an important role in providing suitable infrastructure to allow easy movement of goods and people around the country. It is a function of Government to provide transport spending and I welcome the Scottish Executive's proposed investment in this particular project. It is to be hoped that the construction of the railway will act as a stimulus to economic development in the area. I particularly welcome the new rail link if it means that we can go further than we do at the moment in removing freight from our roads. With increasing vehicle traffic, we should be looking for all opportunities to move freight off roads and on to rail. That is not always practical, however—transporting freight by rail works only when both the supplier and the customer are within easy reach of a rail head. However, I understand that the new rail link offers opportunities, particularly in delivery of coal, a bulk product that is especially suited to transportation by rail. As a number of members have said, another advantage in moving coal on to this route and off the Forth rail bridge will, we hope, be improvement in reliability of passenger trains on the bridge. I have heard numerous complaints from constituents about the lack of reliability in the current services. If we can improve that reliability, it would be most welcome. I understand that, since privatisation of the railways, the volume of freight that is moved by rail has increased by some 50 per cent. That is an excellent and welcome statistic, but we should always be looking to increase that figure. If I may, I  will mention two examples where I believe that that could be done. I recently visited the Highland Spring Ltd factory at Blackford in Perthshire. Highland Spring is a very successful and growing business; it is now one of the largest employers in Perth and Kinross. The bottled water that it produces in bulk is presently delivered throughout the UK by road, but the company would be very interested in transferring its product to rail. The factory lies immediately beside the Perth to Stirling main line, and immediately adjacent to the disused Blackford station, so transfer to rail must be a serious possibility. A local campaign is under way to have Blackford station reopened for passenger traffic and I understand that Highland Spring has commissioned a feasibility study into utilising the station, with suitable adjustments and sidings, to allow transport of goods by rail. That would bring considerable benefits to Highland Spring as a business, to the wider economy of Perth and Kinross and, indeed, to Scotland. There would also be benefits to the environment if the development were able to proceed. I have written to the minister to encourage him to look favourably on the proposal when it crosses his desk. I will give another brief example of goods that are transported by road at present that could be transported by rail. On Monday, I met representatives of the Forestry Commission at Inver, by Dunkeld. There is a plan for major tree felling at Rannoch forest in Perthshire. At present, that would involve transfer of logs in large vehicles over small country roads, which would not only cause damage to the roads, but disruption and inconvenience to people living in the area. However, the west Highland line passes nearby in the forest and the Forestry Commission has a proposal to load the timber directly onto freight wagons. As there is no siding at the appropriate point, that is heavily dependent on the timing of trains on the west Highland line, but the Forestry Commission seems to be confident that any problems in that regard can be overcome. There is still a problem in relation to English Welsh & Scottish Railway Ltd, the freight operators, agreeing a realistic cost. If the minister were able to ease the way, that would be welcomed by the community and would have major environmental benefits. I am sure that both the Forestry Commission and Highland Spring would make excellent use of the new rail line between Kincardine, Stirling and Alloa. I feel that I might have digressed a little from the strict subject matter of the bill before us. However, I think that there are wider issues about the expansion of rail that should be addressed and I thought that it would be remiss of me to miss the opportunity to raise them in this debate.  I support the general principles of the bill and wish every speed to the project.

To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Executive's response is to the Auditor General's report "Scottish Enterprise: Special audit examination ". (S2F-440)

The First Minister's rather complacent reply comes the day after we learned that in 2000 Scottish Enterprise spent £298,000 on rebranding the business shops as the small business gateway and that, earlier this year, it spent another £269,000 on changing the name of the small business gateway to the business gateway. On top of everything else that appears in the Auditor General's report, does that not make it clear that Scottish Enterprise cannot be trusted with a budget of £500 million? Do such examples not prove the case for transferring at least part of Scottish Enterprise's budget out of its hands—clearly, it cannot cope—and using that money to  reduce the burdens on our hard-pressed business community?

Does the minister accept that the people who suffer most in the current comprehensive school system are those who cannot afford private education and cannot afford to buy a house in the catchment area of a good school, but are trapped in the catchment areas of poor schools? Why does he not accept that those are the people who suffer under his policies?

I am sure that a present-day Labour politician such as the First Minister will not want to be reminded of the involvement of past-days Labour politicians in Commonwealth games bids. Can he assure us that we will not have a crook like Robert Maxwell involved in any future Scottish bid for the Commonwealth games?

I declare an interest, as I am a solicitor—albeit not currently practising—and a member of the Law Society of Scotland. I wish to speak in support of the amendment in the name of my colleague Annabel Goldie, because I do not think that it is possible to consider the availability of legal aid without examining the justice system in the round and particularly the public's confidence in it. In her opening remarks, the minister mentioned the issue of criminal legal aid, which was also touched on by Margaret Smith. There is a deal of public frustration in relation to that issue. I will give members an example. Let us say that there are two trials going on in adjoining courtrooms in the High Court down the road. In the first courtroom, Mr Smith is on trial for housebreaking. He is a gentleman with a long record of previous convictions for housebreaking who has served a period of time in prison. He is in receipt of legal aid to pay for his expensive  defence team as he meets the criteria because he does not have a job. Indeed, he has not worked or paid tax in his life. In the adjoining courtroom is Mr Jones. He has been charged with a serious offence—a murder or violent assault—of which he happens to be innocent. Because he is someone of modest income, he does not fulfil the legal aid criteria and has to fund his own defence. Because of the seriousness of the offence, his solicitor recommends that he engage junior and senior counsel, and his defence therefore costs him a great deal of money. Although he is acquitted of the offence, he is left with an enormous bill to pay for clearing his name—£30,000 or £40,000, plus VAT, of course, so that the state gets its share of the money—and is left, if not bankrupt, having to sell his house and use up any modest savings that he might have to fund his defence. That example—which is fictional, but not too far from the truth in many circumstances—illustrates why people can become frustrated with criminal legal aid and the way in which it is allocated. However, there is an issue not only with criminal legal aid but with civil legal aid. I remember acting a number of years ago for clients who wanted to take a case to court and who fulfilled the criteria for civil legal aid but who were turned down by the Legal Aid Board. That was at the time when Robert Maxwell's sons were up for various misdemeanours of which they were rightly being accused. They had applied for and had been granted legal aid, and it took me great pains to explain to my client why the Maxwell brothers got legal aid and my client did not. There are a number of ways of accessing legal advice that do not involve going to solicitors, and perhaps we need to consider expanding some of those services. A number of websites and telephone advice lines are currently available. Many organisations, such as the Consumers Association, provide legal advice by telephone, and many insurance companies now provide telephone advice on legal cases as part of their package. Members have referred already to the citizens advice bureaux, which provide an excellent legal advice service. I visited my local CAB in Perth about a month ago and was able to see for myself the work that the advisers do. Many of those advisers are not legally trained but, because of the number of cases with which they deal, they are able to grasp legal concepts over time. However, the CAB has an enhanced service, because it has an arrangement with many local lawyers in Perth whereby people who have a legal case that requires a bit more attention have the opportunity of a free first consultation with solicitors. In that way, although they do not have to be eligible for  legal aid and to go through the process of filling out forms, they are able to get some advice on whether their cases are worth pursuing and taking to another stage. There is scope in civil cases to get round the court system as much as possible. There is an opportunity for alternative dispute resolution and mediation, which avoid having to go to a solicitor and go to court, if that can possibly be avoided. One of the initiatives that the previous Conservative Government initiated was the small claims action, which has been taken up widely. It is an opportunity for claimants themselves to take cases up to a certain level to court and avoid having to employ solicitors altogether—the level of fees awarded at the end of such cases is deliberately capped to dissuade people from employing solicitors. That initiative has been successful, particularly in consumer cases, and has enabled people to access the courts. Perhaps the Executive should consider expanding it. There will always be a great deal of interest in civil legal aid while the number of cases continues to expand, because we seem to be growing a compensation culture in this country. The Institute of Actuaries calculates that Britain's compensation culture now costs around £13 billion a year and that that is rising by something like 15 per cent year on year. That has a substantial impact on our economy, quite apart from anything else: premiums for employers' liability insurance are increasing dramatically and, in fact, for some employers in the construction industry, insurance premiums have increased twentyfold, which is a dramatic increase. When examining this issue, we need to be conscious of the fact that it has an impact on wider society. These days, people are much more conscious of their rights. They are attracted by adverts on television and see that organisations and companies have been set up deliberately to exploit people who may have a claim against a public body or private company. We need to be wary of that. The Conservative amendment indicates that the debate is not just about legal aid but about the whole justice system. The example that I gave of criminal legal aid and the circumstances in which it is awarded shows that the public are nervous and, sometimes, unhappy about the way in which the justice system operates. That is why we need to consider the whole picture, not just the award of legal aid.

Given all the international evidence that points to a clear link between a low-tax, lightly regulated economy and a growing population—witness the examples of the United States of America, New Zealand and Singapore—will the minister outline what steps the Scottish Executive is taking to create a more business-friendly environment in Scotland?

My point was that we must get a balance in the debate. I hope that the member understands that I did not suggest for a moment that there was not a serious problem of domestic violence.

I welcome the debate on this important subject. Violence against women is clearly unacceptable, as is violence of all kinds. We should all work to build a society where people can go about their lives free from the fear of abuse or violence from any other party. Although I welcome the debate, I highlight an aspect of the debate on domestic abuse that is often overlooked. I refer to domestic violence where the victims are male. Although it has already been touched on in the debate and I do not wish to steal Mr Rumbles's thunder, it is an important subject to highlight. The 2000 Scottish crime survey disclosed that 19 per cent of women had experienced domestic abuse at some point in their lives. However, the same survey showed that 8 per cent of men had also been victims—a substantial proportion. Domestic abuse of all kinds, whoever the victim and whoever the perpetrator, must be equally unacceptable, or the Parliament's commitment to equal opportunities and inclusion is meaningless. This is by no means the first debate that we have had in Parliament on violence against women, but I do not recall a debate on violence against men. I will be interested to hear from the minister when the Executive intends to debate that subject. Violence against men in the home is a serious matter and much of it goes unreported. If it is hard for a woman to report domestic abuse, it is probably even harder for a man to admit that he has been abused by his partner. After all, men are supposed to be the stronger sex and many men in such circumstances would face the fear of ridicule. We must work to remove that stigma.

I do not dispute for a moment that women are victims of domestic abuse. If the member had been listening, she would have heard me say just that. My point is that we cannot focus exclusively on situations where women are victims. It is unfortunate that that is what we have been doing. Maureen Macmillan made a good point when she intervened on Donald Gorrie to say that domestic abuse is all about the power balance. In most relationships it is correct to say that the man is the dominant partner. However, that is not the situation in every relationship and there are relationships in which the woman is the dominant partner and that must also be recognised. I looked up the Executive's website on domestic abuse to see what it had to say about the matter. There is a brief statement on that website that says: "some men are abused by their male or female partners." Everything else on that website relates to women; every photograph is of a woman. Even the children who feature on the website and who are photographed with the women are girls and not boys. Not a single male is featured on that website. If the Executive is saying that domestic abuse can affect men and children, that is not the impression given by its website. I am sure that members will remember the Executive's advertising campaign that had the strapline: "1 in 5 women live with the constant threat of domestic abuse." The television adverts featured dramatic pictures of women and were designed to create the impression that one in five women was regularly the victim of physical abuse, or to put it another way, that one man in five was a violent abuser of women. Unfortunately, the truth of the matter was somewhat different. The Scottish crime survey showed that one in five women had experienced domestic abuse at some point in their lives. That is a world away from saying that they lived with a constant threat. Domestic abuse is defined widely—as on the Scottish Executive website—to include "keeping you short of money" and  "telling you what to wear, whether or not to wear make up." I do not dispute that those are serious issues, but they are a world away from the popular perception that domestic abuse has to be physical. Following complaints that were made to the Advertising Standards Authority and the Independent Television Commission, the Executive changed the strapline on its adverts to the more accurate: "One in five women have experienced domestic abuse in their lifetimes." It is rather unfortunate—to put it mildly—that the Executive used taxpayers' money to promote a distorted message in the first place.

It is, frankly, outrageous for the minister to suggest that I do not take the issue seriously. I said that the Advertising Standards Authority looked at the advertisements and came to the view that they were inappropriate. If we use taxpayers' money to promote a message, we should do so accurately. It does the Executive no credit to make ill-founded statements such as the one that the minister has made. I hope that the Executive will reflect on that issue in the future when it comes to similar debates. I also hope that the Executive will treat the issue of violence against men as a serious issue worthy of attention.

Given the fact that programmes such as the modern apprenticeship scheme are administered by Scottish Enterprise but delivered by further education colleges, would it make more sense and assist the finances of colleges if the schemes were administered by the colleges themselves? We would thus cut out a tier of bureaucracy and cost.

We are seeing some unusual alliances in the chamber this morning. I was somewhat surprised to find that the Scottish socialists were proposing a debate on poverty because, if there was ever a political ideology that has caused human misery and poverty throughout the globe, it is socialism. Let us consider the example of a few socialist countries. North and South Korea share the same peoples and the same geography; the only difference between North and South Korea is political ideology—North Korea is a socialist state, while South Korea is a democratic country with a free-market capitalist economy. Gross domestic product per capita in North Korea is a mere $1,000 per annum, whereas it is $19,400 in South Korea. Infant mortality in South Korea stands at a mere 8 per 1,000 live births, whereas it is 27 per 1,000 live births in North Korea. North Korea has a miserably low growth rate while South Korea is booming. The whole of North Korea is in extreme poverty and is dependent on foreign aid from the rest of the world to avoid starvation of its people, who are oppressed and miserable. In contrast, South Korea is a prosperous country that is reliant on market economics to grow business, create private sector jobs and generate wealth, which all contribute to the elimination of poverty.

I will be happy to address some of those issues in a moment. I merely observe that for many years the party that was in power in this country and in many of the local government areas to which the member referred has been the Labour Party—not my party. I appreciate that the socialists find the comparison with North Korea uncomfortable. Let us take another example—Cuba, which is Mr Sheridan's favourite holiday destination. GDP per capita in Cuba is only $2,300 per annum, whereas it is more than $25,000 in the United Kingdom. Cuba is a recipient of foreign aid to the tune of $68 million per annum; the UK, on the other hand, is a foreign aid donor to the tune of $4.5 billion per annum. Far from being attracted to a low-poverty  utopia in Cuba, people are desperately trying to leave the country to escape poverty and political oppression. Every year, hundreds, if not thousands, of Cubans risk death trying to escape Cuba—and the evil Fidel Castro's regime—by boat to reach the United States, with its free economy and political system.

If life expectancy in Cuba is so great, why are people risking their lives to avoid the socialist regime there? Why are they getting on boats to sail across the channel to the United States? Things cannot be that great in Cuba if they do that.

Exactly—they go to get the freedoms that are available in the United States but not in Cuba. I am probably way over time.

It seems that the socialists would prefer everyone to live in misery and on low incomes, provided that there were no disparities of income. We believe that the Scottish Government should be seeking to create wealth in our country and to reduce the burdens on businesses, such as high business rates and water charges, and to reduce the whole range of business regulation. By freeing the economy, we will create economic opportunities, which will create jobs and spread wealth. In that way, we will raise living standards for all and help to reduce poverty. It was the great American President Abraham Lincoln who said that we do not help the poor by pulling down the rich and that we do not help the weak by attacking the strong; that is a lesson that the socialists have yet to learn. A socialist recipe will simply cause in Scotland—as it has caused elsewhere in the world—more human misery and poverty. Instead, what Scotland needs is a dynamic free economy that creates wealth and opportunity for all. I move amendment S2M-625.1, to leave out from first "recognises" to end and insert: "notes that socialism has caused more poverty and human misery than any other political ideology in modern  history; further notes that socialist policies, where implemented, have singularly failed to remedy the lack of economic growth that is the root cause of poverty; believes that the best way to tackle poverty is to create a strong, dynamic, free enterprise economy with opportunity for all, and therefore calls upon the Scottish Executive to reduce business rates and ease the burden of water charges on Scottish business thereby taking the first steps towards improving the Scottish economy."

Will Margaret Curran give way?

I do not necessarily accept that measures of relative poverty are always the truest assessment of poverty, but does the minister accept that disparities in income—the Executive's own measure—have increased rather than decreased since new Labour came to power?

I commend Sarah Boyack for lodging the motion and securing the debate, which I welcome. The Conservatives have the pleasure of welcoming the commitment of local authorities, community organisations and the Fairtrade Foundation to the fair trade cause, because it demonstrates the free market at its very best. Indeed, as an entirely voluntary project, the fair trade scheme is essentially capitalist. We all know that the market price of any commodity does not come down to the cost of production but to the amount that people are prepared to pay for that product. In that respect, the fair trade movement has very successfully cultivated the Fairtrade  brand and has also been successful in persuading consumers not only to buy but to pay more for Fairtrade products. In much the same way, people will pay much more for tee-shirts with brand names such as Tommy Hilfiger and Calvin Klein than for other tee-shirts. I heard Jamie Stone refer to raw market forces. Fair trade works because of such forces and because of consumer power. After all, consumers have the choice of buying Fairtrade products, and fair trade works because they are prepared to exercise that choice. If we did not have markets, fair trade would not be a success. As a result, Fairtrade is a brand worth supporting.

Mr Stone completely misunderstands my point. Because we have a market, consumers have a choice—and exercise their choice—to buy Fairtrade products. They will happily pay more for those products because they know that more of their money will go to the producers. As a result, the market delivers success for Fairtrade producers.

I am sure that the Co-op will find the Fairtrade brand a success and that its profits will increase as a result of selling that brand. Why has the Co-op been running an advertising campaign promoting Fairtrade? To attract people into its shops. People will come into the shops to buy Fairtrade products, and they will spend more money on other things at the same time.  Everybody is a winner from fair trade, so what is the problem? That is why I commend the Fairtrade mark. Let us remember that fair trade is about more than the Fairtrade mark. It is about ensuring fair and open trading conditions for all producers in the developing world. By forming an exclusive trade block, the European Union is guilty of creating a barrier to trade with the developing world. Is that fair on producers in third-world countries? The common agricultural policy has proved particularly damaging to people in developing countries, where 90 per cent of the work force depends on farming for a living. By choosing to protect our markets with vast amounts of annual subsidy, the EU economies stand accused of restricting market access, depressing produce prices and discouraging investment.

I am sorry, but I will not give way, as I have already taken interventions and will shortly run out of time. If we are serious about tackling deprivation and poverty in the developing world, we must be equally serious about creating fair trading conditions for their producers. That might mean removing advantages from some home producers. Fortunately, we do not yet produce tea, coffee or the raw materials for chocolate in these islands—although we might do soon enough with some more global warming.

I am sorry, but I am already over time and am anxious to come to a close. If we are to open up fair trade across the board, we must face up to the possibility of home producers with much higher costs being forced out of the market. Although United Kingdom food producers are fairly efficient, people on this continent might have to pay the price—unless we are prepared to defend the common agricultural policy, which is not something that I think we should do in the long term. Essentially, this is a moral argument. Is it right to protect producers nearer to home if that protection means condemning others around the globe to poverty and starvation? I cannot pretend to know the answers to such questions, but I commend Sarah Boyack for lodging her motion and giving us the opportunity to debate these issues.

Will the minister give way?

I am very grateful to the minister for giving way under the circumstances. If the current planning guidance is so adequate, will the minister tell us why SNH, the Government's own adviser on this issue, has said that we need a new national framework?

I am grateful to the member for giving way, in light of the shortage of time. If the present planning guidance is sufficient, why do not only objectors but power companies say that the planning regime is unsatisfactory?

I am delighted to have the opportunity to present this motion for debate and I thank all the members who have signed it. I welcome to the public gallery people who have an interest in the subject who have travelled all the way from Angus, Perthshire, Argyll and other parts of Scotland to watch this evening's debate. I lodged my motion in response to meetings with my constituents in Mid Scotland and Fife and meetings with power companies that are concerned about the lack of clear planning guidelines. However, it is clear that concerns exist throughout Scotland and, as you said, Presiding Officer, it is a measure of the public concern about the matter that the discussion forum on wind farms on the Scottish Parliament live website has attracted more entries from the public than any other discussion forum in the Parliament's history. Wind farms can be extremely large, with turbines up to 100m tall, and they will dramatically affect the appearance of the landscape. The cumulative effect of all the developments that are being proposed in Scotland, if they are allowed to proceed, would be the most significant change in our landscape in several generations. Public interest in the matter is immense and it is essential that the Parliament is seen to address the issues  that are raised as a result of the deluge of planning applications in recent months. At the outset, I stress that I am not against renewable energy, nor am I against wind farms per se. I fully support the need for all of us to play our part in reducing CO 2 emissions. However, the existing planning guidance that is contained in national planning policy guideline 6 was last revised in November 2000 and it is time for a new national framework with clear planning guidelines that will outline the capacity of different parts of Scotland to accommodate wind farms. It is also time for a clear line of dialogue between the Scottish Executive, planning authorities and local people. In the meantime, a moratorium on existing unapproved applications that face local opposition would give us an opportunity to have a thorough review of how to achieve the Executive's goal of having 20 per cent of energy supplied by renewables by 2010.

I am suggesting that there should be a moratorium where there is opposition. If there is opposition to a wind farm in a particular area, that should be enough to halt it, as people will need to pause and think. I will elaborate on the matter shortly, if Mr Ewing will forgive me. A moratorium would enable Scotland to develop a cohesive strategy to reach the Executive's goal in the most efficient, environmentally sensitive and economic manner possible. The Parliament's Enterprise and Culture Committee—of which I am a member—will commence an inquiry into the issue in January. Without a moratorium, the danger is that we will shut the stable door once the horse has bolted. Concerns that have been expressed on the website and raised elsewhere range from the potential impact on tourism—surveys indicate that tourists come to Scotland not to look at wind farms, but for the unspoilt beauty of our landscape—and the knock-on effects of that impact on our economy through to the environmental impact of the construction of wind farms, the destruction of natural habitats, threats to wildlife and pollution. The contributors to the website are not nimbys who are concerned about their property prices—they are ordinary people whose lives are being disrupted by planning applications for turbines; some of those turbines could be up to 100m high and sited very close to  homes and businesses. One posting on the website reads: "I live in an area where Scottish Power has applied for planning permission to build 17, 93mtr turbines. The closest of these is to be a mere 600mtrs from my property ... How close is too close?" I have heard it said in various quarters that there is nothing wrong with existing planning guidance and that it is robust enough to deal with current and expected applications. However, even the Executive's own advisers in Scottish Natural Heritage have expressed concerns about the high degree of competition for sites and a first-past-the-post race to book grid capacity and secure planning permission. SNH believes that it would be helpful if there were a national framework to provide steerage as to the expected capacity of different parts of Scotland to accommodate renewable energy and—crucially—the share that one planning authority should accommodate. Each planning authority could then plan strategically. I fully support that view. The pressure that is being put on local authorities by the current deluge of applications is immense. Local planning departments do not have the expertise or staff to cope with all the details in such a quantity of applications. Council officials have expressed concerns about the costs of local inquiries and the burden on councils' budgets of a proliferation of inquiries arising from the large number of planning applications.

That is a fair point, but I would prefer to deal with wider issues, if I may. Mr Crawford makes his point well and I am sure that he will do so again. Any guidelines that are introduced must take account of the economic and environmental impact of developments, both at local and national level. As the only control is the planning system, it is extremely concerning that guidelines are currently so inadequate. At a meeting that I and a number of other members attended, which was hosted by Scottish Enterprise, I raised that matter with a representative of the power companies. They expressed their frustrations at the number of applications that they have to make, at huge cost in terms of time and resources, to get some of their proposals accepted. The power companies expect a success rate of one in eight.

If Mr Purvis will forgive me, I will not. I have taken several interventions and I have a few more points to make—

Clear guidelines and a planning framework would make the process more economic for the power companies, as they would apply for planning only for sites and areas that were approved for development. That is why we need to take some sort of zonal approach. In the first session of the Parliament, the Rural Development Committee recommended that the Scottish Executive should develop "procedures for local consultation between developers, planning authorities and interested parties, and guidance on best practice in such developments." More important, it further recommended that the Scottish Executive "work together with planning authorities to develop mechanisms to allow potential development zones to be identified in local structure and development plans, in an effort to reduce conflict." The zoning idea is important, as it would allow us to address the impact of the schemes on tourism and the rural economies that are currently under threat. A new planning regime for onshore wind power would be welcomed by all parties—not only by objectors and residents, but by power companies, developers and SNH. If the current rush to develop onshore wind power continues, we will change the Scottish landscape forever. We have one chance to get this right and future generations might not forgive us if we rush into large-scale wind farm developments without pausing to consider all the consequences while we still have time.

In my five tight minutes, I would like to concentrate on the impact that transport has on our economic performance. We all know about the dismal levels of economic growth in Scotland; the situation in relation to manufacturing is particularly severe, with our manufacturing sector having been in recession for several quarters and our performance against the rest of the UK being particularly poor. Scottish business starts at a disadvantage because of our distance from our markets in the rest of the UK and in Europe. Transport infrastructure is therefore especially important to Scottish business. Certain goods, particularly those produced in bulk, can be moved by rail. In that regard, it is pleasing to note—Mr Sheridan might be interested to learn this—that use by freight of the railways has increased by 50 per cent since rail privatisation. However, for the great majority of businesses, travel by rail is inappropriate because of their distance from a railway. Those businesses rely on a good roads network. When we talk about transport infrastructure from a business point of view, we have to put the emphasis on road construction. The previous Conservative Government had an excellent record on improvement of Scotland's road network. We made the A90 dual carriageway from Edinburgh to Aberdeen, we completed the M74 motorway, we dualled sections of the A1, dualled the A9 between Stirling and Perth and did more besides. The programme was of considerable benefit to the Scottish economy in  allowing goods and people to move around. The result was that economic growth in Scotland outstripped that in the rest of the UK in the early 1990s. However, the election of a Labour Government in 1997 and the subsequent moratorium on road projects set our road-building programme back many years. I should point out that the Conservative Government did not need a transport authority to do the job; it simply did it.

I am delighted that Mr MacAskill has welcomed the previous Conservative Government's investment in transport and I am sure that he is well aware of what was achieved in Scotland. Scotland's transport was underfunded by some £90 million between 1997 and 2004, in comparison with England. No new trunk roads were constructed in Scotland between 2001 and 2003 despite motor vehicle traffic in that period increasing by 2 billion vehicle kilometres. The results of that are congestion on Scottish roads and the impeding of people's ability to travel and move goods around. The Scottish economy can well do without that burden.

I am sorry, but I am running out of time. On previous occasions, I have called for the dualling of the A9 trunk road between Perth and Inverness. The economy of Inverness continues to grow rapidly with a consequent increase in traffic levels on the A9, which is that city's connection with the central belt. We all know about the high accident rate on the A9; much of it is caused by the design of that road, with its long sweeping curves and its switches from dual to single carriageway and back again. Both from an economic point of view and a road-safety point of view, there is a strong case for further investment in the A9 upgrades. Although the Executive is investing some money in that regard, which I have welcomed, upgrading is being conducted on a piecemeal basis. Unless we have a clear commitment to dualling the A9, even in the long term, the economy of Perthshire and the Highlands will continue to be disadvantaged.  I believe that there is also an argument for the creation of rest areas on the A9 to help reduce accidents. I raised this issue with the former minister with responsibility for roads and I understand that the A9 safety group will consider the issue. I have yet to hear any conclusions from that group so I would be interested to hear from the minister whether it has yet reached any. The Executive talks a good game when it comes to transport but, to be frank, its record over the past four years and the two years of the Labour Administration before that does not bear that talk out. We must acknowledge the vital requirement for an excellent transport infrastructure if we are to turn around our dismal economic performance. That means that there must be investment in new road building in particular, and that the Executive needs a clear commitment to road programmes with detailed start and completion dates so that we all know where we stand. I support the amendment in David Mundell's name.

We have been underinvesting in transport for hundreds of years.

That would include Liberal Governments.

Turn the page and read on.

Read our manifesto.

After the debate, we will be clear about the importance of cities to Scotland's success. My colleague Brian Monteith made the good point that Edinburgh is very much the driver of the Scottish economy. If we examine the most recent growth figures, which were announced this week, we find that Scotland would probably be in recession without the economic performance of Edinburgh and the Edinburgh region. We must consider Scotland as a whole and must develop policies for the whole country. That means improving infrastructure throughout the country, reducing business taxation and tackling regulation, which is what our amendment calls for.

If the member will forgive me, I will not, because I wish to make a number of points; I may allow him in later. Given the nature of the debate, there was a danger that we would end up getting special pleading from all sides of the chamber. We got a bit of that—for example, Sarah Boyack and Margaret Smith spoke about Edinburgh and Robert Brown and Paul Martin talked about Glasgow. When discussing the record of the previous Conservative Government, Paul Martin—who I think has now left the chamber—seemed to forget about the Glasgow eastern area renewal project, which levered in some £250 million of private investment. That compares well with the £40 million of public investment from the city growth fund that has been invested over three years. In his speech, Fergus Ewing mentioned everything from whisky to bottling friendship, but said very little about cities. Perhaps he should have deferred to his colleague Andrew Welsh, who made a thoughtful and comprehensive speech on cities. Mr Ewing did not even refer to the city of Inverness, which he represents.

I do not recall Mr Ewing referring to Inverness but, as he assures me that he did, I apologise. As an Invernesian, I wonder whether Mr Ewing would agree that the best thing that the city fathers in Inverness could do would be to demolish the horrendous 1960s monstrosities that blight the riverside underneath the castle and to replace them with more sympathetic buildings.

That was an interesting point, but it would have been more relevant to make it in a debate on PPP, for example. We have had some special pleading, so here is some of my own. I know from my regional interest that people in Perth feel that, although Perth is a city—albeit a city without a royal charter—and the ancient capital of Scotland, it is not given the same recognition as Aberdeen, Dundee, Glasgow, Stirling and so on. As Brian Monteith mentioned, Perth and Kinross Council feel that that is particularly unfair, given that the population of Dundee, for example, is in decline, while that of Perth and Kinross is on the increase. Even though Perth is becoming an increasingly popular place to live, it always seems to be losing out to Stirling and Dundee when it comes to central assistance. Civil service job dispersal is an example of that. Dundee secured the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care, but Perth and Kinross has missed out on all the projects that it has pursued, in spite of the fact that it has the lowest average earnings for men of any local authority area in Scotland. We know all about the decision on Scottish Natural Heritage going to Inverness and the difficulties that that has caused. If the decision had been that SNH should go to Perth, many of the Executive's problems would have been averted. It might not be too late for ministers to change their minds on that, so I urge them to think again and to consider Perth as a safe third option for SNH's location. If we isolate the cities and treat them as special cases, other equally needy parts of the country lose out. That is unfortunate and our amendment talks about the need to consider all parts of the country, not just our large cities, as economic drivers.  The territorial ambitions of cities also represent a threat. For example, there are those in Dundee who wish that city's boundaries to be extended to take in part of Perth and Kinross and Angus, in the mistaken belief that the people who live in those areas consume city services and should therefore be contributing to them through their council tax. In fact, the great majority of council spending goes on education and social work, neither of which is consumed by non-residents. The best way for us to regenerate our cities and all our communities is to boost economic growth. Let us cut business rates, water charges and regulation and invest in our transport infrastructure. It is by getting government off the backs of people and of business that we will achieve thriving and prosperous cities, both old and new, throughout Scotland.

Given the importance of the EU constitution, will the Scottish Executive make representations to Her Majesty's Government to seek a Britain-wide referendum on the constitution? If the British people find the constitution offensive, they should have the right to throw it out.

Given the adverse impact on Scottish universities of top-up fees in England, will the minister tell us what representations he and his colleagues in the Executive have made to Her Majesty's Government in relation to the white paper? Has he stressed to the UK Government the damage that will be done to Scottish universities if top-up fees are introduced in England?

I am pleased that we are debating how to create a stronger enterprise culture in our schools. I hope to address this vital topic in due course. Creating an enterprise culture is essential for our young people's prospects and our country's prosperity. A recent survey that I believe the University of  Strathclyde conducted showed that the Scots are the people in the UK who are most jealous of others' success. That is the sort of attitude that we must change. Every step in the right direction—even one from the Executive—is welcome. Experiencing a more enterprise-based ethos in school is worth while for young people. Moreover, creating an enterprise culture is a vital investment in tomorrow's entrepreneurs. It is essential to turn around our economic decline, but we can do so only if our people are prepared to meet the challenge of becoming wealth creators. I am sure that all members are aware of the statistics on poor economic growth in Scotland, which is far lower than in the rest of the UK. That shows the scale of the problem that we must deal with. I go so far as to suggest that the left-of-centre political consensus in Scotland does not help us to create a nation of entrepreneurs. Mr Mather did not refer to that—perhaps he was watching his back in his party—but he might agree with me. Entrepreneurs who are successful in business make money. Scots have a fantastic history of succeeding in business throughout the centuries, but we have a culture and a media that try too often to pull such people down. We must deal with that problem.

Yes, I deny that. I think that by your fruits you shall be judged. We will wait and see. So far, little sign of any economic progress has appeared. If the strategy delivers results in 10 or 20 years' time, I will welcome that, but we will believe it when we see it.

I thought that we were discussing enterprise in education and I will try to stick to that issue, but I remind Brian Adam that, for a period in the early 1990s, Scotland's economic growth outstripped that of the rest of the UK. Of course, we had a Conservative Government at that time. I have examined the recommendations in the Executive's report, many of which are welcome  and some of which may help to create an enterprise culture. However, as usual with Executive publications, although the document contains a lot of target setting, initiatives and aims to work towards, I wonder how much meat is in it. I recently looked at the Executive's enterprise in education website, which can be found at www.enterpriseineducation.org, to see how well the Executive is doing in promoting its strategy. I was amused to find that Nicol Stephen is still the Deputy Minister for Education and Young People and that the report that we are discussing has still to be launched—the website has not been updated since March. If the Executive is serious about encouraging enterprise in education, perhaps the minister should look at that website and decide that it is time to bring it up to date and put his house in order. Our amendment talks about what the business community looks for. For the business community, enterprise in education is all very well, but it is not the priority. The business community's priorities are simple: it wants school leavers who have basic skills in literacy and numeracy, who turn up on time and who have enough communication skills to allow them to pick up a phone and be polite and clear in conversation. Those are simple demands. It is all very well trying to create an enterprise culture in schools, but if those basic skills cannot be fostered, groups such as the Federation of Small Businesses, with which I discussed the issue only last week, can rightfully ask, "What is the point of the strategy?" The attainment figures for five to 14-year-olds that were published last December show that more than half of pupils fail to meet the basic standards in English reading. The figures for mathematics and English writing are also disappointing. Those statistics back up the anecdotal evidence from employers about young people who turn up for their first day at work unable to read, write or communicate properly. We believe that young people should have more opportunities to get involved with further education colleges, training centres and work placements. I appreciate that such initiatives already exist, but we need longer programmes that involve contact of more than one day a week or one week a year and which would produce real achievements. We also want specialist schools such as the technology colleges that exist down south, in which enterprise cultures are embedded in the curriculum. I was happy to find among the 20 recommendations in the Executive's report the Conservative policy of allowing 14 to 16-year-olds the opportunity to undertake courses at FE colleges and training centres.

I am sorry, but I will run out of time shortly. That policy is one of the best ways in which to create an enterprise culture among our young people, especially among children who are disillusioned with the curriculum in their schools. Where trials of the scheme have operated, they have proved highly successful. Nevertheless, the recommendation in the report does not go far enough. I call on the Executive to extend the scheme to allow wider access to FE colleges rather than the basic one day or half day a week that is available at present. FE colleges have a key role in the delivery of enterprise education, and not just through giving school pupils access to vocational training. Many colleges offer taster courses for young people.

I am obliged to the minister for that clarification. No doubt the figures are correct, but the point that I was trying to make was that, rather than keep the existing situation, in which most pupils go to FE colleges for only a day a week, we should consider extending that experience and making it available more widely. There is already in schools a range of programmes that schoolchildren can take up. Those programmes, such as young enterprise and the Duke of Edinburgh's awards, aim to increase the skills we are talking about. Although the recommendations in the report are useful, they will interest only children who are already involved in enterprise programmes. I wonder whether children who do not take up existing opportunities will want to take up new ones. I think that it was George W Bush who said that he could not do business with the French because they did not even have a word in their language for entrepreneur. Although we all, I hope, want more entrepreneurs, we must be aware that we cannot create them through Government action. Rather than try to educate school pupils to be entrepreneurs, the Executive would do our economy a better service if more of our school leavers could spell the word "entrepreneur". The message from the business community and from existing entrepreneurs and wealth creators is  simple: we should concentrate on improving basic skills in education before we try anything fancy. If the Executive does that, it will do more to help our economy than any number of glossy reports and recommendations will. I move amendment S2M-467.3, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: "recognises the necessity of creating an enterprise culture in Scotland in order to help reverse our economic decline; welcomes any moves to encourage young people to become more entrepreneurial but understands that what the business sector primarily looks for from school leavers are skills in literacy, numeracy, communication and timekeeping, and accordingly calls upon the Scottish Executive to take steps to reduce the unacceptable number of school pupils failing to meet basic standards in reading and writing, widen access to vocational courses at further education colleges for 14 and 15-year-olds, and increase opportunities for school pupils to experience work placements."

rose—

The local examples to which the minister refers are all welcome. However, when I speak to employers, they tell me that they find that school leavers who come to them for jobs increasingly lack basic literacy, numeracy and communication skills. Will the minister outline what the Executive is doing to try to drive up standards in those areas?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is satisfied with the provision of respite care for people with dementia. (S2O-519)

I spoke recently to a group of carers who expressed concerns to me. One of their major worries was the stack of forms that they have to fill out every time they access a respite care bed. If a patient goes back to the same bed three months later, the carer has to fill out all those forms again. Will the minister look at the issue, to see whether there is a way in which we can streamline the paperwork that is involved, so that carers who are already in a stressful situation do not have to face that additional stress every time they access respite care?

To ask the First Minister what the impact of the introduction of top-up tuition fees in England and Wales will be on Scottish universities.  (S2F-211)

The key stakeholders to whom the First Minister referred are all on the record as saying that top-up fees in England and Wales will have a seriously detrimental effect on the Scottish universities. In light of that, if the First Minister bumps into his friend the Prime Minister in Bournemouth next week, will he have a word with him and ask him not to proceed with top-up fees in England and Wales? If the Prime Minister refuses, will the First Minister, as leader of the Labour Party in Scotland, ask his colleagues representing Scottish constituencies at Westminster to vote down top-up fees for English universities in order to protect the Scottish higher education sector?

I am afraid that Mr Scott will have to do his research a bit better in future.  Why are we having this debate? Eighty-two per cent of the British people want to have a referendum on the EU constitution. The Conservative party wants to have a referendum, as do the Liberal Democrats, the Scottish National Party, the Green party, the Scottish Socialist Party and Mr Swinburne. There is a clear majority of people in Scotland and in the Parliament who want a referendum on the EU constitution. The most striking aspect of the debate has been the shameless behaviour of the Liberal Democrats and their cheerleader, Mr Scott.

In a second. Clearly, the Liberal Democrats have been reading the campaign handbook, which says that they must act shamelessly. That is exactly what we have heard from them today. Nationally they say that they want to have a referendum, but in the chamber they slither and squirm and try to get out of it. Why? Because they are so out of touch with public opinion.

In a second. The Liberal Democrats are being told at their national conference that they must downplay their stance on Europe because it is unpopular with the voters.

I signed that paper and I am proud of it.

Mary Scanlon has made the point well. Perhaps we will hear from Mr Rumbles later.

Mr Ballard has made a good point, if I may say so. It is typical for those who see public opinion going against them to say that we must have a proper debate, but when we propose a mechanism for having such a debate—a referendum—they get cold feet.

I have taken three interventions in a row and I must deal with more points that were raised in the debate. Irene Oldfather and others made the point that the Conservatives did not hold a referendum when they were in Government. They are absolutely right but, let us face it, times have changed. The Government has had referenda on a bewildering variety of issues. There was a referendum on whether Middlesbrough should have an elected mayor. There was a referendum on whether Hartlepool should have an elected mayor—and they ended up electing a monkey. The Government, which has had referenda on all those issues, cannot bring itself to hold a referendum on the fundamental issue of the new European constitution. According to Peter Hain, the constitution would have substantial constitutional significance. The Government will not hold a referendum because it knows that it would lose. That demonstrates its utter contempt for the views of the Scottish people on the issue. The Parliament has a duty to make it clear to Tony Blair that we will not accept that situation. Helen Eadie said that we are ill-informed about the issues and I quite agree. That is why we must have a referendum, so that we can have a proper discussion of the issues, let the arguments for and against be aired, and let the people decide. The SNP made a comment about fishing, which is a vital issue. I heard Margaret Ewing mention my colleague Struan Stevenson, who is the president of the European committee on fisheries. It is incumbent upon him to represent the views of the UK Government in relation to the constitution and the fact that it might enshrine the CFP. That is not the position of the Conservative party.

I cannot give way to the member because I do not have time. Yesterday in the European Parliament, Struan Stevenson made it clear that that is not his personal position and that he fully endorses  Conservative party policy. That was underlined by Iain Duncan Smith in Perth on Saturday, when he said: "A future Conservative government will 'unilaterally withdraw' from the CFP if national control of fishing stocks cannot be renegotiated". I trust that all members paid close attention to the recent Swedish referendum on the single currency. Sweden is a small country, as is Scotland, and despite all the relentless pressure from the Swedish establishment, to which Alex Neil referred, the Swedes whole-heartedly rejected the euro. That was a resounding victory for the ordinary citizens of Europe whose views are consistently ignored by the self-styled statesmen in Brussels. The greatest weakness of the EU in its current guise is its woeful lack of democratic accountability. It is, therefore, a disgrace that the First Minister and his deputy are pressing ahead with their involvement in the so-called Scottish euro preparations committee, with a view to bouncing the Scottish people into the euro against their will. If Europe is to move forward with the consent of its people, it is essential that the Parliament stands up for the interests of Scotland and insists that Her Majesty's Government holds a national referendum on the proposed European constitution. A referendum is supported by members from all round the chamber. It is the policy of the Conservatives, the Liberal Democrats, the SNP, the Greens, the SSP and the SSCUP. The Labour party should support the Conservative motion; its members know they want to.

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

It is extraordinary that Mr Scott is arguing against his party's policy of having a referendum on the European constitution. Why does he argue against his party leader?

No I am not.

If we are so ill-informed about European issues, as the member claims, does she agree that the best way in which to bring those issues out so that they can be properly debated is to have a referendum?

I am always setting off alarms—in people's heads, at least. I approach this debate with a degree of nostalgia, thinking back to education debates in the previous session of Parliament. I am pleased that I managed to leave Scott Barrie with some warm memories of my participation in those debates. This afternoon's debate has been good and well informed, with many interesting speeches. We miss the contributions that the SNP's Colin Campbell made in the previous session. As a former head teacher, he always  made intelligent and well-informed contributions, especially on school discipline. My colleague Margaret Mitchell, who is a former schoolteacher and has worked in special needs schools, brought her experience to the debate. I also enjoyed Rob Gibson's speech. He spoke from experience and was well informed. Anyway, that is quite enough cross-party consensus from me. The Scottish Conservatives welcome the Executive's commitment to tackling the problem of indiscipline.

Yes, Mr Rumbles, however. However, the top-down target-setting approach that is so beloved of the coalition partners has simply failed to address the problem. As the minister well knows, the number of violent incidents in our schools rose by a staggering 700 per cent between 1997-98 and 2001-02. That is the shameful legacy of the Executive's disastrous exclusion policy. When I listened to the minister, I thought that he must have spent the morning polishing his brass neck. He sought to deflect criticism of the Executive's record by accusing the Conservatives of overblown language and of over-egging the pudding. He did so simply to deflect criticism away from the Executive's disastrous record. We do not believe that there is a problem in every school in Scotland and we have never said that we did. However, we know that the problem is getting much worse. It has got much worse as a result of the Executive's policies and we have yet to hear from the Executive what it will do to make things much better. We need to give more power back to our schools, rather than bewildering them with yet more failed Executive initiatives. The Executive needs to give more power to individual schools to deal with indiscipline. For example, head teachers must be encouraged to draw up their own code of conduct and must be given the authority to enforce it.

I will, if the member is brief.

Oh, Mr Rumbles. As he well knows, we have no intention of imposing anything from above. Imposing from above is his coalition's policy; we want to devolve power to schools. But yes, let us involve the pupils too, in what would  preferably be a zero-tolerance policy. When I speak to school pupils, I hear that they are as fed up with disruptive pupils as are teachers and parents. We have problems in our schools. I had a letter from a constituent just the other week about problems in a school in Forfar where pupils were out at lunch time being disruptive and making a nuisance of themselves. I have tried to take the matter up with the school. However, we also have good examples. Blairgowrie High School—my local high school—had pretty serious problems during the previous session of Parliament. There was disruption, there were violent incidents and one pupil had to go to court to get an interdict against some of her fellow pupils so that she could get on and sit her exams in peace. I am pleased to say that things have been turned round there. A new head teacher has come in, provided leadership in the school, and imposed a uniform policy that has considerably improved the ethos of the school. The pupils and the teachers are enjoying the new environment. It is all about a contract between the pupils, the teachers and the head teacher. Leadership is being provided locally and it is working. That is a model that should be followed elsewhere. We believe that the current one-size-fits-all system in Scotland is too rigid and fails too many of our young people. I thought that Alex Neil made a good point about the lack of motivation, because it is in the S3 and S4 age groups—particularly among the boys—that there is a real disengagement with the system. Sometimes pupils in those age groups see schooling as being boring and irrelevant to their needs, which leads to their becoming a source of indiscipline in the classroom. We want such pupils to be given the alternative option of moving into further education and working on vocational courses that are more in tune with their needs and wishes. In that regard, the trial that Glasgow City Council has carried out should be rolled out throughout Scotland. Rigid mainstreaming policy does not work—it has failed. We need more local leadership and we need the Executive to scrap the ludicrous policy of targets for exclusion that has driven up the statistics on violent attacks.

I am sure that the Conservatives do not characterise every school as a battlefield. Is the minister not concerned that the number of violent  assaults has increased sevenfold under this Administration?

Presiding Officer, thank you for calling me early in this debate. As I intimated to you, I have to leave  to go to another engagement. I apologise in advance to members and the minister for leaving the debate early. I shall read the Official Report with great interest and study the minister's response. I commend Roseanna Cunningham for her motion and for securing this debate even in her presently handicapped circumstances. We wish her a speedy recovery. I had the pleasure of visiting DARA Almondbank about two weeks ago, when the Minister of State for the Armed Forces was there. I had the opportunity to tour the facilities and to meet members of the work force. I was impressed by their dedication and the quality of the skills that was apparent. The work that is carried out by DARA at Almondbank is unique. It has the only test rig for Chinook helicopters outside Philadelphia. If DARA were to close, heaven forbid, it would be almost impossible for the MOD to have the work carried out elsewhere. Almondbank might seem a strange place to have a defence aviation repair facility. Originally, all the facilities were based in Coventry. I understand that the reason why the facility moved to Almondbank was that, during the second world war, Coventry was subject to such bombing by the axis powers that the facilities were outsourced to different parts of the UK. The reason why Almondbank was chosen was that it was felt that, tucked away in a quiet corner of Perthshire, it would be safe from German bombers. The Perthshire economy has benefited considerably. As we have heard, DARA is now a vital part of the Perth and Kinross economy and it employs 325 people. It is not only the headline figures that are important because many of the jobs at DARA are highly skilled engineering positions. If those jobs were lost to the Perthshire economy, they would be difficult to replace. The quality of those jobs is particularly important given the dependence of the Perthshire economy on the service sector, with its low-paid jobs in tourism and hospitality, for example. There is no doubt that the closure of DARA would have a devastating impact on the Perthshire economy. There would be a loss of some £28.8 million per year, as the Mackay Consultants report showed. According to the same report, if one were to multiply the loss of jobs by a standard multiplier of 1.6, 521 jobs would be lost in total, which would mean an increase in unemployment in Perth and Kinross by a third. That is a substantial figure. When I was at DARA, I heard the Minister of State for the Armed Forces, Adam Ingram, speak to the work force. He was full of praise for the work force, who welcomed his warm words. However,  warm words are not enough; there must be a firm commitment from the MOD to retain the jobs at DARA. The members of the work force to whom I spoke felt reassured by the minister's remarks. They were aware that, to an extent, the future lay in their hands. They were confident that, given the quality of the work done at Almondbank, on no objective assessment was there any argument for taking that work away. However, politicians are funny creatures, as we know. We need the Scottish Executive to make the point that the jobs must be retained in the Perthshire economy. We know that defence is a reserved matter but, as Roseanna Cunningham said, this is an economic issue. Economic and enterprise powers are in the hands of the Scottish Parliament, so it is a matter for the Scottish Executive to address with the Ministry of Defence. I welcome Roseanna Cunningham's motion and I look forward to reading the minister's response.

Does the minister believe that the current consumer spending boom, which is fuelled by low interest rates, and the growing deficit in public finances are sustainable? Does he believe that that is a good outlook for the Scottish economy?

That was under a Conservative Government.

I welcome Mr Wallace to his new position as Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning. I am sure that all in the chamber will wish him every success in his vital task. I wonder whether Mr Wallace has reflected for a moment on the fate of his predecessors. The Parliament's first enterprise minister rapidly gained promotion to the job of First Minister, but of course did not last long in that job and left in disgrace. Our second enterprise minister left the job complaining of overwork. Our third enterprise minister, I am delighted to say, is no longer with us, because he lost his seat in May to my colleague David McLetchie. I am not sure which of those fates awaits the Deputy First Minister, but it would be ungracious of me not to wish him a happier time than that of his predecessors. I welcome the emphasis on the Scottish economy in the partnership agreement, and I welcome the fact that on this first day of the new parliamentary session we are devoting the afternoon to a debate on the Scottish economy, especially if, as we are told, it is to be the first in a series of regular debates. I agree with much of what the minister said. In particular, I and members of the business community warmly endorse what he said about the need to have a new entrepreneurial culture in Scotland. However, it is not just the fear of failure that we have to be wary of but the fear of success. For too long, Scots have looked warily on those who are successful in business, as if making too much money or being too successful is somehow unseemly. Our media love pulling down successful public figures. It is as if the national cry is, "Don't get too far above yourself, sonny." We have to change that attitude. The media have some responsibility in that as well. There is much more to be done than that, if we are to improve the state of the Scottish economy. Although the words of the new Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning are welcome, he has to take many more steps. We have a dismal rate of economic growth, we have job losses in manufacturing, we have a falling business start-up rate, and we have a generally depressed outlook.  Talking about what needs to be improved is not enough. The minister will need more than words if he is to be taken seriously—he needs to take action. In particular, the minister needs to take action to cut business rates at least to the level of those in England, which would restore the level playing field that was established by the Conservative Government. I listened with great interest to what he said about the level of rates. I have heard his arguments before, about how the basis of valuations in Scotland is different from that in England. Many of those arguments have been debunked by business organisations, which have provided evidence that in certain sectors of the economy, for example small hotels, the basis of valuation means that Scottish businesses are more heavily rated than those in the rest of the UK. However, let us assume for the purpose of argument that the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning is correct, and that there already is a level playing field. Surely if he was serious about promoting the Scottish economy, he would want to give Scottish business a competitive advantage over the rest of the UK, given that we start from a competitive disadvantage because of our geography and our distance from markets. Surely an enterprise minister who is looking to drive forward the Scottish economy would say, "I welcome the opportunity to give Scottish business a leg up."

I am well aware of the small business rates relief scheme. I am also well aware that many sectors of the economy felt that the scheme was unfair, not least the small hotels to which I referred, which felt that it militated against them. Not every sector of the economy welcomed the scheme. The issue is not just business rates. We need action on the crippling increases in water charges, which are damaging our small businesses, and we need action to improve the basic skills of our work force, because we have falling standards of literacy and numeracy. As I mentioned, an incredible 25 per cent of the work force have no qualifications whatever. We need action to improve our transport infrastructure, so that goods and people can move around more easily. We also need action to sort out the mess that is Scottish Enterprise. If the minister is serious about driving forward the Scottish economy, he has to take action in those areas and so prove that he is  really committed to making a difference to our economy. I read with interest the SNP amendment and listened with some interest to Mr Swinney's speech. As usual in debates on the economy, the SNP has only one club in the bag, and that is to talk about fiscal autonomy. I have some sympathy with the argument that the Parliament needs to be more financially responsible, but it already has the power to deal with aspects of business taxation. It already has the power to cut business rates and the power to deal with water charges, but it chooses not to use those powers, so why would it choose to use any additional powers? What Mr Swinney is arguing for—and I see his argument—is a change of Administration. He is arguing that he should be First Minister and that he would do those things. He is not arguing for a change in powers.

My point is that we need a will in the Parliament to cut business taxation. There is no will in the Parliament at present to do that, regardless of whether we use the existing powers or any enhanced powers that we may have in future. It is all about the Administration—who is running it and whether that will exists. The SNP's position is a handicap to the argument for fiscal autonomy and not an asset. I heard Mr Swinney on the radio this morning, and in the chamber, saying that the so-called Westminster parties—he did not define them—could be accused of racism. That is a serious charge. I appreciate that the leadership challenge to Mr Swinney is weighing heavily on his shoulders and that he is anxious to get as much publicity as he can, but he should not seek a cheap headline by making unwarranted and outrageous statements about political opponents. That is not conduct becoming the leader of a party in the Parliament. I trust that Mr Swinney will, on reflection, consider his remarks ill-judged and withdraw them.

Well, there we hear it. I am sure that Mr Wallace does not wish to go the same way as his predecessors as enterprise  minister. If the words of the partnership agreement "Growing the economy is our top priority" to which Mr Wallace referred are to mean anything, he must take the action on the economy that I have outlined. The Scottish Tories will engage constructively with the Executive parties on the future of our economy. Much of what the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning said today is welcome, but his words will need to be matched with action if our economic decline is to be reversed. I move amendment S2M-287.1, to leave out from "endorses" to end and insert: "notes, however, the poor performance of the economy with levels of growth lower than the rest of the United Kingdom, falling levels of business start-ups, rising levels of business failure and job losses in the private sector; recognises that the objective of long-term, sustainable growth is currently being hindered by high non-domestic rates, increased business water charges and a heavy burden of corporate regulation, and calls on the Scottish Executive to use its existing powers to reduce the business rate poundage to levels at least equal to those in England, to ease the burden of increased water charges that are stifling business growth and to work proactively to free businesses from undue regulation, thereby eliminating the competitive disadvantage at which many Scottish businesses find themselves relative to their English counterparts and allowing the Scottish economy to grow to its full potential."

I am grateful to Mr Swinney for giving way. He will be well aware that I share some of his views on giving the Parliament more financial independence. However, if the Parliament will not use its existing power to cut business taxation, why does Mr Swinney think that it would use any enhanced powers to do so?

Will the minister give way?

Does Mr Wallace think that it is acceptable that 25 per cent of the work force has no qualifications? What is the Executive doing to address the lack of basic skills in the work force? Employers are concerned about basic skills in literacy and numeracy.

The minister seems to be saying that the reason why Scottish water charges are so high is that we do not have effective regulation in Scotland, so what is he going to do about that?

That investment was made because the companies were privatised.

Will the member take an intervention?

I would be interested to hear the member expand on his idea of a not-for-profit trust. I invite him to set out what advantages a not-for-profit trust would have that a mutual company that was owned by its customers, all the profits of which were reinvested for the benefit of its customers, would not.

The Labour party lost seats at the 2003 election.

The member makes some interesting points, but the water industry in England is privatised and yet is delivering better quality water, better quality infrastructure and better investment at a lower cost to the consumer. Given that that is the case, how can all the things  that the member says are wrong with privatisation be true?

Does Nora Radcliffe appreciate the fact that this year's increases are only part of the problem? The other major issue is the fact that Scottish businesses are paying much more than their counterparts south of the border—sometimes 16 times more for an office of similar size. Will she comment on what the Liberal Democrats believe to be the reason for that?

Will the minister confirm that Scottish domestic customers are paying on average 20 per cent per annum more than domestic customers in England and Wales?

I will take a sip from my glass of private water and begin. The Government-owned quango, Scottish Water, is rapidly becoming a national embarrassment. It is failing Scotland with higher domestic bills than in England; higher—and rapidly rising—bills for commercial premises than in England; and poorer quality water. It is time for the Scottish Executive to take action to address the concerns of water consumers throughout Scotland and to consider again the quango's management and structure. I am sure that members will have had similar experiences to mine—being contacted by numerous constituents to complain about a rise in water charges in the current financial year. I have had a number of such letters, which tell of increases of between 200 per cent and 500 per cent. To quote just one example, Hackston's of Dunkeld, who are plumbers of Cathedral Street, Dunkeld, wrote to me on 12 May to complain about an increase in their charges from Scottish Water from £73.32 last year to £344.94 in the current year—an increase of almost 500 per cent. That charge is for an office with one toilet and a cold water tap. It is not only small businesses that are affected; voluntary groups are affected too. The secretary of Grandtully bowling club in Perthshire wrote to me on 11 May to complain about an increase in fixed charges from £13 in 2002-03 to £130 in 2003-04—a rise of 900 per cent. That is for a small bowling club with fewer than 30 members who use water only for the toilets and the occasional cup of tea. Business organisations such as the Federation of Small Businesses, the Confederation of British Industry Scotland and the Forum of Private  Business tell me that they have been deluged with complaints about the increases from members. In some cases, the increases threaten the future viability of those small businesses. My colleague Phil Gallie tells me about Andersons Hardware and Hire in Dalmellington, Ayrshire, which has experienced an increase of more than 400 per cent in water charges since last year. When the proprietor phoned Scottish Water to complain that the increase threatened the viability of his business, he was told that it was up to him to run his business better. The words pot, kettle and black come to mind.

Hindsight is a wonderful thing. We have considered the performance of the water quangos—the three boards and Scottish Water—and clearly they do not work. As Mr Fergus Ewing is aware, if one draws a comparison between Scottish Water's performance and the performance of the private water companies south of the border, it is clear which model is delivering for its customers. The Federation of Small Businesses believes that the decisions that were taken and the rules that were made by the water commissioner and, in particular, the switches to increased fixed charges for water supply are at the root of the problem. Today we ask the Scottish Executive to consider urgently the charging structure for Scottish Water. It is not only the increases against last year's charges that constitute the problem. Scottish businesses already pay substantially higher bills than equivalent businesses south of the border. BP's Grangemouth refinery will pay Scottish Water £12.7 million in the current year. South of the border, the equivalent bill would be in the region of £7 million. BP is considering taking Scottish Water to court to try to force a reduction. There are some more dramatic examples. In some cases, commercial premises in Scotland pay 16 times what their equivalents pay south of the border. Water charges are placing Scottish businesses at a competitive disadvantage. It is little wonder that Digby Jones, director general of the CBI, said in Edinburgh last Friday that it was seriously likely that companies would pull out of Scotland because of soaring water bills. He said that CBI members were deeply concerned about the increased cost of water compared with charges in England and that the charges contributed to the competitive disadvantage of Scottish companies.

I am obliged to Mr Crawford for that helpful intervention and I will develop that point if he will bear with me for a moment. All those examples of increased charges seem to be at odds with the Executive's declaration that growing the Scottish economy is its first priority. Scottish businesses already face higher business rates than those south of the border; now they have the added burden of higher water rates. That double whammy makes Scottish business uncompetitive and makes Scotland a less attractive place in which to do business than the rest of the United Kingdom. I appreciate that Scottish Water requires investment in infrastructure, but I wonder whether I am too cynical to suggest that the increases are directed at those in the small business sector because they are in the weakest position to protest. If the increases were applied to the domestic sector, I imagine that every MSP in the chamber would be drowned under the weight of complaints from constituents and the matter would be right at the top of the Executive's agenda for action. However, the small business sector is regarded as a soft target for Scottish Water and that is simply disgraceful. Domestic customers, however, do not escape. Scottish household bills have increased by 94 per cent in real terms during the past decade, whereas English domestic bills have risen by only 22 per cent since 1989. The average measured household bill in England and Wales is £209 for 2003-04 compared with £245 in Scotland—that is 20 per cent higher—yet Scottish Water delivers lower water quality, more pollution from leaking sewers and more wasted water as a result of leaking pipes. The water commissioner has concluded that, as a result of Scottish Water's inefficiencies, the average household pays about £86 a year more than should have been necessary had Scottish Water been as efficient as its English counterparts.

Mr McNulty will have the opportunity to make a speech in due course. Is he disagreeing with the water commissioner, who says that Scottish householders are paying £86 a year too much because of the inefficiencies of Scottish Water? Let us remember Mr McNulty's role in the famous referendum. Perhaps he needs to reflect on that in the light of experience. We are aware of the problems of Scottish Water. The question is, water we going to do about it?

First, the Scottish Executive must take urgent action to reduce the burden on Scottish businesses. That might involve examining the water commissioner's approach to fixed charges for small businesses and considering increased use of water meters. The question of Scottish Water's inefficiency also requires to be addressed. As I pointed out, Scottish customers are paying through the nose for the inefficiencies of the Scottish water industry. I appreciate that there has been a reorganisation of Scottish Water, but that does not excuse its poor performance compared with its counterpart south of the border. It is difficult to regard the Scottish water industry without reaching the conclusion that the difference between the more efficient and cheaper water companies in England and Scottish Water is that the English companies are in the private sector. If the Scottish water industry had been privatised at the same time as the English water companies, we would today have a more efficient industry, better quality water and lower bills for more domestic and business customers. Only by moving Scottish Water into the private sector, whether as a privatised company or, preferably, as a mutual company, will we provide a proper solution.

Not at the moment. I want to respond to Mr Crawford's point. I should make it clear that my party has no ideological problem with the notion of privatisation. I do not want anyone this morning to accuse us of being wets. However, the information that we have received from industry analysts is that investors would not find Scottish Water attractive if it were sold off. Moreover, Welsh Water prospers as a mutual company and Yorkshire Water is considering a move from its fully private status to becoming a mutual company. As a result, it seems that mutualisation offers a better model.

If Mr Crawford had read our motion, he would have found that we call on the Scottish Executive to investigate the different models of mutualisation to see which would be the most suitable. It is clear that mutualisation works. I read with some interest the SNP amendment, which "calls on the Scottish Executive to consider a not-for-profit trust". What exactly is the difference between a not-for-profit trust and a company limited by guarantee that returns any profits to its members? I am not sure that I see any difference at all. Indeed, I wonder whether the SNP is so ideologically opposed to the private sector that it cannot swallow the thought of using the words "private company" and instead dreams up the phrase "not-for-profit trust".

Mr Lyon has not been listening to me. I have outlined why Scottish Water's charging structure needs to be examined. However, in the longer term, the organisation's fundamental structure must be addressed or we will continue to see the price rises that I have highlighted.

I am in my last minute.

I am grateful.

I point the minister to the example of the privatised companies in England. They were able to deliver better quality service,  better water quality and lower charges for a period of 10 years and more because they were in the private sector. We should follow such a model. It is true to say that Scottish Water is burdened with a £2.1 billion debt. When the English water companies were privatised, their debts were written off, although much of that money was recovered from the sale proceeds. However, it is wrong to think that Scottish water companies have been penalised unfairly. As Peter Jones pointed out in The Scotsman on Friday, the net cost to the taxpayer of writing off the debts for the English water companies was around £50 per customer whereas in Scotland the figure would be about £300 per customer. There can be no argument that it is justifiable at this stage to write off more debt, at least not until such time as Scottish Water can show itself to be an efficient industry that strives to make cost savings. A mutual company would be owned by its customers and employees and would be answerable to them. Being part of the private sector and operating in a competitive environment would give it an incentive to drive down costs. Furthermore, a mutual company would be free from political interference. I should point out that, far from the Tories having a monopoly on such an idea, the Scottish co-operative movement has also expressed an interest in the mutual model. As a result, it should command support from across the chamber. When I saw the Executive's amendment, I thought that it was having a laugh. The amendment says that Scottish Water "has started the process of delivering cost effective and improved services". Where are they? That statement will come as a great surprise to the many small businesses that I mentioned earlier. The Executive amendment reeks of complacency. The fact is that the Executive appoints the regulator, owns Scottish Water, as it owned the three previous water authorities, and appoints the management. Ultimately, the buck stops with the Executive, which means that it must sort the matter out. However, there is no sign today that the Executive is taking the business community's real concerns seriously. Mutualisation offers a model for the future of Scottish Water that will deliver a better quality service at lower cost to Scottish householders and—equally important—Scottish business. It is time for the Scottish Executive to take the necessary action to prevent Scottish Water from continuing to be a burden on economic growth in Scotland and an embarrassment to the nation. I have pleasure in moving, That the Parliament notes with concern the dramatic increases in charges by Scottish Water to businesses in 2003-04 which, in some cases, amount to nearly 500% more than the amount charged in 2002-03; believes that these increased charges bear no relation to the service provided by Scottish Water to these customers; is concerned that these rising costs have increased the competitive disadvantage faced by Scottish firms, particularly in relation to England; further notes that household bills have gone up by 94% in real terms over the past decade, while English domestic bills have only risen by 22% since 1989; acknowledges that privatisation in England has brought substantial capital investment which has led to lower bills for businesses and households alongside improved water quality; calls on the Scottish Executive to address urgently the concerns of domestic and business customers in relation to these higher charges and to look at widening competition with a view to reducing costs, and further believes that, as public ownership has failed customers in Scotland, the Executive should investigate models of private ownership.

I am sure that Roseanna Cunningham would characterise Mr Gallie and perhaps even me as politicians who can speak our minds. Does she think that if we believed that Britain should pull out of the EU we would be afraid to say so?

This has been an enlightening debate in which we have heard the parties set out their positions on the European constitution. It seems that Labour now believes unreservedly in the euro but, like some latter-day St Augustine, thinks that it does not want it quite yet. The famous five tests dreamed up on the back of an envelope in the back of taxi to give some credibility to the Government's position are quite irrelevant compared to the sixth test: can Labour win a referendum? The answer to that question is, of course, no. Labour therefore has to dream up all sorts of excuses as to why the other five tests have not been met. I am sure that that process will continue for many years to come. I am pleased that the Lib Dems are as enthusiastic about the euro as ever. They are the people who said that we should have joined the  euro when it was established in 1999, despite all the evidence that that would have been a disaster for the UK economy. Wim Duisenberg, the president of the European Central Bank, said just yesterday that he had to revise his forecast for euro zone growth from the 2 per cent that he had predicted for the coming year down to between 0.4 per cent and 1 per cent. He said: "Inflation is dropping significantly, further fuelling economists' worries about the risks that prices might start falling, damaging investment and risking even lower growth." It is clear that joining the euro in 1999 would have been a disaster for us.

Mr Raffan did not give way to me, but I will show him a little more courtesy than he showed me.

That is a fair point from Mr Raffan—I will address it in my remarks. I want to deal with a point that Jeremy Purvis raised about inward investment. Ernst & Young published a report on 4 June on inward investment in the UK that showed that the UK share of inward investment projects in the EU rose from 26.5 per cent in 2001 to 28.4 per cent in 2002. The report said: "The UK will continue to punch well above its weight in inward investment terms in Europe. To continue to do so its efforts must not be sidetracked by the euro debate." That is the fact of the matter, from the consultants Ernst & Young. We are not being damaged by staying outside the euro zone. The motion today is from the SNP and, interestingly, I detect a note of healthy Euroscepticism from members on the SNP benches. Of course, the SNP's policy was once independence in Europe. If the press are to be believed, there are some within the SNP who are starting to question whether independence is in fact what they want at all. Perhaps they are thinking twice, not just about independence but about whether they want to be in Europe after all. As my colleague Brian Monteith said—indeed George Lyon, in a remarkably Eurosceptic speech, also made the point when he quoted Alex Neil—if fiscal autonomy is the policy of the SNP, how does the SNP square that with its policy on joining the  euro? Joining the euro means giving up control of interest rates and economic decisions and, in due course, taxation policy. What fiscal autonomy will be left to Scotland if we join the euro zone? The fact is that the euro would be a disaster for our economy.

I am sure that Irene Oldfather will not be surprised to learn that I occasionally disagree with my esteemed colleague Mr Clarke on that issue as on others. The euro would not be to our benefit. We trade substantially with Europe but, by comparison with the rest of the UK, we have large oil and electronics sectors. Those industries are priced in dollars and euro fluctuation against the dollar would only damage them. On interest rates, I would like to respond to Keith Raffan's comments. Looking at the property market in Edinburgh, Inverness or other hot spots in Scotland, who can argue that it is prudent to call for 2 per cent interest rates? In the euro zone, as Ireland has found out to its cost, interest rates that are set too low mean high inflation and long-term damage.

I am sorry, but I have already taken a number of interventions and I am very short of time. We must retain the same currency as the rest of the UK. As Margo MacDonald said, the rest of the UK is our main market. If we were to be independent, we would still have to have the same currency as England to retain our single market.

I am sorry, but I am in the final minute of my speech. SNP members are out of step with public opinion in Scotland, and not for the first time. They would surrender our currency, our control of interest rates and our national ability to influence economic affairs, which would have serious consequences for jobs, living standards and other aspects of economic welfare. By contrast, on this issue as on so many others, it is the Conservatives who speak for the people. We believe that the Scottish Parliament must be responsible for ensuring that Scottish views on the  convention are clearly represented to the Westminster Government, thereby ensuring that Scotland's specific concerns are covered in any final outcomes. Only we see that membership of the single currency and the inability to set interest rates in our own interests would hit jobs and incomes. To safeguard people's living standards, we must keep control of our economic policy and set the interest rates that are right for us. Throwing away that flexibility would undermine economic stability, putting jobs at risk. Only we oppose a European constitution, because that would be a further step down the road to a unitary super state. Whatever the outcome of the European convention, the Scottish Conservatives believe that the people of Scotland have the right to decide. The Government must hold a referendum on the proposed European constitution. It must trust the people. I am delighted to support the amendment in the name of my colleague Phil Gallie.

I am delighted that the member has given way. Will she say which leader of a major political party in the UK is the only one who has campaigned on a platform of withdrawing the UK from Europe?

I understand that it was the policy of the Liberal Democrats that we should join the euro in 1999, when it was established. Given the respective performances of the UK economy and the euro zone economies since that time, have the Liberal Democrats revised their opinion?

rose—

Will Keith Raffan give way?

Will the member give way?

The commissioners were all reappointed, however.

Will the member give way?

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive is satisfied with the performance of Scottish Water. (S2F-40)

I am not sure that the First Minister's response will bring much comfort to the many small businesses in Scotland that have seen water bills rise this year by 200 per cent, 300 per cent and up to 500 per cent in some cases. If the First Minister is serious about the Executive's stated aim that "Growing the economy is our top priority" why does he tolerate a situation in which some Scottish businesses are paying 16 times more in water charges than the equivalent businesses in England?

Will the member give way?

I look forward to seeing the promise of free school meals for all in the next SNP manifesto, under Alex Neil's leadership. The bill seeks to remedy an unintended consequence of a change to the benefits and tax system on eligibility for free school meals. It is a technical measure to ensure that those who currently benefit from free school meals will continue to access them. The move to child tax credit removes the existing qualification for eligibility for free school meals. I rather wonder whether those responsible for the benefit changes were even aware of the impact that those changes would have on free school meals. If they were aware, they took no action, which meant that the bill was necessary. Whatever happened to joined-up government? I shall digress for a second, as other members have done, on the issue of child tax credits. There is no doubt that the whole system is an absolute mess. I have been contacted by many constituents—as I am sure other members have—who have complained about the way in which the system has operated and about underpayments and overpayments. A constituent told me that she realised that she had been overpaid and phoned up to complain. She was assured that the  calculations were correct, but she had done her sums and knew that they were not. Her colleagues and other people she knew had been similarly overpaid and had happily spent the money, but she had a bit more sense and said that she would keep the money, as she knew that, sure as guns, the Inland Revenue would be asking for it back. That must be happening right across the country. I have also been contacted by staff at the Inland Revenue call centre in Dundee, who are utterly frustrated by the situation. They have been bombarded with telephone calls from members of the public and are ill equipped to deal with the situation. The computer continues to crash and people cannot get through by telephone. When people eventually get through, they take out their frustration on staff. I appreciate that that is nothing to do with free school meals, but it is a concern. Will the minister take the matter back to colleagues in Westminster on the Executive's behalf and tell them to sort out the system?

I am afraid that I do not share the member's faith in the infallibility of the Scottish Parliament. The bill, which, as my colleague Lord James Douglas-Hamilton said, the Conservative party is pleased to support, does not change the substance of the policy on eligibility for free school meals. However, I cannot understand why a technical measure of this nature requires some two hours of parliamentary time for debate. That simply gives those who believe in free school meals for all another platform to present their opinions. We debated the issue in the first session of Parliament.

I recognise that many organisations hold the views that Mr Sheridan holds and that many organisations take contrary views—I will refer to some of those organisations shortly. The point that I was making, which I hope  Mr Sheridan will appreciate, is that we debated the issues in the first session and will debate them again in this session, as an SSP member has proposed a member's bill on the topic. I simply wonder why we are debating the issue again, as I am sure that there will continue to be a parliamentary majority against free school meals.

As my colleague Lord James Douglas-Hamilton said, it is clear that there should be a debate about the appropriate level. However, that is a matter for subordinate legislation and I do not see that there is much point in discussing it at length today. I want to deal with the substantive issues. Members have made a number of fair points. The minister said that swipe cards have been developed to try to deal with the problem of the stigma that is attached to free school meals. SNP-controlled Angus Council said when giving evidence on the bill that Mr Sheridan introduced in the first session: "Whether it is necessary to provide free school meals for all pupils in order to remove that possible stigma is highly debatable." The simple fact is that many schools do not have the capacity to deliver free school meals for all—there is simply not the space in schools to provide big enough canteens. There could be horrendous queues, which would put pupils off taking up free school meals—the meals would not be attractive to pupils, and making them attractive is the whole objective. It is all very well providing nutritious meals for free, but what guarantee is there that pupils will consume them? Despite the fact that my local high school provides nutritious meals, pupils leave the school premises, go down the road to the chip shop and buy chips and a roll, chips and cheese sauce, chips and curry sauce or something else that is pretty frightful and a can of juice. Free school meals can be provided, but we cannot force children to eat them. I suspect that, even if free school meals were provided, the majority of pupils would continue to get pocket money from their parents, go to the local takeaway or chippie and buy whatever food they want to buy. The plan to have free school meals for all would work only if children were forced to stay on school premises at lunch time and banned from taking any food into  school with them. I say to the SNP that it is playing a slightly dangerous game with its amendment, as it is leaving the door open to the idea of free school meals for all—an idea that was rejected in the first session. If the SNP thinks that the way for it to progress politically is to try to out-campaign Mr Sheridan's party on the left, it is going down the wrong road. Free school meals for all is a diversion. The idea is irrelevant to the needs of children in Scotland today. We should reject that diversion and agree to the stage 1 motion, as the bill will bring about an important change in the law.

I congratulate Jim Mather on an excellent maiden speech. I have always thought that Mr Mather makes some good points, but I am sure that his colleagues on the SNP benches will soon beat that out of him. He may wish to reflect on the unfortunate experience of his predecessor, Mr Andrew Wilson, who of course talked very much the same language as Mr Mather, and was rewarded by the SNP activists by being kicked out of this Parliament. The first sentence in the partnership agreement that we are debating this afternoon is: "Growing the economy is our top priority." Those are fine words from the coalition parties. Let us just hope that this time the delivery matches the promises. If we examine the coalition's record of the past four years, we see that it is not one of which to be proud. The Scottish economy grew by only 0.1 per cent last year. In 2002, we saw Scotland in recession for the first time in 20 years. Manufacturing has been particularly badly hit, with more than 7,000 job losses in 2002 and, since 1997, more than 57,000 job losses in the manufacturing sector. Business start-ups were down in 2002, despite extensive funding for the enterprise networks. Perhaps most significantly of all, there has been a marked increase in company insolvencies in Scotland, with 2002 showing a 23.6 per cent increase over 2001. What are the coalition parties proposing to do to turn around this sorry situation? There are plenty of woolly words in the partnership agreement: woolly words on working with Scottish business and supporting manufacturing industries; woolly words about working in partnership with business and trade unions; woolly words about reducing unemployment; and woolly words about pursuing the creation of centres of excellence in industries, but no detail on how those things are to be achieved. There are woolly words on encouraging local authorities to give school pupils hands-on opportunities in enterprise initiatives but, again, no detail. There are woolly words on working in partnership with trade unions on learning initiatives but, again, no detail, and so on. There is a specific commitment to review the law of personal bankruptcy. That is welcome, but it says a lot about the expectations of the Executive when the emphasis is on businesses that fail, rather than on businesses that succeed. The Executive is to consult on a review of planning laws. That will be welcomed by many in the business community who see the current system as slow, expensive and cumbersome—indeed, as  a real barrier to economic growth. Fortunately, the Liberal Democrat manifesto commitment to grant third-party rights of appeal—a proposal viewed with horror by the business community—does not appear in the partnership agreement, although I was concerned that the First Minister did not rule that out when I questioned him on it yesterday. My major criticism of the programme is that, when it comes to business, it misses the point completely. The key priorities for Scottish businesses are the twin burdens of business taxation and over-regulation. During the first term of the present Administration, the level playing field between Scotland and England on business rates, which the previous Conservative Government achieved, was lost.

As Mr Ewing is aware, historically, Scottish councils had the right to fix the level of business rates, which meant that it took some time to move from that situation to the unified business rate. Mr Ewing should congratulate the previous Conservative Administration on achieving the UBR. Scottish businesses were delighted at that achievement and want to return to what they had between 1995 and 1997. However, the Executive does not propose action to restore the level playing field, which demonstrates how out of touch it is with the business community. Business rates are not the only problem. Scottish Water's charges have increased substantially in the current year. I have been contacted by businesses whose charges have increased by 200 per cent, 300 per cent and, in some cases, 500 per cent. As Scottish Water is a monopoly supplier, businesses must pay the charges or they are cut off. We need an urgent inquiry into the activities of that unaccountable quango, but there is nothing in the programme for government that offers any hope in that regard. There is little in the programme about the widely discredited quango, Scottish Enterprise. Indeed, it did not even feature in the Labour party's manifesto—perhaps the party was too embarrassed to mention it. The Scottish economy needs a shift away from the bloated quango culture. Scottish Enterprise absorbs millions of pounds of taxpayers' money, but does little to grow the economy and helps only a favoured few businesses. We should cut Scottish Enterprise's budget and return the money directly to  businesses in the form of rate reductions. We have had four years of poor growth, manufacturing recession, poor business start-up figures and increasing levels of business failure. The programme for government offers more of the same and fails to address the business community's real concerns. I hope that, during the next four years, the economy in Scotland will grow, but I fear that this timid programme is a recipe for another four years of economic failure.

I am glad that the Deputy First Minister seemed to acknowledge that to grow the economy we must reduce the burdens on business. Why will he not listen to the business community and reduce business rates in Scotland to remove the competitive disadvantage from which Scottish businesses suffer in comparison with their counterparts south of the border?

In view of the First Minister's welcome statement that he wishes to see the creation of conditions for economic growth, will he assure us that the Executive will not support legislation in this Parliament for third-party rights of appeal against planning decisions? Such legislation would be vigorously opposed by the business community and would do nothing to support economic growth in Scotland.

As the convener of the consolidation bill committee, I rise to contribute to the debate. I also wish to deal specifically with the Lord Advocate's amendment, and I congratulate him on introducing it. As he says, the amendment will consolidate section 12(1) of the 1986 act. That consolidation is necessary to ensure that the bill is an accurate restatement of the existing law. Otherwise, that section would not be consolidated. The advice that we have received from the legal adviser to the Salmon and Freshwater Fisheries (Consolidation) (Scotland) Bill Committee is that this is an admissible amendment under rule 9.18.7 of standing orders. I am pleased to support amendment 1. With your indulgence, Presiding Officer, I would like to address some wider issues. I hear the comments that Mr Canavan and Mr Stevenson have made on policy matters. The role of the Salmon and Freshwater Fisheries (Consolidation) (Scotland) Bill Committee was simply to consider consolidation of the existing law, but in our stage 1 report on the bill we suggested that it might be advisable for the Executive to examine the wider policy issue of salmon fishing as a separate item. However, it was not within the committee's remit to consider policy changes. I trust that members will understand that. As convener of the Salmon and Freshwater Fisheries (Consolidation) (Scotland) Bill Committee, I record my thanks to the members of the committee, who participated in this process and considered the issues thoroughly. If members reflect on the fact that some of the legislation that we were consolidating dates back as far as 1607—I refer to the Theft Act 1607—they will understand why a consolidation bill was necessary and, indeed, desirable. We struggled with issues such as haaf-net fishing, cruives and fixed engines on the Solway, and I think that we did our job well. I thank the clerks and, especially, our legal advisers Iain Jamieson and his deputy, without whom we would have found the process even more impenetrable than was otherwise the case. We support amendment 1, in the name of the Lord Advocate. I shall be happy to vote to pass the bill.

I commend my colleague, David Mundell, for his motion and congratulate him on securing the time to debate it. It concerns a vital issue for those of us who represent rural areas. Over recent months, I have visited a number of  post offices around Perthshire and Angus—including those in Murthly, Memus and Kinloch Rannoch—which have been saved by local communities that are desperate to hold on to a key local service. I have found that those post offices are going from strength to strength, although they were saved only by the involvement of the local communities. Last autumn, I met a delegation of sub-postmasters from Tayside who had come to lobby Parliament and who expressed their concerns about the transition to automatic benefit transfers and the marketing—or the lack of it—of the Post Office account card by the Department for Work and Pensions. They said that they believed that there would be a poor take-up of the card account due to the biased literature that was being produced by the Government. They have been proved right. In the first trials, only a small percentage of benefit recipients took up the Post Office option. A MORI poll that was carried out in post offices in 2001 asked pension and benefit recipients how they would prefer to receive their payments: whether in cash at a post office or paid directly into a bank or building society account. At that point, 95 per cent of those people said that they would prefer to receive their benefits in cash at post offices. So, what has changed? It is the view of the sub-postmasters that the Department for Work and Pensions has failed to promote effectively the choices that are available to customers. David Mundell and other members have referred to the forms that must be filled in. I recently visited Blair Atholl post office, where the sub-postmaster showed me one of the forms that had been sent out. It required the customer to be proactive and phone up to get a further form to fill in before the money would be paid at the post office. It is far easier to access the money through a bank or building society, and that is surely unacceptable. A further point was made to me today by a postmistress. There is no provision for home helps to collect a pension for someone unless they have been appointed as a permanent agent. If the regular home help is off sick or on holiday, a temporary home help cannot collect a pension for a client. That could present a major problem for a housebound pensioner whose pension is, at the moment, collected by home helps. Due to changes in home help provision over the years, it is unusual for someone to have the same home help all the time. I believe that customers are entitled to a genuine choice. All the sub-postmasters whom I have met know their customers well and are often called upon for help in filling in forms and accessing services, as well as just being a friendly face in the community. The Parliament has a duty to help our rural communities to retain that service, and we  can make a positive contribution to that end by promoting a level playing field and campaigning for choice for all. Looking around the chamber, I note the presence of members of the Scottish National Party, members of the Liberal Democrats, members of the Conservative party and Mr Canavan. However, apart from the minister, not a single member of the Labour party is present. Perhaps that explains why we are in the situation that we are now in.

Is it not time that the minister conceded that the whole Scottish Enterprise network is completely discredited? The declining economy of many small towns in Tayside would be better served by redirecting some of that money to a reduction in business rates. Is it not time to stop giving the money to public servants to hand out to the favoured few?

Does Mr Sheridan not recognise that, during the 1939 to 1945 war, we ran supplies to Stalin's murderous regime because it was a better alternative than Hitler's murderous regime?

The Black Watch, which is my local regiment and recruits from much of my region, was posted to the gulf less than two weeks ago. On Sunday, I spoke to the mother of a Black Watch soldier who is in Kuwait. She told me that morale among troops was high. They were well-trained and ready to do the job if the need arose. The point that she was anxious to make to me was that those young men who are putting their lives at risk want to know that, in whatever action they have to take, they will have the support of people at home. If an invasion takes place—it goes without saying that we all hope that that can still be averted—it is essential  to back our forces 100 per cent. On behalf of that mother, I appeal to all those who take anti-war stances—which are understandable—to support our forces in everything that they do if they go into action. That is the least that we owe not only to them, but to their families and friends at home. If it comes to that, let us wish our forces godspeed and pray for an early return. A substantive issue is at the core of the debate and forms part of the SNP's motion—the legality of a war. I understand the position of those who argue that war would be illegal and against international law. The difficulty with that stance is that opinions differ, as ever when legal questions arise. For every legal opinion that war without a further UN resolution would be contrary to international law, another legal opinion says the opposite.

Like many other parties, the Conservative party is a broad church and contains members with different opinions. I disagree with Kenneth Clarke and Douglas Hogg, but they are entitled to their view. We live in a democracy. My point is that legal opinions on the issue differ. Today, the emeritus professor of international law at the University of Strathclyde said that he was clear that the "serious consequences" to which UN resolution 1441 refers could mean war and could justify war. There is good legal opinion for that, so the matter is not as clear-cut as the SNP suggested.

I am sorry; I have little time and I need to make progress. Another serious point has to be made. I understand that those who are anti-war want no action to be taken, but troops are massed on the Iraqi border. If Saddam Hussein does not disarm and we cannot obtain further progress through the UN, only two options will be left. The first option is war, the dreadfulness of which goes without saying. The second option is that nothing happens. The consequence would be that, eventually, the UK and US troops would pack their bags, withdraw and go home. Can members imagine the tremendous propaganda coup that that would deliver to Saddam Hussein? The second option would do huge damage to the credibility of the UN and of the western alliance and would give every dictator and rogue  state throughout the globe carte blanche. Yes, war has unforeseen consequences, but taking the second option would have unforeseen consequences, too. Many years might have to elapse before we could look back and decide what the correct action and the least-worst option are now. There is no easy answer. Much as I understand their motives, those who call for peace at any cost cannot ignore the political consequences of failure to take action against Saddam Hussein.

I am obliged to Mr Swinney for giving way. He rightly puts much emphasis on international law. However, does he accept that for every statement on international law that argues that another UN mandate is required, there is an equally authoritative statement that supports the contrary argument? For example, the emeritus professor of international law at the University of Strathclyde is quoted today as saying that another mandate is not required. Surely Mr Swinney cannot be categorical on that point.

In relation to amendment 25, the  minister said that he had in mind other examples. Can he elaborate on those?

I am obliged to the minister for that clarification, although the examples seem to go a bit beyond amendment 25's intention. However, in view of what he said, I will not press amendment 25. I remain concerned about the lacuna to which I referred in relation to amendment 26, so I will move amendment 26.  Amendment 25, by agreement, withdrawn.  [Amendments 87 and 88 moved—[Allan Wilson]—and agreed to.]

As the minister identified, amendment 27 would require the tenant to give the landlord three months' notice in writing specifying any intention to carry out an improvement and the manner in which it was proposed to carry out the improvement. The reason for that is that section 42(1) does not specify the length of notice that the tenant is to give the landlord. In the interest of fairness, it seems reasonable that the landlord be given a time frame in which to consider the tenant's notice of his or her intention to carry out improvements. As three months is the period that section 38 of the 1991 act requires, it reflects what is already in the legislation. Some notice period is required in such instances, so amendment 27 is worth considering.

In light of the minister's comments, and as I have got my legal head round the wording of section 42(3), I will not move amendment 27.  Amendment 27 not moved.

Amendment 25 seeks to amend the wording of section 34. Indeed, it is a technical clarification and I hope that the minister will provide some helpful guidance on it. As I understand it, the wording of section 34 in relation to subletting was intended to catch short-term holiday accommodation and in effect to allow it as a form of diversification. There is no dispute that such an objective is desirable, but the Law Society was concerned that, as drafted, the subletting provision was drawn too widely. If it was intended  that the provision should apply only to subletting short-term holiday accommodation, it would be better for everyone if the legislation said so specifically instead of leaving the matter in such general terms. Amendment 26 seeks to clarify in section 35 that if the "non-agricultural purpose" referred to is "the planting and cropping of trees"— notwithstanding the provisions in section 35(11) and (12)—the landlord is "deemed to have objected to the notice of diversification". It appears that there is a lacuna in the legislation, in that the matter is not specifically dealt with. I hope that the minister will address those points. I should also point out that we have no difficulty with amendments 87 and 88. I move amendment 25.

Amendment 22 seeks to make the reference to "the" particular sitting tenant rather than to "a" sitting tenant—in other words, not to an abstract sitting tenant or a sitting tenant of other ground. The only relevant sitting tenant in any valuation is the sitting tenant of a particular ground that is to be sold. The specific circumstances of that sitting tenant will have an effect on the price paid by an outside party. The circumstances of a sitting tenant of other ground or an abstract sitting tenant are surely of no relevance whatever. It should be noted that the parties are already assumed to be reasonably "willing, knowledgeable and prudent"—although I see that the phrase "knowledgeable and prudent" is to be removed. Surely, those criteria already give suitable objectivity to the task of the valuer. I listened with interest to what the minister said about amendment 23. In the light of his comments and of the wording of amendments 80 and 82, I shall not move amendment 23. Amendment 24 would require the valuer to take account of any rights that are "to be reserved for the beneficial occupation and use of other land" that is owned by the landowner. Notwithstanding the minister's comments, that is an important issue. When a farm is part of a larger whole, it will frequently be necessary for rights to be reserved  for the benefit of the remainder of the estate. Those rights might well affect the value of the farm that is being sold, and it is only reasonable that the valuer should be required to identify those rights as part of the valuation and that they should form part of the tenant's offer. I am not reassured by what the minister has said in relation to amendment 24, which deals with an important issue that still requires to be addressed.

Amendment 21 seeks to delete subsection 4(b) of section 27, which prevents the owner of land, or the creditor in a standard security with a right to sell the land, or a person acting on behalf of the owner or the creditor, from entering into "negotiations with another person with a view to the transfer of the land". The bill as drafted provides no sanction against the owner of the land in respect of any breach of subsection 4(b), as the tenant is protected by virtue of section 28(3), as the minister observed. The Law Society of Scotland's concern was that that might breach article 10 of the ECHR, and that subsection 4(b) was somewhat superfluous. However, in the light of the minister's comments—and I note the effect of section 28(3)—I intend not to move amendment 21.

Sections 19 and 20 deal with the technical issues of succession to leases. Amendments 17 to 20, which originate from the Law Society of Scotland, seek to provide clarity in the bill's treatment of those issues. Amendment 17 would allow executors to transfer SLDTs only to one of the deceased tenant's intestate heirs. The reason for that is that SLDTs are short and, under section 6(1), are not assignable. To permit the executor to assign to any person would give him powers that the tenant did not have in life. Surely such powers would conflict with the personal nature of SLDTs and with the approach that has been taken elsewhere in the bill. Amendment 18 would delete the proposed new section 16(4E) in the Succession (Scotland) Act 1964, which raises the issue of the termination being in the best interests of the deceased's estate. The Law Society's view is that an executor is under a general duty to act in the best interests of the beneficiaries of the estate and that, if he does not do so, he will be personally liable for damages to the beneficiaries. That matter is purely between the beneficiaries of the estate and the executor. New section 16(4E) of the 1964 act would introduce into the relationship with the landlord domestic issues that relate to the deceased tenant's estate, but surely those issues are not the landlord's concern. If the landlord receives notification from the executor of the termination of the lease, or of his acquisition of the lease from the acquirer following a transfer from the executor, the landlord should be able to rely on that and should not subsequently find that it might be invalidated because of a dispute among the tenant's heirs. Amendment 18 seeks to clarify the bill on that important point of law. Amendment 19 would ensure that the grounds of objection to a proposed legatee of a limited duration tenancy are the same as those for an objection to a proposed assignee. The reason for that is that a legacy is a form of assignation. Because the tenant of an LDT has a qualified right to assign, it is right that the basis on which a legatee is or is not recognised as a successor tenant should be the same as for any other assignee, particularly given that the right of  assignation is at large and is not confined to members of the family. Amendment 20 deals with the same point in relation to section 21. We have no difficulties with Executive amendments 70 and 71. I move amendment 17.

I listened with great interest to the minister's comments. Although I understand the arguments that he makes, I feel that amendments 17, 18, 19 and 20, which originally came from the Law Society of Scotland, would make the law work better. Therefore, it is my intention to press the amendments.

My colleague Alex Fergusson will address in more detail the amendments in the group. In the light of what will be substantive changes to the wording of section 15, it is not my intention to move amendment 16.

Amendment 54 deals with the question of notice for the termination of limited duration tenancies. Amendments 55 to 57 are all consequential on amendment 54, and the effect of the amendments, read together, is to require a minimum period of notice to be given by the tenant and to eliminate the requirement for the landlord to give two notices to bring the LDT to an end. The aim is to simplify the proposed legislation in relation to the termination of LDTs. As they currently stand, the procedures in section 8 are unnecessarily complex, as they require a double notice to be given by landlords. They are also inadequate in that they make no provision for a period of notice to be given by the tenant. My amendments seek to turn that situation round and to make the law clearer and simpler. I move amendment 54.

I will press the amendment.

Amendment 14 would add a new subsection after section 9(2), which states when a review is deemed to have taken place. Amendment 14 seeks to add clarification as to whether a rent review has in fact taken place and to determine exactly the circumstances under which one will have occurred. Amendment 15 seeks to delete "lease" and insert "tenancy" in section 9(3). The purpose of that is to ensure that it is the terms of the tenancy, not just of the lease, that should be considered when the provisions under that subsection are applied. The lease will be only one of several pieces of documentation that will constitute a tenancy. A tenancy may be set up by a lease and  other subsequent memoranda and informal writings. In the interests of clarity and certainty, it would be more accurate to refer to a tenancy, as that would ensure that the terms that are referred to in subsection (3) cover not just the lease but the additional documentation. Having said all that, I note that the wording of the Executive's amendment 58, which will supersede amendment 15, contains "tenancy". In view of that, I therefore do not intend to move amendment 15. I move amendment 14.

Briefly, I am happy to advise that the Conservatives are content with the wording of amendment 58, and we will support it. As far as amendment 14 is concerned, it is not satisfactory for the deputy minister to continue to parrot that, because the landlords and tenants have agreed, we do not need to worry about the detailed provisions of the bill. The Law Society of Scotland has expressed concern about the wording in section 9. Rent reviews can take place where there is no formal documentation of them and disputes can thereafter arise as to when the rent review took place and what the level of rent was. I am sure that anybody in legal practice is aware of such circumstances. Amendment 14 would provide a useful clarification of the law, which would make matters easier to deal with if the bill is passed. Therefore I press amendment 14.

Fergus Ewing drew a comparison with the commercial lease of a shop or factory premises. Of course, in such leases, it is always the case that the onus is on the tenant to prove the case of an assignation—that was my experience of commercial law, at least. Amendment 11 would add an additional subsection to section 3, to ensure that the assignee's ability to meet any of the tenant's other  obligations under the lease was a further ground on which the landlord could object to the assignee. The reason for that is that the lease might have other clauses, such as a residence clause, to be complied with as well as the requirement to pay the rent due and to maintain the land adequately. The landlord should not have to accept the assignee if he does not believe that the assignee would be capable of fulfilling the terms of the lease. The amendment deals with an important point and would provide clarification. With regard to the minister's comments, it may well be the case that landowners have not expressed concerns about this matter, but the fact is that the Law Society has. The Law Society represents solicitors who, on a daily basis, are involved in disputes between landlords and tenants and who advise landlords and tenants on aspects of the law. The minister cannot discount the Law Society's opinions out of hand. After all, it represents those who will have to deal with the bill when it is enacted—they will have to seek to interpret it and work with it daily. It is therefore important that the Law Society's views are taken into account, notwithstanding the fact that the landowners may not have picked up on technical points in the bill.

The purpose of amendment 13 is to ensure that any proposed assignation must have involved a bona fide third party. That is intended to avoid the possibility of collusion between assignor and assignee with a view to inflating the price. However, I listened with interest to what the minister said and, in view of the wording of amendment 52, I will not move amendment 13.  Amendment 50 agreed to.  Amendments 51 and 52 moved—[Ross Finnie]—and agreed to.  Amendment 13 not moved.

I was a bit confused by Fergus Ewing's approach because it seems to me that  amendment 4 is purely technical and would make no policy difference or provide any advantage to landlord or tenant. I cannot understand why Fergus Ewing opposes amendment 4. The minister said, if I remember correctly, that my amendment 4 addressed a legitimate point but, because it conflicted with the wording of Executive amendment 45, the Executive would not support amendment 4. I ask the minister, in all seriousness, why on earth the Executive did not take any conflict into account when it lodged its own amendments, which were lodged subsequent to the amendments that I lodged. If there is a serious point to be addressed, it is a pity that the Executive did not take that conflict into account when it became apparent that the wording of my amendment 4 sought to cover the same points as are covered by amendment 45. The situation is rather unfortunate.

I press amendment 4.

Amendment 6 would insert the phrase "Unless otherwise agreed in writing," at the beginning of section 6(1). The effect would be to give landlord and tenant the freedom to contract out of the provisions in section 6, which I believe are too restrictive and for which flexibility should be provided. Amendment 6 would give flexibility to both parties to contract out of the statutory provision, if they so agree. Amendment 7 would require the agreement between a landlord and a tenant to terminate a short limited duration tenancy on a date that is different from the originally agreed termination date to be "in writing", because a degree of formality is surely preferable. Putting the agreement to terminate in writing would provide clarity and certainty and would enable the easier resolution of any disputes that might arise. Amendment 8 would ensure that a tenant must give a landlord at least 60 days' notice of any intention to assign a lease. The bill as drafted specifies no such notice period. A 60-day notice period is a practical time scale, which would allow for the 30 days in which the landlord is entitled to object under section 7(4) and for a further period that would allow any dispute to be resolved before a proposed assignation took place. I move amendment 6.

I listened with interest to the minister's comments, on the basis of which I have decided not to press amendment 8. However, I believe that amendments 6 and 7 would provide some clarity in the law and, as it is the view of the Law Society that they would improve the bill, I  intend to press them.

Amendment 4 seeks to clarify the provisions in section 2(1). As drafted, the wording of that subsection seems to imply that the landlord and tenant cannot, by agreement, bring to an end a tenancy under the Agricultural Holdings (Scotland) Act 1991 unless they enter into a 25-year limited duration tenancy. However, at the moment, tenancies are often terminated by agreement without notice being given. Amendment 4 seeks to enable 1991 act tenancies to continue to be terminated without the landlord and tenant having to enter into a fresh lease. I move amendment 4.

I have not lodged some 25 amendments to the bill because I have developed a sudden, desperate political interest in agricultural holdings. That said, I had some experience in the field of agricultural leases in my time as a solicitor. All my amendments originated from the Law Society of Scotland. In most cases they were lodged to seek clarification of and, in some cases, improvement to the bill. I declare an interest as a member of the Law Society of Scotland and as a solicitor, albeit that I am not currently practising. If the Executive can answer some of the concerns that the Law Society has expressed, I may not need to press some of the amendments. Amendment 43 seeks to preserve the status of section 2 leases that were current at the commencement of the Agricultural Holdings (Scotland) Act 1991. The intention behind the amendment is to provide a transition period for leases of less than a year to a year that were entered into under section 2 of the 1991 act. This is a saving provision, as it is not clear from the wording of section 1(3) what will happen to such leases that are extant at the date on which the bill comes into law. If the minister can answer that point it may not be necessary to press amendment 43. My colleague Alex Fergusson wishes to address amendment 44. I move amendment 43.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer, of which I have given you notice. At First Minister's question time on Thursday last week, I asked the First Minister about an Executive minister whom The Scotsman quoted as saying that Scottish Enterprise was like "an oil tanker running out of control". The First Minister's reply was: "I will make two straight, factual points. First, no minister made to any newspaper the comment that Murdo Fraser has cited. That will be confirmed in due course."— [ Official Report , 6 March 2003; c 19174.]  Notwithstanding the First Minister's reply, I am unaware that any confirmation has been issued and I understand that The Scotsman sticks to its story. The issue is serious, as it gives rise to the concern that the First Minister might have breached paragraph 1.1(c) of the ministerial code of conduct, as he might not have given "accurate and truthful information to Parliament." The same paragraph says that ministers should correct "any inadvertent error at the earliest opportunity" and that "Ministers who knowingly mislead the Parliament will be expected to offer their resignation". Presiding Officer, I would be grateful if you could advise me whether the First Minister has contacted you to request permission to make a personal statement to Parliament under rule 13.1 of standing orders, to correct the statement that he made at question time last week and to which I referred.

I welcome the bill and congratulate Michael Russell on introducing it. I am aware of the hard work that he put into it over a long time. I hope that he will forgive for me saying that the proposal is modest but nonetheless worthy. It will take Gaelic a step forward. A more comprehensive bill that sought to address secure status more fully would have been welcome, but I appreciate the difficulties that producing a member's bill on a larger scale presents. The bill is at least a step in the right direction. I am proud of the record of previous Conservative Governments on supporting Gaelic. During our time in office, we passed several relevant pieces of legislation, such as the British Nationality Act 1981, which specified that knowledge of Gaelic would satisfy the language conditions for naturalisation; the Education (Scotland) Act 1980, which placed a duty on  education authorities to provide for Gaelic teaching in Gaelic-speaking areas; the Grants for Gaelic Language Education (Scotland) Regulations 1986, which provided a scheme of specific grants for Gaelic education; the National Heritage (Scotland) Act 1985, which allowed for financial support to organisations to promote the Gaelic language and its culture; and the Broadcasting Acts of 1990 and 1996, which placed a duty on the Secretary of State for Scotland to make payments for a Gaelic broadcasting fund. In 1979, under a Labour Government, there was no funding for education or broadcasting. The only sum that was available for Gaelic was a grant of just over £60,000 that was given to An Comunn Gaidhealach. By 1997, public support for Gaelic had increased to more than £12.5 million. I would like to outline briefly current Conservative thinking on Gaelic. Governments cannot make people speak Gaelic or create a demand where none exists. However, Governments can and should respond to demand that exists and create an environment in which those who wish to learn, speak and conduct their affairs in Gaelic have the opportunity to do so. In recent years, there has been a welcome resurgence of interest in Gaelic, particularly among the young. However, that has not always been matched by Government support. For example, there is a growing demand for Gaelic-medium education, but local authorities have sometimes been slow to respond to that demand, which has hampered the development of the language. Conservative members have previously made the point—and I do so again—that we must empower parents and give them real rights to Gaelic-medium education for their children. There should be a right, subject to demand, to establish their own Gaelic-medium schools with direct state funding. I would like to make a few points about the specifics of the bill. I would have liked to have seen a specific reference to Gaelic-medium education in the bill, but I appreciate that that might be outwith its scope. I am concerned that the bill extends only to certain parts of Scotland. Much of the new interest in Gaelic comes not from the traditional Gaelic-speaking areas, but from our cities—Glasgow, Edinburgh, Perth and Aberdeen. In many ways, the future of the language is in those areas, so why should they be excluded from the bill's ambit? On section 1(3), I question whether it is realistic to say that "the Gaelic and English languages should be treated on a basis of equality." I appreciate that that is a fundamental point for Michael Russell, but I am aware that even some  activists in the Gaelic community do not consider that objective to be achievable. We need assurances about exactly what impact such proposals would have if they were to be implemented. I have no doubt that if the bill progresses—and I trust that it will—such points can be addressed at stage 2. Opponents of public support for Gaelic sometimes use the argument that nowadays more people in Scotland speak Urdu or Punjabi than Gaelic. Even if that is true, it misses the point. Gaelic is a unique part of our Scottish heritage and that brings an obligation on us to try to preserve and strengthen it. There are millions of Urdu and Punjabi speakers elsewhere in the world and even if those languages were to die out in Scotland—which I do not advocate—they would survive and prosper elsewhere. Gaelic is our responsibility and ours alone. Why should we encourage Gaelic? Why should we not just let it die? Whether or not we speak Gaelic and whether or not we know people who speak it, it is one thread in the complex tapestry that gives us our Scottish identity. If we lose Gaelic, we will all be diminished, whether we are Gaels or not. The bill will not be the salvation of Gaelic, but it is a small step in the right direction and will therefore receive Conservative support. I am pleased to hear that it will have Executive support. I trust that such support is not just a token, but that the Executive will ensure that the bill will complete its passage through the Parliament before the end of March. Michael Watson's speech was a little mean-spirited and nit-picking, but I hope that he is genuine in his support for the bill. In this historic first session of the Scottish Parliament, we have an opportunity to pass a bill that will benefit our ancient Scottish language. I hope that we will do so in order that future generations of Scots—whether or not they are Gaelic speaking—will look back on today as a day that made a difference.

To ask the First Minister whether the performance of Scottish Enterprise is satisfactory. (S1F-2550)

I am interested to hear the First Minister's reply, because this week one minister  was quoted as saying that Scottish Enterprise is like "an oil tanker running out of control". Where does the First Minister stand on the issue? Concern about the performance of Scottish Enterprise is not confined to the Conservative benches, but exists outside the Parliament—it is widespread in the business community. Will the First Minister back the call by my colleague Annabel Goldie for a wide-ranging, independent inquiry into Scottish Enterprise? If he and the Executive have nothing to hide, they have nothing to fear from such an inquiry.

Will the member give way?

I sometimes think that Mr Wilson is a singular voice of sanity in the Scottish National Party, as he supports financial autonomy because he wants to use it to stimulate economic growth in order to reduce taxes. All his colleagues, however, support financial autonomy for exactly the opposite reason: they wish to raise taxes in order to fund their grandiose spending plans. What is the real policy of the SNP?

Head teachers.

Will Mr Lyon take an intervention?

Right first time.

I commend Margo MacDonald for lodging the motion for this debate. I know that it is customary to say that at members' business, but I say it quite sincerely and not just as a courtesy. The debate is on a vital subject, and I have received a number of pieces of correspondence from constituents on the matter, as I am sure other members have. Other members have made many excellent points  throughout the debate, and I do not want to rehash them, as I agree with everything that has been said. In particular, I agree with what Lloyd Quinan said about the use of food supplements in trying to treat children with autism. I want to raise two important points of principle. The first is the question of freedom. We are dealing not with children or with simple people, but with responsible, intelligent adults. Many people who opt for food supplements do so deliberately, fully aware of issues of diet and of the use of preservatives in food production. They make a conscious choice to go for food supplements, fully aware of all the nutritional issues that surround them. To say that those people should be treated as children and that they are incapable of making up their own minds about whether they should purchase and use food supplements is quite the wrong approach. I am a great defender of personal liberty, and I think that people should have the right to do more or less what they will, as long as they do not harm others. Indeed, I echo what my colleague Alex Fergusson said. If we allow people the right to buy alcohol and tobacco, which are poisons, why on earth are we seeking to ban beneficial items such as food supplements? The second point that I wish to raise relates to Europe. Pauline McNeill referred to that august journal, the Official Journal of the European Union , to which I subscribe. I am sure that she understands that perhaps my views accord a little more with the editorial line of that journal than hers do. There is an important principle here. People want subsidiarity, which is why I raised the issue earlier. Regulations are passed down from a European level and people in this country feel that they do not have politicians in Europe to represent their views, as those in Europe who make such regulations are not directly elected. Having decisions taken for the whole of Europe without a proper democratic process means that citizens in this country inevitably get upset and disgruntled, and ultimately end up being anti-Europe. Contrary to popular belief, I am not anti-European Union, although I am anti-euro. It is no wonder that the EU gets a bad press when we see such things happening. There should be subsidiarity, and decisions should be taken at member-state level rather than at European level. I hope that the minister will take those comments back to her colleagues in Westminster and ask them to consider the issues seriously.

I am terrified to open my mouth. Does Margo MacDonald agree that the principle of subsidiarity should apply to the measure and that it should be up to member states rather than Europe to decide what action to take on food supplements?

Margo MacDonald might be familiar with the concept of subsidiarity. Would she agree that the matter that we are discussing is a clear example of an area in which subsidiarity should apply and that, instead of this being decided by—[ Interruption. ]

This has been a good debate, and we have heard some well-informed speeches from all sides of the chamber. The Conservatives will support the Executive's motion today, and we agree with much of what has been said by the minister—which I am sure will disturb her. However, I echo what my colleague Brian Monteith said: that it is perhaps  premature to be holding this debate on the basis of the information that is before us. We will not support the SNP's rather carping amendment, because there is not really enough evidence at the moment to support what the SNP is saying. Perhaps if we have a debate on the subject in a year's time, that will be the time to make the points that Irene McGugan made today. As the minister acknowledged in her speech, educational attainment among looked-after children is poor; six out of 10 of those children leave school with no qualifications, compared with a national figure of around one in 20. That is not good enough, and I am pleased that the minister has acknowledged that. Looked-after children need stability; constant changes in their circumstances lead to low attainment levels, as Colin Campbell said in his speech. Fewer than one in seven looked-after children live in residential care accommodation. Most are with relatives or friends. Of those who live away from home, a quarter have had more than three placements. That cannot be good, and the figures suggest that there is a link between poor attainment levels and instability in the home environment. We must do more to provide stability. I want to respond to what Scott Barrie said in his rather bizarre argument about school exclusions. I am sure that we can debate school exclusions in more detail on another occasion, but there has been a sevenfold increase in violent incidents in the classroom since 1997. We would argue, and have argued, that that is a direct result of the policy of having targets to reduce school exclusions. If discipline in school is breaking down, as it seems to be, it is rather strange to suggest that we should tolerate violence in the classroom just because it is being carried out by looked-after children.

I am obliged to Mr Barrie for clarifying his remarks. That was not what I took him to be saying earlier, but what he is saying is not necessarily an argument for changing the exclusion policy. His argument may, in fact, suggest that, if looked-after children have a series of temporary exclusions, they may perhaps be in the wrong environment to start with. Perhaps there are other, more appropriate, school settings for them to be placed in, rather than those in which they have that series of temporary exclusions.  I want to make two specific points on other issues, the first of which concerns the use of schools in the independent sector. A number of local authorities, for reasons of scale, do not have the necessary provision within their area. They are happy to buy into provision from the independent sector, which provides a combination of pastoral care and an holistic approach to teaching that is not always reflected in local authority schools. I can think of two schools where there is such provision. One is the new school at Butterstone in Perthshire; the other, to which Sylvia Jackson and Brian Monteith referred, is Ballikinrain school near Balfron, which is run by the Church of Scotland's board of social responsibility—the largest provider of care in Scotland outside the state. Those schools are run not for profit, but by charitable bodies to a high standard of service. I hope that the Scottish Executive will reaffirm its support for such institutions and the standard of care that they provide.

I am obliged to the minister for that clarification. Secondly, we must address why we need a debate about looked-after children in society. We cannot have the debate without considering the primary causes, one of which is family breakdown. My colleague Lyndsay McIntosh referred to the importance of the family unit. Government, in its broadest form—I am referring not only to the Scottish Executive, but to the Government at Westminster and local authorities—must ensure that we have policies that promote family life and try to keep families together. That means promoting marriage. We know that children who are brought up by married couples are nine times more likely to be with that couple at the age of 16 than those who are brought up by a couple who are not married to each another. Politicians must recognise that statistic. We should shy away from policies and stances that undermine family life and parental rights—we saw some of that during the consideration of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill last week. We shall support the Executive's motion, and we shall await developments and new statistics with interest. We look forward to revisiting the subject in the future.

Some of the problems being alluded to in respect of landowners are exactly those that were foreseen by some members when we discussed the Land Reform (Scotland) Bill. Does the minister agree that the best way forward is to encourage local authorities to establish core path networks very quickly? Will the Executive ensure that funding is available to local authorities to progress that work as quickly as possible?

We have heard several passionate speeches and they all dealt with extreme cases. However, it is not extreme cases but trivial cases that concern the people who are writing letters to me and to other members. I will pose a number of questions to the minister about trivial cases. As Bill Aitken asked, if a mother shakes the arm of her 15-year-old son, will she be committing an offence under section 43(3)? It appears that she will. What will the Deputy Minister for Justice say on the record that  will help the courts and procurators fiscal in such cases? Can the minister explain what guidance will be given to procurators fiscal and sheriffs in such cases? When a parent is prosecuted for assault, the court must consider the circumstances if the assault falls under section 43(1), but if it falls under section 43(3) the courts will be forbidden from considering the circumstances in deciding whether an offence has been committed. Will not that lead to ordinary parents being turned into criminals over trivial incidents? I would also like to know what constitutes an implement. If a mother throws a pillow at her son, will she be committing a criminal offence in every case? What about a mother who clips her son with a rolled-up newspaper? Is she committing an offence? There is also a point about the scale of prosecutions. How many prosecutions are envisaged in the first three, four or five years after the bill's enactment? People are not concerned by the extreme cases that we have heard about today, but about the trivial cases that take place in every household in the country every day. Are we going to criminalise loving parents? The minister must tell us.

Will the member confirm whether he thinks that a mother who clips her 15-year-old son on the shoulder with a newspaper should be prosecuted for committing a criminal offence?

Does the minister recognise that there is frustration among the Gaelic-speaking community at the fact that some local authorities are failing to meet demand for Gaelic-medium education? Does he agree that the solution is to empower parents and give them the right, subject to sufficient demand, to set up state-funded schools to provide Gaelic-medium education?

I am obliged to Mr Smith for giving way. I listened with interest to his argument. Does he not realise that no less than three of the five people recently appointed to the Gaelic board of Scotland declared political affiliation to the Labour party? That is an example of what is wrong with the current system.

Will the member take an intervention?

The British Cattle Movement Service exists to operate the cattle-tracing system—CTS—which is a necessary function, particularly in the wake of the BSE crisis. It is based in Workington and operates the CTS on behalf of Scottish, Welsh and English ministers. It processes an average of 60,000 cattle movements every day and, although it is located in England, it is answerable to Scottish Executive ministers with responsibility for rural development. All cattle now have their own passports, which allows each beast to be identified and tracked. When an animal is sold or transferred off a farm, the farmer sends a movement-on or movement-off card to the BCMS, which allows the BCMS to update its records in much the same way as sales of motor cars are tracked by the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency. The facility now exists to update records online, with the CTS Online service. It is vital that the records that the BCMS keeps are fully accurate. That is because the CTS database is now used by the Scottish Executive environment and rural affairs department to crosscheck farmers' subsidy claims. Previously, such crosschecks were carried out during on-farm inspections, but they are now made against the database. That is important because, if there are discrepancies between the subsidy claim and the database, the farmer will be penalised by having subsidy payments withheld or sums recovered that  may have been overpaid in error. The principle of the system is fine and it should work well; indeed, it would work well if the level of errors within the BCMS was at a minimum. However, the evidence suggests that that is not the case. I have received numerous letters from farming constituents in Mid Scotland and Fife, complaining about the BCMS's record keeping, the difficulties in obtaining responses and the impact on their businesses as a result of penalties being imposed due to errors originating within the BCMS. To give a flavour of those letters, I will quote from a letter that I received from Christopher Dunphie of Bridge of Cally—a version of it appeared in Scottish Farmer in June last year. He wrote: "My dreaded cross-checking letter accused me of seeking Suckler Cow Premium in August 2001 for four cows which had been culled for Foot & Mouth in Cumbria in April 2001, fifteen months after I bought and moved them to Perthshire. I have just spoken severely to the cows. They all assure me that they are alive and well, with splendid calves to show for it. Indeed they were rather offended that BCMS refuses to issue passports for their calves, despite countless letters and phone calls. Another cow wandered up and reminded me that it had taken a year to get her a CTS document because BCMS said she was a stot. After seven months frustration I had to threaten court action to get her calf passport, just in time for the suckler calf sales ... However, I am not blameless. I did include three calves which I had to cull before the end of my SCP Retention Period. And I forgot the rule change which required me to declare details of the replacements, of which I hold plenty. I will doubtless be penalised for my three clerical omissions. BCMS, which has 85 errors in relation to my farm will receive no punishment. I clarified my omission with my local SEERAD office within 3 days of it being pointed out to me. BCMS refuses to answer any letters or act on phone calls. Hardly a level playing field!" I could go on, but I think that Parliament gets a flavour of the problems. Christopher Dunphie is not alone. A retired farm manager from outside Blairgowrie wrote to inform me of an unnecessarily hard line being taken on minor errors, of problems with cards being posted to Workington and not being received, and of a lack of basic farming knowledge among those in the BCMS at the end of the phone. Another farmer, from Dunkeld, wrote to me about having £15,000 in payments withheld due to errors in a crosscheck—errors that subsequently turned out to be the responsibility of the BCMS. No compensation was paid for the delay. Given the state of farming incomes in Scotland, delays in payments of large sums might be enough to put someone out of business. I have a file of papers on similar cases, some of which I have raised in correspondence with Ross Finnie, as the Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development might be aware. The  complaints are all similar: continual errors; a draconian approach from SEERAD to crosschecking errors, which might in fact originate in the BCMS; no distinction being made between genuine mistakes and fraudulent claims; a lack of farming knowledge among the staff; and huge difficulties in making telephone contact with Workington. I am aware of CTS Online: it helps to reduce errors when it is used, but not every Scottish farmer is online. Given the high average age of Scottish farmers, not all are computer literate or even possess a personal computer, so CTS Online can be only part of the solution. I understand that recently there has been an increase in the number of staff at the BCMS call centre. It is clear from the examples that I have given that that is long overdue, but it remains to be seen how far it will go in helping to solve the problems. A thorough review is required of the working of the BCMS, with a view to eliminating, so far as possible, the all too numerous administrative errors that currently occur. The fact is that Scottish farmers have little confidence in the system, and it cannot be allowed to continue as it as at present. We also need a new approach from SEERAD. It must recognise that errors in crosschecking are as likely to originate from the BCMS as they are from the farmer. I ask the minister to consider seriously an amnesty for farmers accused of errors—given the track record of the BCMS there must be a strong suspicion that responsibility rests with that organisation rather than with the farmers. We must wipe the sheet clean, make improvements to the system, and move forward so that we can have a BCMS that Scottish agriculture can have confidence in.

I hope that the minister shares my concerns about a recent HMIE report, which showed that, in one Scottish secondary school in 2001 alone, one in five of the pupils were excluded at one point in the academic year. Does not that sort of failure point to the need for much more fundamental change in the system than the proposals that the minister announced in her statement? For example, should not the management of the school be taken away from a local authority that is manifestly failing pupils, parents and teachers?

What the Executive has failed to do throughout the process is to make the case that what matters is the ownership of land, rather than the use to which it is put. If the right-to-buy proposals in the bill are to be successful, that will entail large sums of taxpayers' money—millions of pounds—being put into the transfer of property titles. That money will not be put into creating wealth or jobs; it will be put directly into the pockets of the very landowners whom proponents of the bill are so anxious to disinvest of their interests in the Highlands. If all that money is available for rural Scotland, would not it be better to use the money for job creation, economic regeneration and transport improvements rather than to use it to transfer the ownership of titles, which, in themselves, will do nothing to promote economic regeneration? All sorts of comments have been made about the right to buy salmon fishings and the safeguards that will be available. I claim no expertise on those matters—the experts are the  people who live and work in remote areas and who derive their living from salmon fishings. Those people have been treated disgracefully by the Parliament and its committees in not being allowed to give evidence to the Justice 2 Committee. The people on the ground—unlike the legislators, the parliamentarians or the civil servants—know what their experience is and what the outcome of the legislation will be. All the evidence points to disinvestment in salmon fishings as a result of the bill. That is happening already, although members should not take just my word for it: even Highland Council, which is hardly a bastion of landlordism, Toryism or even readers of The Daily Telegraph , came out and said that we should reject the right to buy salmon fishings. Members who support the proposal should listen to the people on the ground and trust them, even if they will not listen to us.

I am sorry that Mr Stevenson discounts so abruptly the views of Highland Council, which consists of the elected representatives of people in the Highlands. The evidence was already there and Mr Stevenson should have listened to it. The bill does not address the real issues in rural Scotland, such as low farm incomes, unemployment, low pay, poor transport links, loss of local post offices and the closure of rural schools. The bill is merely a sop to the land reform cranks outside the chamber and the members of parties who wish to refight old battles. If a fraction of the time, energy and money that have been expended on the bill had been spent on the real issues, the prospects for rural Scotland would be much better than they are today. It does not matter to me one whit that, in the chamber, the Tories are the only people who oppose the bill, because we know that, outside, in the real world, there is widespread opposition to the bill. I hope that I am wrong, but I fear that, in years to come, we will look back on today and say that we made bad law.

Will Stewart Stevenson take an intervention?

The crux of Mr Rumbles' argument is that the river workers do not understand the legislation. He is saying again that they are just stupid. That is a disgraceful comment for a parliamentarian to make.

What does Mr Lyon say to the river workers who came to the Parliament yesterday, who are  concerned about the loss of their jobs? Does he ignore their views, or does he share the view of Mr Rumbles that they are stupid and do not understand the bill?

The issue of commercial access is the one on which there is the prospect of controversy. I think that the principle that people should be allowed to come on to the land and exercise access is accepted by all sides of the debate—by landowners and farmers as well as by those taking up access rights. The principle is reasonable in the case of mountain guides, for example. However, we should not have situations in which people access land to derive profit from it by, for example, holding events or setting up stalls. In general, the Conservatives welcome the amendments in the grouping because we think that they make sense. I have concerns about one of them, however, which I put to the minister for his response. I am concerned about amendment 63 and in particular how it would work in practice. Amendment 63 seeks to include the words: "which the person exercising the right could carry on otherwise than commercially or for profit". I will give two examples that illustrate my concerns. The first example is of someone who comes on to land and starts to peddle hamburgers. If they said that they were giving away the hamburgers, not selling them for profit, would that activity be excluded from access rights? Secondly, it would be possible to hold a rave on someone's land and not charge people admission and yet the people organising the rave could be doing so for profit. Would amendment 63 allow raves to be held without the landowner's permission if people were to derive their profit other than by charging admission? Those points require clarification and I would welcome any comments that the minister may make on amendment 63.

Notwithstanding the minister's clear statement that he considers that there will be no increase in liability, is he aware that lawyers have different views on the issue? Surely it would be sensible to put the matter beyond doubt by clearly stating in the bill that access is taken at the access taker's risk.

I offer the apologies of my colleague Brian Monteith, who is not able to be with us for the whole of this afternoon's debate. Unfortunately he is attending a family funeral, but he hopes to be with us later if time allows. As deputy education spokesman for the Conservatives, I am pleased to contribute to the debate on the bill to create a children's commissioner. I do not deny that my party's approach has been rather sceptical from the outset, as members of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee will be aware. I do not apologise for that; indeed I sometimes wish that there were more scepticism about legislation. It is to be regretted that so many people—especially some of those elected to the Parliament—believe that the Parliament's success should be measured by the quantity of legislation rather than by its quality. To borrow a phrase from manufacturing, it is not the productivity that matters but the build quality. Lawmaking is a serious business, and it is important that we  examine whether other approaches might be used before we commit ourselves to legislation. It is crucial that an initially attractive idea about the need for a children's commissioner was challenged and justification sought. I believe that the Education, Culture and Sport Committee understood its role in that regard and that it has made a case for a children's commissioner that we will support. It is our belief that the evidence that was presented justified the introduction of the committee bill and I congratulate the convener on her introductory remarks. Evidence from witnesses who are active in the field of child law, protection and care have made a compelling case, especially for giving looked-after children a voice. During the evidence sessions, my colleague Brian Monteith said that a commissioner should be able to walk before he or she can run, and I am glad that the committee has resisted calls to give the commissioner even greater powers than are provided for in the bill. Account has been taken of a number of our concerns, such as the possible threat of family and parental rights and responsibilities being challenged. The possibility of the commissioner taking up individual cases has been reined back and the suggestion that the commissioner would represent the views of Scotland's youth has, quite properly, been disposed of. Let us have a commissioner who can consider how we can better protect children and how the public services that seek to protect them can be more attentive to their needs than to those of the producers. Let the commissioner report to the Parliament so that we can debate what further measures, if any, must be taken to right wrongs and to relieve injustices. Once the commissioner has had time to bed down and to show what can be done and what might be a weakness in how he or she operates, the Parliament can reconsider—in 10 or more years' time—whether fine tuning or new legislation is needed. The Conservatives are willing adherents to the bill and we will give it our support in the vote later this afternoon.

As the debate is important and concerns a vital subject, it is depressing that the benches are so empty. Perhaps yesterday's excitement was too much for members and they have decided to go back to their offices. How society treats its young people and old people is a test of how civilised it is. If we consider the report that we are debating today, we see that we have a way to go before we can count ourselves as truly civilised. My colleague Bill Aitken referred to some of the harrowing accounts that the report contains. I was pleased to hear the  minister say that she recognised that the serious problems in the system need to be addressed. I wish briefly to raise two points. The first concerns the children's hearings system, which a number of members, including Alasdair Morgan, mentioned in their contributions. I am sorry to say that the children's hearings system is in a bit of a mess. There is no doubt that it is losing—or has lost—a lot of public confidence. There are a number of reasons for that. Perhaps it is because it is under-resourced, but it is certainly because of the excessive delays in getting children through the system. There is also a perception among the public that the system does not treat young offenders as effectively as it should. That is particularly the case for the persistent young offenders who come before the system. I can talk only from personal experience. In the small town in which I live, the perception among my neighbours and people in business is that the disorder in the town is caused by a small group of young offenders aged 14 and 15, who persistently reoffend. Everybody knows who they are.

My colleague Bill Aitken has just confirmed to me that he disassociates himself from the remarks that were made. I think that it was my colleague Brian Monteith who made the remarks yesterday, to the effect that if money is available to deal with such problems, it would be better to put it into improved policing, education and properly punishing those who offend. I return to the point that I was making about the public losing confidence in the children's hearings system, and especially with how it deals with persistent 14 and 15-year-old offenders, who are not being dealt with properly. Although that is partly an issue for the police, it is also an issue for the children's hearings system. As my colleague Bill Aitken pointed out, young people are victims of crime themselves. Many of the crimes that young people commit are crimes against young people. As a result, we need to protect younger as well as older people. I am delighted that, during consideration of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill, we saw a U-turn on the ludicrous plan to send 16 and 17-year-olds to the children's hearings system. Such a step would  simply have overburdened the system even more. Instead, we should make more use of youth courts for 14 and 15-year-olds, which would ensure that they are dealt with properly and would free up the children's hearings system to deal more adequately and speedily with young offenders.

No, I am in my last minute and wish to make another point. Mr Barrie will be pleased to hear that I wish to congratulate the Executive on one particular aspect. This week, Cathy Jamieson launched the "Think U Know" campaign, which deals with internet safety for young surfers. I welcome such an encouraging move from the Executive. We are all aware of the concern that young people on the internet are being targeted by paedophiles and other adults who seek to use them for sexual purposes. We have to get the message across to our young people that they must take the issue seriously and ensure that they inform parents, teachers and siblings. The message must also go out to parents and to teachers in schools that they can speak to young people about such issues. There must be access to organisations such as ChildLine. Indeed, I was pleased to hear the minister's acknowledgement that there would be funding for that organisation. Another aspect of the debate that needs to be examined is the fact that, if the matter is to be policed properly, we need more policemen. I know that I am over my time, Presiding Officer.

I will just conclude with one final point.

Thank you, Presiding Officer.

I will speak against amendment 1, not because I doubt the motivation of those who support it—I see where they are coming from—but for a particular reason: it could discriminate against specific providers. Last year, I had the pleasure of visiting an organisation in Edinburgh called the Bethany Christian Trust, which is a faith-based provider of welfare. Many members will be aware of the trust and the work that it does, particularly among the homeless and people on the streets. It does a power of valuable work. At the moment, the trust is discriminated against, as the City of Edinburgh Council will not allow it to be a contractor because it will not sign  up to the council's equal opportunities policy. That is simply because Bethany—as one would expect for a Christian organisation—operates a Christian employment policy, which breaches the council's equal opportunities policy. That is a disgrace. We should prevent such things from happening in Scotland. Indeed, we should not go even further than the existing law provides for by saying that such discrimination as currently exists should be entrenched in law. Amendment 1 would further entrench that discrimination. The Bethany Christian Trust and similar organisations are already being discriminated against, and the Parliament should reject amendment 1.

Would the minister address the particular point that I put to him earlier, which is that if the Rural Development Committee amends the bill at stage 2 by including in it an absolute right to buy, what would the Executive's response be to that?

Unlike other members, I have no formal interests to declare, but in my legal practice I did some work on agricultural holdings. Indeed, I am one of the wicked lawyers referred to in the debate who set about circumventing the 1991 act with limited partnership agreements. I say to John Farquhar Munro that limited partnership agreements came in because the 1991 act still allowed security of tenure. If we did not have limited partnership agreements, we would not have land let at all under any circumstances. That is the important  point. As far as the bill is concerned, it is a piece of legislation that is overdue to modernise the law on agricultural holdings. There was consensus between the NFUS and the SLF, and many of the measures in the bill, such as the limited duration tenancies and the improved dispute resolution measures, were warmly welcomed. Sadly, the bill has been wrecked by the introduction of a tenants' right to buy. We have to wonder why there was a U-turn on the part of the Executive. As my colleague Alex Fergusson told the chamber, Ross Finnie set out in a ministerial statement on 17 May 2000 the Executive's opposition to a tenants' right to buy, which he said would not "do anything other than dry up a limited supply", and that that would not be "consistent with our aim of getting new tenants."— [ Official Report , 17 May 2000; Vol 6, c 695.]  We have to ask why there has been a change of heart on the part of the Executive. Could it perhaps have something to do with lobbying by George Lyon, who I see has ensured his diplomatic absence from the chamber this afternoon and who stands to benefit personally from the bill? It is interesting that, despite what Mr Rumbles said, the Liberals are all over the place with the bill. What is the Liberals' position? All Liberal members who have contributed to the debate have taken a different position. As the minister said, evidence to the committee suggests that most landowning interests do not have a problem with the pre-emptive right to buy in itself. I say to Mike Rumbles that the right to buy is not a problem in itself, but its introduction opens the door to an absolute right to buy—that is what the committee saw. The committee's evidence makes it clear that the threat of the absolute right to buy is causing huge concern to the agricultural community throughout Scotland. In the debate, we have heard that land agents are trying to terminate all leasing agreements, as they fear that the door has been opened to an absolute right to buy.

That should be perfectly clear to Mr Rumbles. We oppose it for the same reason that he has opposed the absolute right to buy: in a liberal democracy, it should not be the right of the state to tell a person to sell their property to another person. More seriously, it opens the door to an absolute right to buy and we have seen the damage that that has already done to the tenanted sector. If the intention of the bill is to rejuvenate the tenanted sector, it will not do that.  All the evidence on the ground is that an absolute right to buy would be a disaster for the tenanted sector. Far from expanding that sector, which was the bill's intention, it would further restrict the supply of land that is available to tenants, and the farming industry would be deprived of new entrants. That would be a disaster. The minister could do one thing to help the situation—he could state here and now, on behalf of the Executive that, if the bill is amended at stage 2 to include an absolute right to buy, the Executive will drop it and not pursue it. If the minister did that, he would at least provide some assurance to landlords and tenants alike. In his response, I invite the minister to address that. I am truly sorry that what should have been a sensible piece of reforming legislation has been wrecked by the minister for political purposes. The bill will further damage the fragile economy of rural Scotland. For that reason, the Parliament should support the amendment in the name of Alex Fergusson and ensure that there is a sensible bill that will achieve the stated aim of rejuvenating the tenanted sector.

Will the member give way?

If Mr Rumbles believes that, in a liberal democracy, the state should not force an individual to sell his land to another individual, why does he not apply that logic to the pre-emptive right to buy?

No he is not.

Will the minister give way?

The minister is aware that there is some concern in the Roman Catholic community about shared campuses. Will she assure us that there will be no move to introduce shared campuses unless they have the full support of the parents of children at both schools involved?

The debate has been enlightening, because we have heard how Labour and the Executive are failing Scotland's children. There is no shortage of rhetoric or glossy publications from the Executive, but delivery is sadly lacking. Anyone who listened to the members representing the Executive parties would not believe that Labour has been in power, at one level or another, for getting on for six years. I am sorry to say that we have heard no new ideas from the SNP, either. All that it is offering is yet more of the same. As was recognised earlier in the debate, what the Executive amendment proposes is similar to what the SNP is saying. There is, once again, a left-of-centre consensus that has nothing new to offer. In his opening remarks, Bill Aitken spoke about child poverty. According to some indicators, child poverty is on the increase in Scotland. The recent social justice annual report showed that there has been an increase in the percentage of children who live in low-income households. We take issue with many of the measures that are used but, on the Executive's own measures, the statistics are going in the wrong direction. That is despite all the Executive initiatives that we have heard about. We cannot talk about poverty, or child poverty, without considering its root causes: lack of educational opportunities; lack of access to skills training; lack of employment; family breakdown; crime and disorder; and the effect of drugs. All those things impact much more on disadvantaged communities than they do on society as a whole. We must have an economy that spreads wealth and creates wealth. We must use that money to create high-quality public services that help the vulnerable. Too often, the current system acts against the most vulnerable and those living in disadvantaged communities. We must work in partnership with voluntary groups. The state and its agents do not deliver everything. I have visited social projects that help the most vulnerable. The most successful are often those that are run by voluntary—perhaps faith-based—groups. We must consider removing barriers that affect the way in which those groups operate. I turn to the issue of education, because it is through our schools that we can have the greatest impact on child poverty and the way in which children are treated. We have made the point before and it has been made again today—the present education system fails the most vulnerable in society. Colin Campbell, in a typically thoughtful speech, mentioned the widening gap between pupil performance in the best schools and that in the poorest schools. The increase in the past year  in the number of pupils who leave school with no qualifications shows that the present system does not deliver.

We will judge community schools and the other initiatives that the minister mentioned on their results. It remains to be seen how successful they will be. I question whether the money is best spent in those ways. It would be better to give the money directly to schools and to let them decide how best to use it. Schools are best equipped to take local decisions. We want high-quality education for everyone, not only for the favoured few whose parents are fortunate enough to own a house in the catchment area of one of the better schools. We also want those who become disengaged from the education process at 14 or 15 to have access to vocational training at further education colleges. We have talked about that issue before. In the time remaining to me, I turn to the issue of justice. Again, those who live in the poorest communities—the most disadvantaged—suffer the most from crime and disorder. Bill Aitken mentioned youth justice, particularly in relation to anti-social behaviour among young people. All members know of communities of people whose lives are made miserable by youth offenders, especially persistent offenders. I agree with Kenny MacAskill's point that we need an holistic approach. The issue is not only about crime and punishment, but about encouraging diversionary activities such as youth clubs to give young people an interest so that they are not simply out on the streets. Jamie McGrigor referred to community police officers. In Tayside, there has been a welcome move to getting police on the streets, rather than in cars. We will see what impact that measure has. In speaking about young offenders, we always come back to children's panels. As Robert Brown said, there is a problem with children's panels. The Audit Scotland "Dealing with offending by young people" report strongly criticises the way in which the current system operates. Robert Brown referred to various delays. I am delighted that the Executive's ludicrous plan to send 16 and 17-year-olds to children's panels was defeated by the Justice 2 Committee. I commend Bill Aitken and  the more sensible members of the other parties who supported the overturning of that measure. Bill Aitken mentioned the moves to extend available disposals to include weekend and evening detentions, tagging, community service orders and supervised attendance orders. Those ideas are sensible, but other parties, including the SNP, voted against them. We have heard many fine words, but there has not been much about delivery. We have heard that Labour is failing. Labour has had five and a half years to deal with the issues, but there has been a lack of delivery and a failure to take hard decisions. All that we heard from SNP members was yet more of the same. They say that they would spend more money, but they do not say where it would come from. Only the Conservative party challenges the failed consensus. The Executive and the SNP do not have a monopoly of care; the only monopoly that they have is on a poverty of ambition for the most vulnerable in Scotland. I support Bill Aitken's amendment.

It is my pleasure to wind up the debate for the Conservatives. As my colleague John Scott said at the beginning of the debate, we support the general principles of the bill. I have three points to make in relation both to the bill and to wider aspects of building control. A number of members referred to my first point, which is verification, particularly the opportunity to have private sector verifiers, which the Conservatives welcome. I can speak from personal experience on this. In a previous life, as a commercial lawyer practising in Edinburgh, much of my day-to-day work was taken up with building projects. Many developers experienced frustration at delays in the various stages of building contracts because of the time that it took to get the appropriate official from the relevant building control department out to visit the  development in question. If we are to provide other avenues for that exercise, which do not depend on a local government monopoly in verification, that will be very much welcomed by the construction industry, especially in a fast-moving commercial environment such as that of property development in Edinburgh, where buildings are going up all over the place, and where it can sometimes be difficult for the building control department to keep up. If building control departments had the opportunity to contract out some of the services that they provide, that would be very useful. I note that the proposals on verifiers were welcomed by the Institution of Civil Engineers in Scotland, as well as by other bodies, including the Scottish Consumer Council, a representative of which said: "It does not matter whether the verifiers are from the private or the public sector as long as they are transparent and accountable."—[ Official Report, Transport and the Environment Committee , 6 November 2002; c 3620.] Of course there must be adequate safeguards for the protection of the public, but I think that that issue can be overcome, and I welcome the consultation that the Executive will undertake on that point. My second point was mentioned by Robert Brown: letters of comfort. Conveyancing solicitor colleagues of mine came up against the issue time and again. A letter of comfort is produced by a local authority building inspector to say that works that have been carried out, although they have not been properly certified, nevertheless meet the appropriate regulations. We would like to think that we live in an ideal world in which, when people get work done to their house, they always get a building warrant first or a completion certificate, but many people do not bother. They might not even realise that, if they are taking down a wall here and there or installing an en suite bathroom , they need to get those certificates. It might only be when the house is surveyed and an offer to purchase is received that the poor solicitor—[ Interruption. ]—I realise that "poor solicitor" is something of a paradox—who is acting for the seller realises that there is a problem, and that the work has been done without authorisation. Although there is a mechanism to apply retrospectively for a building warrant and completion certificate, there is usually no time practically to make that application, because the date of entry tends to be set at between four and eight weeks from purchase. In that situation, people approach their local authority and ask for what is called a letter of comfort. The local authority will send out an inspector to examine the work and, if the work is all right, issue a letter to say that, although no certification is available, the works will pass  regulations. Letters of comfort are therefore extremely useful, but the problem is that there is a patchwork approach to them throughout Scotland, with no uniformity. It would have been useful if the bill had introduced a uniform approach for letters of comfort, so that local authorities throughout Scotland would adopt a similar approach. Perhaps the Executive could address that matter, under either the Building (Scotland) Bill or a future bill. My third point relates to historic buildings; I have raised this issue in the chamber before. Balthayock House is an historic listed building just outside Perth, which has fallen into disrepair. Scotland is littered with historic buildings—most of which date from the late 19 th century—that are now of little practical use. They are far too large to be used as family homes and it would cost too much to modernise them. Although they could be used as hotels or institutions, that market is limited. There are far too many such buildings. Earlier this year there was a desperate tragedy at Baldovie House, just outside Dundee—a young lad who had broken into the house was killed. Large, derelict, empty houses are magnets for young children. Regardless of whether the owners erect fences or signs that state "Dangerous building—do not enter", kids will enter such houses to play inside them. We need to strike a balance on this issue. Of course we must protect our historic buildings and built heritage. However, it is time to take a more reasoned approach to the future of listed buildings that are of limited historical or architectural merit, are falling into disrepair and have no practical use in the modern world. The cost of repairing such a building might far exceed the economic value of the house if repaired. The estimated cost of repairing Balthayock House is £2.3 million. It has also been estimated that, once the house had been fully restored, its market value would be about £750,000. Given those figures, only an ignoramus would spend money to repair the house and restore it to modern standards. We must examine the way in which Historic Scotland approaches the question of listing and of giving consent to the demolition of listed buildings. I understand that the Education, Culture and Sport Committee proposes to conduct an inquiry into Historic Scotland and the way in which it operates. I hope that the committee will cover the issue that I have raised. I conclude by welcoming the bill—as other members have done—and reaffirming that the Scottish Conservatives are pleased to support its general principles.

The debate has been lively. It is the first time that I have ever heard myself compared to Arnold Schwarzenegger. I will need to make a few more trips to the gym. Our motion refers to post-comprehensive education. That choice of words was deliberate. A debate about how education needs to change is going on in Scotland, and there is growing recognition that our comprehensive system fails too many in our society. We have heard that today from Brian Monteith and we have heard it in the Parliament often enough before. We usually hear it from Conservative members, but I was pleased to hear Rhona Brankin acknowledge it in her speech. The comprehensive system is fine for a child from a middle-class background who is fortunate enough to have parental support and parents who can buy a house in a leafy suburb in the catchment area of a good school. Such a child can go to one of the good schools. However, as we saw from the results tables that were published yesterday, there is a yawning gulf between the performance of our best schools and that of our poorest schools. I accept that the tables tell only part of the story and that we must take into account pupil development, discipline in the classroom, truancy levels and all sorts of other factors. However, we must not deny the stark truth. Some schools  perform far better than others do. The schools that do not do so well are generally those in areas of social deprivation. No matter how talented or diligent a child born in those areas is or how supportive the parents are, such a child starts with a handicap on day one. That is what our comprehensive system delivers and that is exactly why the Conservatives want to change it, even if all the other parties in the Parliament defend the status quo. We want to change it because it works against those who already come from disadvantaged backgrounds.

We can have a debate about poverty on another day. One of the things that was interesting about Mr Russell's intervention was that he accepts—

No. I thank the minister, but I ask her to let me deal with the point. Mr Russell accepts that there is a correlation between pupils going to schools in less well-off areas and results. That is exactly the point that I was making. Pupils are trapped in those areas by our current system of geographical catchment areas. That is why we want to change the system.

No. I will not give way at the moment. In the Parliament, the Conservatives may be the only ones who see the need for change. However, out in the real world, other voices challenge the complacent attitudes that we have heard today. Speaking on Friday, Graham Donaldson, who is the new senior chief inspector of education in Scotland, talked about a huge waste of talent in Scottish education. He said that education reforms were failing to impact on all children. In particular, he meant those from disadvantaged backgrounds. At the same event, Fraser Sanderson, president of the Association of Directors of Education in Scotland, said that there was a large section of the student community whose needs were not being met, and he spoke of schools in poorer areas that had unacceptably low expectations.

I assure the minister that I have read in detail the speeches that were delivered on Friday, so I do not need to be informed by the minister about that. I am pleased to hear the minister accepting that there are problems and that they need to be addressed, because we have heard so many complacent attitudes being voiced in some of the speeches made by members of other parties that one might think that there is nothing wrong with the current system. We need to change the system. We should not get hung up about what the word "comprehensive" means. In England there is a whole spectrum of specialist schools, faith schools and city technology colleges operating in a system that the Prime Minister, and indeed other Labour MPs, still call "comprehensive". We are not saying that we should imitate the systems in England, Northern Ireland or anywhere else; we are saying that there are lessons to be learned from what is happening elsewhere in the UK and in Europe. Let us look at the systems there and learn from them. That does not mean that we have to copy everything that is being done there. However, although we recognise that lessons may be learned from elsewhere, that is not the impression that I get from the Executive, judging by what we have heard this morning. By establishing more specialist schools and by allowing diversity, we will provide opportunity for able children who, at the moment, are trapped by the catchment-area system and have to go to schools that are simply not delivering. We already have specialist schools in music and sport, which are accepted, indeed praised, by all parties. If that is good enough for music and sport, why is it not good enough for engineering, science, mathematics or languages? Of course children have to come out of education equipped for life, with life skills. I would say to Stewart Stevenson, however, that the idea that they should not leave education with basic vocational training is nonsense. We currently have the problem of children coming out of education without proper standards of literacy and numeracy, so they are not equipped for the work force.  I would also say to Stewart Stevenson that he should do more efficient research before he contributes to a debate on education. If he had done so, he would have found out that, when I attended Inverness Royal Academy, it was a comprehensive school. Looking at my colleagues sitting next to me on the front bench, Brian Monteith and Alex Johnstone, I note that all three of us went to comprehensive schools. Stewart Stevenson should in future do his homework before speaking in such a debate. [Interruption.] The deputy minister is waving bits of paper at me, but I assure him that I was at that school, and I know what the case was.

I am obliged to Mr Aitken for that intervention. We offer real hope to those who are being failed. The Executive may talk about an end to the one-size-fits-all system, but it has no real solutions, and opposes even the modest reforms being pursued by Tony Blair in England. The SNP offers only more of the same and refuses to countenance the idea that there is anything fundamentally wrong with the system that would not be solved by more money and smaller class sizes. Indeed, there is an inherent contradiction within the SNP approach. On the one hand, it talks about having a system of education controlled from the centre; on the other, it talks about having more diversity. That simply does not add up. Meanwhile, those children who come from disadvantaged backgrounds continue to have their life opportunities damaged by an inflexible system that clings to an outdated comprehensive model. Specialist schools offer a window of hope for such children. They offer them a chance to have their abilities recognised, to gain qualifications, to follow a route to further education and to equip themselves for employment. Outside the chamber, the education debate goes on. People recognise the need for change. Inside the chamber, however, it is the Scottish Conservatives who are prepared to speak up for the many who are being failed. I have pleasure in supporting the motion in Brian Monteith's motion.

rose—

We do not take you seriously.

I commend John Swinney for his motion and for securing the debate. It follows on from a motion that I lodged on A9 dualling back in March of this year. I also congratulate The Courier and Advertiser  on the way in which it has highlighted the campaign and drawn it to the public's attention. It has sought to bring together public opinion on this matter and I think that it has done a tremendous job so far and that it will continue to do so. I speak from personal experience of the dangers of the A9. I was involved in a head-on accident 12 years ago on a single carriageway section of the A9 just north of Carrbridge. It was a serious accident; both cars were destroyed and I suffered multiple fractures, which resulted in a long period on crutches. The other driver suffered similar injuries. I do not complain, because I was fortunate to survive. Many others have not been so fortunate. At the meeting in Pitlochry to which John Swinney referred, we heard testimony from Steve Strang, who lost his son in a car accident, which was caused by a French driver. No one who was there could fail to have been moved by the courage of that man in standing up in a public meeting of that nature and recounting what had happened. We owe it to people like Mr Strang to ensure that such accidents are minimised in the future, even if they cannot be eliminated totally. When the A9 was constructed in its present form in the 1970s, it was designed to cope with the traffic volumes of the time. Since then, although there has been at least a fourfold increase in traffic on the A9, the road has not had the necessary programme of upgrading. The design of the A9, which switches from single carriageway to dual carriageway and back again, causes particular problems. The fact that it is easy for drivers to get confused about which type of road they are on might have been a factor  in my accident. The situation is bad enough for locals, who know the road, but it is courting disaster when we have visitors to the area, particularly those from overseas. The road was designed with sweeping curves, which limit visibility and cut down on overtaking opportunities. That causes driver frustration and leads to accidents. The simple fact is that the road was not designed to cope with modern traffic levels. Tayside police, who are at the sharp end of dealing with the aftermath of accidents on the A9, are clear about what needs to be done. They have identified three specific problems: driver frustration, confusion and tiredness. They believe that a fully dualled road is necessary to eliminate driver frustration and confusion. We need improved junctions, which should be grade separated where necessary, and proper rest areas to combat driver fatigue. The fact that the current lay-bys are unsafe because they are too close to the busy road was tragically demonstrated only recently. All that will cost a great deal of money. Previous Conservative Governments spent huge sums on the A9 and I am proud of our record. In the 1980s and 1990s, we dualled the Perth to Stirling stretch, completed the dualled Killiecrankie bypass and carried out many improvements further north, such as the Kessock bridge, which is in John Farquhar Munro's constituency. We also completed major road projects in other parts of Scotland. However, any trunk road needs continuous improvement to cope with growing traffic levels. When Labour came to power in 1997, it imposed a moratorium on new road construction and improvements. Even under the Scottish Executive, road spending falls far short of what it was under the Conservatives. Although dualling the A9 will be expensive and will take many years, if we do not make the commitment to do it, accidents will continue to happen and lives will continue to be lost. I do not want anyone to have to go through what I went through on the A9. I am even more concerned that no one else should lose a daughter or a son or a family member on the A9. I urge the minister to listen seriously to the debate and to take the steps that are necessary to ensure that the A9 is a safe road and one that the people of Perthshire, Inverness-shire and beyond deserve.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to promote the development of small towns. (S1O-5907)

The minister will be aware of the continuing economic decline of small towns in rural areas, which is largely the result of the decline in income from the agricultural sector. Where there are local initiatives to try to reverse that decline, such as the proposal to designate Blairgowrie in my area as Scotland's game town,  what help can such small towns expect from the Executive? In particular, will the business recovery fund that was set up following the foot-and-mouth outbreak be extended to provide help to such initiatives, as has happened south of the border?

I should start by declaring an interest as I am a solicitor, albeit not currently a practising one, and a member of the Law Society of Scotland. Earlier, James Douglas-Hamilton indicated that the Conservatives would be supporting the Title Conditions (Scotland) Bill at stage 1, as we regard it as a welcome and necessary piece of law reform. It is worth considering for a moment why we need title conditions because some might say that they are no longer required in the modern world. However, they are necessary in a number of situations. A typical example might involve a farmer who sells a piece of land to someone who wants to extend their garden. The farmer might say that he will sell the piece of land at a price that reflects its amenity or agricultural value and that, in order to protect that, he will include a title condition to say that the new owner will not be allowed to build on the land. That is because, if he had sold the land for development, he would have sought a higher price. Title conditions are also necessary in urban or suburban situations. At one time, the house that I own had a larger garden than it now does but previous owners sold part of it to allow a smaller house to be built. Because the house sits in front of my house, there is a title condition, which I have the right to enforce, saying that the other house cannot be more than one storey high, in order to protect the view and the amenity of my property.

That is an interesting intervention because it displays a complete ignorance of the way in which the law operates. Our planning system allows a person to apply for planning permission, but the person who has sold the land might want to exercise some control over the land, as it will be adjacent to his property. Another important question is involved. If the farmer sells that piece of land knowing that he will  have no control over it, he will have to assume that the use to which that land will be put will be the most valuable use, to wit, development. Therefore, he will seek a price for the land that will reflect its most valuable use. Therefore, the person who wants to buy the land to extend their garden will end up not being able to afford it. Title conditions encourage the development of land that would not otherwise be developed. The fact that Mr Rumbles does not understand that point says a lot about the Liberal Democrats. We have used title conditions in this country for many years. In fact, our great urban landscapes, such as the new town of Edinburgh, were developed under title conditions, long before the current system of public planning was developed. It is telling that the great urban landscapes that we have in Scotland all predate our current planning laws, which came in after the second world war. That demonstrates the value of title conditions. However, law needs to be not only equitable and fair, but practical and workable. There are a couple of points that I would raise in that regard. Bruce Merchant, a solicitor in Inverness, and others told the Justice 1 Committee that there is concern over the impact that section 52 will have on the workability of conveyancing practice. It is all very well giving an implied right to enforce to all sorts of other proprietors, but the fact is that if you are a solicitor trying to convey a transaction—and I have experienced this in my working life—the requirement to go to 50 or 60 people to seek a waiver will make it impossible for conveyancing to continue. In practice, of course, the solicitor would not go to 50 or 60 people but would probably go to get some sort of insurance policy from an indemnity company that would cover them against any claims that might be made. That would mean that, if the bill went through with that measure, the purpose of the bill would be defeated. I would therefore ask the minister to consider again the question of implied rights to enforce, and think about whether we should instead have something like the four-metre rule that is included elsewhere in the bill, which would limit the number of people from whom the solicitor would have to seek consent and make the system a bit more workable. My other concern relates to clawback provisions. If land is disposed of for less than its development value, I can see the need for clawback provisions, but I cannot understand why the clawback provisions should be restricted to local authorities or public agencies. I can think of examples of private estates having sold land for development, and they should have that right to clawback also. The Conservative party supports the bill, with the reservations that I have outlined. I trust that those will be addressed as the bill progresses.

Will the member give way?

I sympathise with Mr Ewing's constituents. However, does he agree that the worst offenders for demanding payment for waivers are local authorities?

Will the minister explain why as a matter of policy the clawback arrangements to which he referred will be available to public authorities but not to private developers?

I will be relatively brief. The Scottish Conservatives support the general principles of the bill for the reasons that were outlined by my colleague, Brian Monteith, in his opening speech. The bill seeks to ensure that adequate checks are made on the stability of people who work with children and young people. It is important that people who have a record of child abuse are  stopped from simply moving from employer to employer when they have been found out. The bill seeks to introduce appropriate safeguards. Employers must be aware of who they are employing and they must be aware of those people's backgrounds if they are to work with children. That applies to employers and to voluntary groups, about which I shall say a bit more in a moment. Of course, we have some concerns about the bill; many have been aired during the debate. I have four specific points to touch on, most of which have been covered. First, we are concerned about the extra burden of administration that the bill will place on organisations. That burden will apply to schools. Judith Sischy of the Scottish Council of Independent Schools raised the issue in her evidence to the Education, Culture and Sport Committee. However, more relevant is the concern about how the extra administration will impact on voluntary groups. Jackie Baillie and Des McNulty referred to that during the debate. We are sympathetic to the view that the register should cover all groups and that all groups should get assistance in the costs that will be involved in registration. Costs do not come only from registration. A Scottish Criminal Records Office check must be paid for, but there is administrative and training time involved in making such referrals and doing the SCRO checks. We must take account of the burden that the register will place on voluntary groups. There is also concern that if checks must be made on potential volunteers, there will be a delay before a person can be appointed as a volunteer. That could remove spontaneity and cause difficulties for voluntary organisations. The minister should consider that concern, which was also referred to by my colleague, Jamie McGrigor, in his speech about training. Our second concern is about who makes the referrals. There is no doubt that there can be no objection if the court refers to the register a person who has been convicted. There is, however, a question about employers making referrals. In her opening speech, the minister said that referral to the register would result in cases in which an employer's substantial concerns have led to a dismissal. That is welcome, but there is a question about unscrupulous employers who, were they to dismiss an employee, could seek to make life difficult for them by seeking to put them on the register.

I am obliged to the minister for that clarification. When I referred to unscrupulous employers I did not, of course, say whether they were private or public sector employers. The minister makes a good point, but will she acknowledge Christine Grahame's speech and consider going a little bit further by making it a crime for an employer to make a false referral? Will there be comeback against an employer for a person who has been placed on the register by that employer and who feels hard done to? We need to consider that. Thirdly, provisional listing was referred to by a number of members—Michael Russell referred to it in his opening remarks, as did Des McNulty. The minister said that provisional listings would be kept to an absolute minimum. We welcome the idea that the provisional listing will last only for six months until the matter is resolved, but there is still concern about it. Christine Grahame, in what I thought was a valuable contribution, expressed the concerns of the Justice 1 Committee in relation to a right of fair hearing and how that might impact on human rights legislation. There is a question of balance: it is obvious that we must seek to protect children, but we must at the same time have regard to human rights issues. I am short of time, but I have only one more point to make, about the role of teachers. The Educational Institute of Scotland expressed concern in its written submission about what is, in effect, double jeopardy. That would happen in the event that a person was placed on the register, dismissed from their job, but then appealed to the General Teaching Council which, in effect, cleared them. Such a person would still be on the register because there will be no automatic removal from the register when the GTC clears them. Although they have a right in law to go to the sheriff court and appeal, that is an expensive process that not many people have the resources or the will to go through with. We support the bill; it is not a witch-hunting bill. Of course there are concerns about the impact that the bill might have on individuals who are falsely referred to the list. We all know the dangers of the press getting their teeth into that sort of thing and the damage that that can do to people's reputations and lives, but I hope that as the bill proceeds we can build in the necessary safeguards. We support the bill, and we hope that it will improve protection for our children in Scotland.

Will the minister give way?

How much did the annual report cost to produce? However much that was, would not that money have been better spent on providing free instrumental tuition in schools, for example?

As members know, Brian Monteith usually leads for the Conservatives in such debates. However, he is detained elsewhere this afternoon. I do not know how Brian Monteith would have felt, but I am rather disturbed to find that I agreed with much of Michael Russell's speech. Mr Russell mentioned his Gaelic Language (Scotland) Bill. I want to deal with that at the start, as it concerns a very important part of Scottish culture. I have not yet read the detail of the bill, but he addresses an important point in principle. The Scottish Conservatives will support the bill at stage 1 because we feel that such an important measure should be taken forward. Indeed, I am disappointed to hear that the Executive has decided not to support the bill and at least allow the matter to be debated in Parliament. If the bill comes before us, we can consider how it might be improved, and lodge amendments. Frankly, we agree with much of the motion. We also welcome "the significant achievements of many dedicated artists and professionals throughout Scotland" and "recognise ... the importance of culture in defining Scotland's identity both at home and abroad, its contribution to the well-being of communities and individuals across the country and its role in helping to bridge the opportunity gap". However, we do not welcome the cultural strategy itself, because we fundamentally disagree with the Executive's approach. Indeed, we fundamentally disagree with the notion of a cultural strategy, as if we can plan culture as we would plan a new road or building. Scotland's culture belongs to its people, not to a Government minister or agency. People do not engage with culture because of a Government strategy.

The minister said that my amendment is silly. I am not the one in the chamber who is being silly. If the minister bears with me, he will hear me develop my argument. People do not buy tickets for concerts or the theatre, play musical instruments or visit historic buildings because the state tells them that those are good things to do or because some strategy says that this is how culture should develop. Culture develops organically regardless of—and probably in spite of—any cultural strategy. We welcome many individual measures in the report, but we reject in principle the notion that we can encapsulate all Scottish culture in a strategy document. It is a top-down strategy that is based on the assumption that the minister has perfect knowledge of Scottish culture and that he knows what is in, what is out, what is or is not popular and what should or should not be encouraged. The minister might be intelligent, but he is not all-knowing. I give members an example. The biggest single cultural event in Scotland—in terms of annual ticket sales—is the Edinburgh military tattoo. It attracts tens of thousands of visitors to Edinburgh and Scotland every summer. Every ticket was sold this year before the first show commenced. The tattoo provides a huge boost to the economy, as the Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport will know. I scoured the cultural strategy document for a mention of the Edinburgh military tattoo. How often does it appear? Not once. Perhaps that is because the tattoo celebrates our military traditions and our links with the Commonwealth and is insufficiently politically correct to be part of the cultural strategy. Whatever the reason, it makes my point: a cultural strategy for Scotland that fails to mention an event as significant as the Edinburgh military tattoo must be questioned. Even if we accept the minister's argument that we should have a cultural strategy, the report is fundamentally flawed. Where are the targets? Where is the evidence of increased participation? It is rich with words, but poorer on concrete examples of progress. We have heard a lot from the minister about more cultural co-ordinators in schools. By all means let us have more culture in schools, but why do it in such a top-down manner? Why do we take the decision for them rather than give them the money directly and let them decide at a local level how to spend the money on promoting culture? Perhaps they would spend the money on more musical instruments. Perhaps they would spend it on piping lessons—we know that there is huge unmet demand for piping lessons in Edinburgh.  On page 39, the report says that guidance on tuition is being developed, but when, last month, Brian Monteith asked parliamentary questions about which local authorities charge for music tuition and how much they charge, the reply was that such information is not held centrally. The Executive does not even know what the current position is. How can the minister in all seriousness produce a strategy that mentions music tuition in schools when he does not have even the most basic information about the level of current provision? This morning, I talked to a parent in Aberdeen whose son displays some prowess at the piano. He goes to piano lessons provided by the local school for half an hour a week. He shares that lesson with six other children and, if he is lucky, he gets two minutes on the piano. That is the standard of current provision. When I examine the glossy strategy document and those that proceeded it, I wonder how much it cost to produce. Surely that money would have been better spent it if had been put into schools to provide instruments and free music tuition. Another example of failure is to be found on page 49, where Gaelic-medium education is mentioned. Another 10 teaching places are welcome, but can the minister tell us whether that will meet demand? I suspect that he does not know. If he is serious about promoting Gaelic-medium education, why does he not support our plan to give parents a genuine right to Gaelic-medium education schools where the demand is not being met by local authorities, as is the case in Edinburgh? Yet again, the strategy fails. The cultural strategy is deeply flawed. It was always bound to be, no matter who the minister was. By its nature, culture flows from the people. It cannot be handed down from above and it cannot be encapsulated in a glossy document, no matter how expensively produced. In the words of the motion, we welcome the achievements of artists throughout Scotland. We recognise the importance of culture, but we reject the minister's flawed approach. I move amendment S1M-3571.2, to leave out from "the second" to "and welcomes".

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will meet representatives of local community groups campaigning for the upgrading to dual carriageway status of the A9 trunk road between Perth and Inverness. (S1O-5856)

I thank the minister for his answer, although I am not quite sure whether it was a yes or a no. I dare say that we can pursue the matter. My colleague Mary Scanlon and I have both been victims of car accidents on the A9 trunk road. Does the minister accept that the high level of accidents and, indeed, fatalities on the A9 constitutes an unanswerable case for upgrading the road to dual carriageway status?

This has been an enjoyable debate and, in the spirit of consensus, I will start by agreeing with something that Michael Russell said: he expressed regret that the First Minister is not here for the debate. The First Minister made an important speech on education yesterday, and we heard some fine words from him about extending flexibility and choice. I am not sure exactly what he was signalling, but such a move would be extremely welcome on this side of the chamber. In fact, we have been calling for more flexibility and choice for years. If the First Minister's conversion towards Tory ideas on education is genuine—I suspect in the teeth of opposition from the Minister for Education and Young People—then that is welcome. Therefore, we have not sought to amend the motion; we have simply made an addendum. I wonder how real the First Minister's conversion is. In the speech that he made yesterday, he was at pains to praise the comprehensive system, but we know that the system fails some of the most vulnerable in society.

I am obliged to the minister for that clarification, and I will deal with some of those matters shortly, but I think that she has to accept that, for some pupils, the comprehensive system does not work. For many pupils, it does. Bright children, those with parental support and those who attend the top-performing comprehensives do well out of the current system, but the system fails too many others. I am talking in particular about those who struggle in class, those whose home environment is not supportive and those who are trapped in the catchment area of a failing school, who do not have the middle-class option of moving  house into the catchment area of a good school. Those children are being failed.

I will come on to our amendment, which I am not discussing at the moment. I will clarify that the proposal for greater involvement of FE colleges is not intended as a way of dealing with difficult children. Earlier we discussed what the term "comprehensive" means. The minister talked about the comprehensive principle and I tried to tease out from her exactly what that meant. The word "comprehensive" seems to have become a Humpty-dumpty word—it means anything that people want it to mean. The minister says that it is possible for a comprehensive school with a specialisation in sports or the arts to select on the basis of ability. She says that it is possible for a comprehensive school to reject mixed-ability teaching and to have setting and streaming. If that is her vision of comprehensive schools, she will not encounter much opposition from Conservative members. However, I wonder if that is what she means.

I am sorry—I have already taken two interventions. The real test for the First Minister is how serious the Executive is about allowing parental choice. Let us not forget that the First Minister signed the order that took St Mary's Episcopal Primary School in Dunblane back into local authority control, in the teeth of opposition from parents in that school. I will now deal with the amendment, which proposes one simple policy idea that should win support from at least three parties in the chamber. My colleague Alex Johnstone set out our proposal in detail. We all know that our schools include some 14 and 15-year-olds who have no interest in academic subjects. Their presence in school—if they attend and do not add to our appalling truancy statistics—can be disruptive for other pupils. Is it not much better for such pupils to have the opportunity to undertake vocational training, not in a school environment, but at FE colleges?

I will give way to Cathy Jamieson.

I am delighted to give the minister the confirmation that she seeks. We are talking about having flexibility. However, at the moment, some 14 and 15-year-old pupils are disengaged from the mainstream process of education. The amendment provides an opportunity for those pupils in particular. I see no problem with that.

I am afraid that I cannot. I have already taken three interventions and I am over time. Duncan McNeil and others on the Labour back benches have expressed concern about our amendment. I am sorry that he has left the chamber, because he wanted this point to be clarified before he voted. I reassure Duncan McNeil that the amendment is not about people leaving school at 14—it is about allowing them to have access to training and education at FE colleges. If Labour members are concerned about the policy, they should seek clarification from coalition colleagues on the Liberal Democrat benches, as it is the Liberal Democrats' policy, too. I am not surprised that Labour back benchers are confused. When we proposed the policy on 10 October, Cathy Jamieson attacked it. She said that we should not write off young people or limit someone at the age of 14.

Thank you for your indulgence, Presiding Officer. I am interested to hear the minister's explanation, but on 10 October we set out our policy in detail and the minister attacked it. It seems to me that we have a consensus, because we have come forward with a policy, the Liberal Democrats have come forward with a policy and the SNP has come forward with a similar policy. We have a clear view on what the policy should be, which is to allow 14 and 15-year-olds access to training and education at FE colleges rather than in schools. There is nothing complicated about that. Little wonder that there is confusion on the issue when the minister attacked the policy on 10 October. I am delighted that she seems to have changed her mind. Let us support the consensus and move forward with a new idea for Scottish education.

Will the member take an intervention?

My question is simple. If the member has reservations about our proposals, will he support our amendment?

Will Cathy Jamieson give way?

How does the minister define a comprehensive school? Does a school that streams its pupils fall into the category "comprehensive school"?

This has been an instructive debate because of what it has told us about the Scottish National Party. It is no surprise to anyone in the chamber that the SNP wishes to see broadcasting devolved to Scotland because it wishes to see everything devolved to Scotland. However, that blinkered approach blinds the SNP to the good sense of having matters that affect the whole of the UK dealt with at Westminster. The media and broadcasting are surely issues that should be dealt with at a UK level because radio waves do not stop at the border. I am sure that Michael Russell wishes that they would, but he has to accept that we have a United Kingdom and that we have that because that is what people in Scotland want and consistently vote for. If we have a United Kingdom, there are certain matters that should properly be dealt with at the UK level and broadcasting is one of those matters.

My views on fiscal autonomy are on the record, as Mr Ewing well knows. I accept that there are matters that should be dealt with at a Scottish level and others that should be dealt with at a UK level. As I have said, broadcasting is just such a matter. There are 72 Scottish members of the Westminster Parliament, some of whom make up the Select Committee on Scottish Affairs, which is holding an inquiry into broadcasting. There is even a member of the Scottish National Party sitting on that committee. If the nationalists are so against broadcasting being dealt with at Westminster, why do they have a member sitting on that committee? That is sheer hypocrisy. I shall deal briefly with the question of competition in newspapers, to which a number of members referred. Members from different parts of the chamber made the important point that the Scottish newspaper press is not just The Scotsman and The Herald . To think that shows a central-belt bias. In different parts of Scotland we have different broadsheet newspapers. We have The Courier and Advertiser in Tayside, Fife and Stirlingshire. Further north, we have The Press and Journal , which has achieved substantial market penetration. It is not just a question of The Scotsman and The Herald . Should the same company own The Scotsman and The Herald ? I see that there might be  problems with that, but there might also be certain advantages. It is not for me to make that judgment. That is what the competition authorities are for, as even Michael Russell accepted. To make up scare stories when the mechanisms already exist is just seeking to score political points. In response to Donald Gorrie's contribution, I say that ownership of newspapers is entirely detached from editorial control. It is quite possible to own a newspaper and have an editor or columnists who represent a contrary point of view. That is why someone such as Jimmy Reid can write a column in The Scotsman . No one could suggest that he holds similar views to those of Andrew Neil. I turn to broadcasting. David Mundell made a good point about the future of Border Television and I concur with that point. I speak up for Grampian Television, which covers my area, because it is now owned by SMG—the same company that owns Scottish Television—but it still retains its Grampian Television identity. That has not been diminished by the fact that the ownership of the two companies is the same. Throughout the debate, SNP members have disclosed their fear of the outside world. Richard Lochhead, who has now left the chamber, said that the Disney corporation should not be allowed to own ITV. Why ever not? If it improves output and the quality of programmes improves, what is wrong with it, as long as there are competition rules to protect the public interest? Twenty years ago we could get only four channels on our televisions. If there was an argument to be made for broadcasting being regulated from Scotland, that might have been the right time to make it. There are now five terrestrial channels, and countless channels available on satellite and digital television that do not just cover the UK but cross national boundaries. With the internationalisation of broadcasting, the SNP's typically parochial approach is completely out of step with the modern world. Yet again, the SNP has missed the point. In the modern world, we should not be talking about more controls or which Parliament regulates what; we should be removing controls, allowing free choice and letting the consumer decide. That is what our amendment proposes and I commend it to the chamber.

A number of members have spoken from a local perspective and I will unashamedly do the same, by looking at the ways in which airports affect my constituents in Tayside and Fife. At present, the area is not well served by airports. As we have heard, there are, in effect, five regional airports in Scotland—at Edinburgh, Glasgow, Prestwick, Aberdeen and Inverness. None of those airports directly serves Tayside and Fife, which have a large population.  I suppose that the closest and most accessible airport is Edinburgh, but the transport links are still poor. There is no rail link as yet, although I hope that we will have one in a few years' time. However, not all travellers have access to rail and many will still travel by car. Last week, it took me more than two hours to travel from Dunfermline to Edinburgh because of a car crash blocking the A8000. Sadly, such events are not uncommon. I was not going for a flight so I did not miss it, but I was late for a committee meeting. If I had been going to the airport to catch a flight I would have missed it despite having left in plenty of time to get there. Such occurrences are not uncommon and cause considerable problems for people trying to use their local airport. There is an airport in Dundee that is owned by Dundee City Council and which has daily scheduled flights to London City airport. That is a welcome service, but the airport in Dundee is not financially viable and is heavily subsidised by the council tax payer. A proposal has been made for a new central Scotland airport in the Falkirk area. That idea was floated by my colleague in the European Parliament, John Purvis MEP, and by various others. It is an interesting proposal, but I wonder whether it is realistic, given that it would depend on the closure of Glasgow and Edinburgh airports to be successful. It would be no more accessible to my constituents than Edinburgh is, unless and until a new Kincardine bridge is built. Businesses in Tayside and in Perth and Kinross want a local airport.

The member makes a fair point but she should recognise that rail access is only as good as where the railway goes to. Many of my constituents live a long way from railway stations. They do not want to travel to a railway station and leave their cars parked there for two weeks while they go on holiday. They would rather drive to the airport. A rail link would be welcome, but it is not the full answer to the problem. There is also a proposal to reopen for commercial use the airfield at Errol, which is currently used only by gliders and light aircraft. Ryanair has already expressed an interest in using Errol for low-cost flights. If Errol were to be developed, the existing 1,500m runway would have to be extended to 2,200m. Facilities would also have to be built for aircraft and passenger handling, fuel provision and security. It is inevitable that there would be some opposition from local residents, but the financial benefits for  the economy of Tayside and Fife would be extensive. A recent feasibility study that was done in Newquay, from where Ryanair has started flying once a day to Stansted, estimated that that service will put £40 million into the Cornish economy. Ryanair's initial proposal for Errol is for five routes, which would generate an estimated £200 million per annum. The potential for the Scottish economy—particularly for the tourism industry in Perthshire, Angus and the southern Highlands—is tremendous. The advantage of the Errol site is that it is handy for the centres of population in Perth and Dundee that are not currently well served by airports. It is immediately adjacent to the M90 motorway and to the east coast main rail line, so it would be possible for it to be served by a rail link. It is also within 90 minutes of 90 per cent of the Scottish population. I believe that it would be an ideal site for a new airport to serve Tayside and the northern parts of Fife. A development at Errol would be led by the private sector but would of course require some support from the public sector in putting in the necessary infrastructure. Although responsibility for such matters is reserved, I ask the Executive and the ministers to consider the proposal for Errol. It would be of great benefit to the local economy and to the wider Scottish picture.

I thank the minister for her statement and I apologise on behalf of my colleague Brian Monteith, who usually fills this seat. He is widening his waistline in Bournemouth. I am not surprised that the minister is pleased with the support that is shown for the comprehensive system. When the full responses are published, I suspect that many will prove to be from the usual suspects, who have a vested interest in the continuance of the current system, which benefits some, but fails too many—especially the least well off. All too often, the comprehensive system condemns pupils living in deprived areas to a sub-standard education from a failing school. If we wanted to design a school system that had the express aim of perpetuating social divisions, it would be hard to see how the Scottish Executive could improve on the present arrangements. Members should not take my word for it. Someone said last week: "The better-off can buy a better education, or move to a better area ... In education, we need to move to the post-comprehensive era, where schools keep the comprehensive principle of equality of opportunity but where we open up the system to new and different ways of education, built round the needs of the individual child. ... Why shouldn't there be a range of schools for parents to choose from; from specialist schools to the new city Academies, to faith schools, to sixth forms and sixth form colleges offering excellent routes into university and skilled employment?" Who said that? It was not a Tory politician—it was Tony Blair, speaking at the Labour party conference. I have just one question for the minister. What lessons does she believe that she can learn from her colleagues south of the border?

I am pleased to follow Colin Campbell, whose speech was well thought out. He mentioned prevention, which I would like to highlight, too. We all know that money spent on prevention is better than money spent on cures. In winding up, perhaps Mary Mulligan will respond to some points that I hope to raise. We have a truly terrible record on CHD and stroke, with one of the highest death rates in the world. We do not need to look too far for the causes—poor diet, lack of exercise, smoking and alcohol, which Keith Raffan mentioned. I have spoken in the chamber before about women with alcohol problems. The problem is hidden at the moment, but I hope that it is starting to come to the surface. Members may have been following the television series on Ninewells hospital, which is extremely interesting. I pay tribute to the staff at Ninewells who have taken part in the programme. A programme that I saw two weeks ago dealt with people who had been admitted with heart disease. It followed a number of patients who were stabilised, treated and visited by the consultant afterwards. The consultant gave them advice about lifestyle, diet, exercise and the need to stop smoking. That was not the first time that some patients had been given such advice—they were repeat offenders, if you like. There were encouraging signs when they all said in the hospital that they would never smoke again and that they would cut down on drinking and take exercise. The follow-up programme was interesting. At least one patient confessed that he had continued to smoke, despite the manifest risk to his health and life. Such attitudes must be overcome. I want to discuss physical exercise, too. It is estimated that 36 per cent of men's deaths from CHD and 38 per cent of women's deaths are due to lack of physical activity. In the UK, some 9 per cent of deaths from CHD could be avoided if people who are sedentary or have a light level of physical activity progressed to a moderate level of activity. If we are to change attitudes, we must start with the young. We should catch pupils in our schools  and get them to understand the need for exercise and good diet. We have a long way to go in that respect, as obesity rates among the young are still rising steadily. Two weeks ago, I visited Pitlochry High School and talked to the modern studies class. Coincidentally, the Scottish Rugby Union had an introduction-to-rugby day course at the same time, which went down well, as the school is small and does not have rugby on its curriculum. Talking to the teachers was interesting. They said that, that morning, there had been a sudden rash of sick notes from pupils, who all claimed that they had colds and could not participate. It was obvious that the worst offenders were girls. Perhaps they did not fancy rugby or did not feel that they wanted physical exercise. In fact, one pupil ended up being taken to hospital with a broken jaw, so perhaps they had intelligent foresight, but that is by the by. Girls and young women everywhere, not just girls in Pitlochry High School, seem to have a problem with physical exercise. We must encourage more activity among the young. Health education has a role, but I am somewhat sceptical about the effect of television adverts, always battering people and saying that they must eat better and stop smoking. I wonder whether people will behave better because the state lectures to them. A better initiative would be to place more physical education teachers in schools. The Conservatives have said in the chamber that they want a full-time equivalent PE teacher in every primary school in Scotland. That initiative would increase physical activity among the young. If we catch them young, it is to be hoped that that will set a pattern for the rest of their lives. After that, we can deal with the problem of our appalling rates of coronary heart disease and stroke throughout Scotland. I am delighted to support the amendment in the name of my colleague Ben Wallace.

To ask the Scottish Executive what support it gives to rural post offices to expand the public services that they offer. (S1O-5676)

The minister will be aware of the performance and innovation unit report that said that some aspects of the programmes for rural post offices were the responsibility of the devolved Governments. Will the minister explain the delays in rolling out the "Your Guide" programme and in access to internet learning, which are causing considerable concern among sub-postmasters in rural areas throughout Scotland?

Does the minister share my concern at today's news of the discovery of an outbreak of  legionnaire's bacteria at Perth royal infirmary? Does the minister agree that the public can have confidence in our hospitals this winter only if effective measures are put in place to prevent such outbreaks?

Does Cathy Peattie not accept that a plethora of organisations already regulates care in the private sector?

When my colleague Brian Monteith opened the debate for the Scottish Conservatives, he said that  we had some reservations about some of the proposals. I have listened to the tone of the debate and to some of the contributions to it, and I believe that our stance has been vindicated. We have been reassured that we came in at the right angle. The Conservatives are somewhat sceptical about some of the proposals. In particular, we are sceptical about the idea that all children should be treated as part of a class, rather than as individuals. Children are different—they have different needs, come from different situations and have different opinions. To suggest that we can lump them all together and say that they have a commonality of interests is a flawed approach.

Of course the report does not say that. However, Karen Gillon might recall that a number of speakers said that children's interests must be represented, which implies that interests are not being represented at present. That is the point to which I sought to respond. Children are best represented not by an arm of the state but by their parents. The commissioner's role should not be about taking rights away from parents. We must be clear that primary responsibility for children is with their parents. That is enshrined in the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child. I quote article 5 of the convention, which is important: "Parties shall respect the responsibilities, rights and duties of parents or, where applicable, the members of the extended family or community as provided by local custom, legal guardians or other persons legally responsible for the child, to provide, in a matter consistent with the evolving capacities of the child, appropriate direction and guidance in the exercise by the child of the rights recognized in the present Convention."

Yes, if it is brief.

It is rather unworthy of the committee convener to accuse anyone of seeking to score cheap political points. If she listens, she will find that I am about to explore and expand on the debate. A slightly worrying trend is becoming apparent. Last week, during the stage 1 debate on the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill, the Executive—grudgingly—had to drop its proposal to take away the right of parents to discipline their children as they saw fit, due to the backlash from parents. During that debate, the Deputy Minister for Justice, who is sitting on the Labour party benches, said that the Executive would be closely monitoring public opinion on that issue and would look for an early opportunity to reintroduce it. Today, Scott Barrie, in his rather disturbing speech, made it clear that that is part of the Executive's agenda. We have an Executive that thinks that the state knows best—better than parents. I would be concerned if the appointment of a children's commissioner was another step along that road. We must defend the rights of families and of parents to bring up their children free from state interference.

No, thank you. I want to make some progress and I have already taken two interventions. We heard much in the debate about the nature of society. I am sorry that Jackie Baillie has left the chamber, as she, too, talked about society. The first person to say that there is no such thing as society was John Macmurray, who happens to be Tony Blair's favourite philosopher. We have a society that is made up of individuals and families. We have a strong society by having strong families, and an agenda that weakens the family is one that will weaken society. Family breakdown is a primary cause of child poverty. If we are serious about such issues, we must champion the rights of families rather than seek to chip away at them. However, we accept that there is a role for a children's commissioner. There are children who need protection. My colleague Jamie McGrigor referred specifically to children in care—children who are looked after not by their parents but in homes. We are all familiar with horrific tales of abuse of children in council and state-run homes over the years. Those children do not have parents to stick up for them or to defend their rights. They are precisely the children who need protection. Such protection cannot come from the state, because the state is looking after them. That is why we need an independent body or person to champion their rights. That is where the role of a children's commissioner lies.  The commissioner should have the right to investigate public bodies, as its primary role should be to help children in care, but surely the investigation of private sector bodies is a matter for the police and other existing institutions. I understand that that position applies to the children's commissioners in Wales and Northern Ireland. We do not accept that the commissioner should agitate for changes in legislation. That is the job of members of the Scottish Parliament, of the Westminster Parliament and of the European Parliament. The children's commissioner does not represent a panacea. Johann Lamont made that point effectively in a fine speech. We support the principle of a children's commissioner, but we have reservations about the detail of what is proposed. We will reserve our position on the matter until we see the detail of the bill.

In previous debates, the Conservatives have expressed scepticism about the idea of a national cultural strategy; we do not think that one can plan culture. Surely culture is something that is organic and grows naturally. The last thing that it needs is politicians meddling with it and trying to promote their own ideas. That perhaps explains why we lodged an amendment to today's motion. The amendment seeks to achieve something important, in that it stresses the importance of schools in the process of promoting culture among young people. We must examine the school curriculum. We do not need a top-down approach, but we must provide more opportunities to schools, which can then make decisions at local level about which parts of culture they buy into. During the debate, a number of different aspects of culture have been referred to and I shall cover as many as I can in the time available. John Farquhar Munro talked about Gaelic-medium education, and I warmly endorse what he said. I would like to see a much greater roll-out of Gaelic-medium education throughout Scotland where there is parental demand, such as there is in Edinburgh, where parents want their own Gaelic-medium school, but are being denied it by the local authority. We want Scottish traditional music to be encouraged in schools. Michael Russell referred to piping. Many independent schools offer piping tuition and, as a result, have successful pipe bands, which compete internationally. It is much more difficult to get piping tuition in the state system. I am sure that we would all benefit from improved standards of piping, bearing in mind the standard of some of the pipers on the Royal Mile, who blast out continually outside our office windows.  We should also consider the role of instrument teachers. I remember a debate a few months ago about how the McCrone settlement sought to impose some conditions on instrumental teachers. Some of them felt that that would be to their detriment. I should also mention Scottish traditional dance. I lodged a motion on that subject some months ago, which members from different parties were kind enough to support. We have a mixed record in dance, with some schools and authorities being very good at including it as part of the physical education curriculum, while others are not so good. Dance is something that we should cherish because, if someone goes to a ceilidh and is asked to do "The Reel of the 51 st Division" and does not have a clue what they are doing, it is useful at least to have a background. Donald Gorrie mentioned Scottish history, which is a particular interest of mine. It is depressing that, even now, some people still think that Culloden was a battle between the Scots and the English. I remember my grandmother telling me that when she was taught Scottish history at school, all she ever learned about was the Highland clearances—my grandmother was born in 1892. At the end of last year I was at a primary school where the pupils were doing a history project. Guess what it was on? The Highland clearances. I do not have a problem with pupils learning about the Highland clearances, but we tend to overemphasise the black periods in our history. We do not want young people growing up with a sense that the Scots are victims all the time. Let us also look at the good things in our history and remember the great role that the Scots have played in developing the United Kingdom and, indeed, the empire. There is also a role for specialist schools of the arts, drama and music. St Mary's Music School in Edinburgh is extremely successful. What does it do? It selects on the basis of ability. There is a lesson to be learned there. I think that schools ought to be the prime drivers in promoting culture to our young people, but it is up to the schools themselves, to their heads and to school boards how to prioritise. Some will wish more emphasis to be placed on culture than others do. What we do not need is a prescriptive, top-down approach. I say to Linda Fabiani that, when we talk about taking money away from local authorities, what we of course mean is that the money should be given directly to the schools, rather than routed through the education authorities. Let us give freedom to schools, and let us allow the decisions to be taken at the grass roots. That is the best way to promote culture.

Especially the cuisine.

To ask the Scottish Executive what consideration it gives to public safety issues when determining applications for listed building consent to demolish historic buildings that are in an unsafe condition and uneconomic to repair. (S1O-5562)

I thank the minister for her thorough reply and echo her comments about the Scottish chess champions who, Keith Harding tells me, soundly thrashed their MSP opponents. The minister has been in correspondence with me over the case of my constituent David Walter, owner of Balthayock House outside Perth, who has been refused permission to demolish the house despite the safety risks. As the minister's advice was that Mr Walter should sell the house and as the estimated cost of repair is put at £2.3 million against a likely market value when restored of £750,000, what sort of person does the minister think is likely to want to buy that house?

Like many members who have spoken in the debate, I declare an interest as a member of the Law Society of Scotland and as a solicitor, although I am no longer practising. Like Robert Brown and Fergus Ewing, when I was a practising solicitor I had to advise people who were in debt. I also had to advise creditors. We have heard a lot about the rights of debtors, but I would like to speak up for the rights of creditors. It was my job to advise creditors—often people in small businesses—who had difficulty in recovering sums of money that were due to them.  They came to me when they faced bankruptcy, losing their homes, closing down their businesses and laying off staff because they could not recover sums that were due to them. What we have heard in the debate so far has been pretty depressing. The Scottish Socialist Party, perhaps not surprisingly, does not care for the rights of creditors. However, it is pretty depressing that the Scottish National Party is taking the same line and not proposing a realistic alternative.

Christine Grahame did not give way to me during her speech, but I shall be delighted to give way to her.

The problem is that the SNP has come up with no realistic alternative to the attachment of moveable property. The SNP is therefore disregarding the interests of commercial creditors, which is grossly irresponsible.

No, thank you. We have heard enough from the SNP. The Scottish Conservatives welcome the bill, as it strikes a reasonable balance between the rights of creditors and the need to protect debtors. Crucially, it allows the attachment and sale of moveable property with suitable safeguards in place. No legal system in the western world does not have a system of diligence against moveable property. All civilised countries need such a system because, without it, it would be too easy for debtors to escape their obligations. The problem of speaking so late in the debate is that all the points that I was going to make have been made. I will endear myself to the Presiding Officer by being brief on two specific points. The first relates to the volume of subordinate legislation that is mentioned in the bill. It must be of concern that so many issues—some of them fundamental—will be dealt with through regulations, especially when only the negative resolution procedure is to be used. That applies, for example, to the detail of debt arrangement schemes in section 2(5), which sets the limits of the debt payment programme. That detail should be subject to the affirmative procedure, not to negative resolution. There are other examples  later in the bill. My second point concerns summary warrants, which issue has been raised by my colleague Lyndsay McIntosh. The bill does not deal with summary warrants, although they are used widely by public sector creditors, especially local authorities that are trying to recover council tax. There are issues of natural justice attached to that. Why should public sector creditors have advantages that private sector creditors do not have? The bill contains numerous safeguards to protect debtors who owe money to private sector creditors, but those do not apply in the case of public sector creditors. Why should that be? Are public sector creditors much more reasonable and responsible than private sector creditors? There is no evidence of that. In fact, the great majority of warrant sales were instructed by the state—by local authorities. From the consequential amendments, it looks as though the new attachment order will be permitted under summary warrant. That issue needs to be examined carefully. For the sake of fairness to all, we should consider why public sector creditors should have an advantage over private sector creditors. I have made several points. I hope that the Executive will consider them at stage 2 of the bill.

Will Christine Grahame accept an intervention?

Will Christine Grahame take an intervention?

I want to go back to vending machines. I wonder whether the minister acknowledges that parents' greatest concern is their children's leaving school premises at break time to buy sweets and drinks in local shops. At least if the schools have vending machines on the premises, it keeps children in the school building and reduces risk to them. Ultimately, decisions about such matters should be taken not by the Scottish Executive or local authorities, but by head teachers in consultation with school boards.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to reduce the number of alcohol-related deaths in women. (S1O-5444)

Does the minister acknowledge the importance of family support groups for people suffering from alcohol problems? If so, what support does the Executive provide to such groups throughout Scotland?

Scottish Conservatives oppose this bill—not because we do not think that it is well-intentioned or because we think that the motivation behind it is anything other than genuine, but because we do not feel that providing free school meals to all pupils is the way to achieve the desired results. I want to deal with the question of stigma. I have to correct Alex Neil, who would not take an intervention from Brian Monteith. Brian Monteith did not say that there was no evidence of stigma, but that there was scant evidence of stigma. Even if we—

No, thank you. Alex Neil had the chance to make a point and he got it wrong. Will he please sit down? Even if we acknowledge the point that stigma can be attached to receiving free school meals, that can be dealt with by the use of swipe cards, as a number of members have said. A similar system operated when I was at school. Every Monday, we went to collect our dinner tickets at the school office. Only the school office knew whether we paid for them or got them free. Swipe cards are simply an update of that system. In written evidence, SNP-controlled Angus Council said: "Whether it is necessary to provide free school meals for all pupils in order to remove that possible stigma is highly debatable." Many schools do not have the capacity to offer free school meals for all; there would not be the space in the canteens. There would be huge capital costs and horrendous queues that would put people off. I took school meals for many years, but I eventually gave up because I was fed up queuing for 25 minutes and seeing my whole lunch time taken up. Others around me had eaten  their packed lunch before I had even sat down. The prospect of queuing will not make school meals attractive to pupils, which is the whole object. It is all very well providing nutritious meals free, but what guarantee is there that kids will eat them? Near my office in Blairgowrie, I often see kids from the high school out and about at lunch time. The school canteen provides very affordable nutritious meals but, even so, the most popular destination at lunch time is the chippy and the most popular meals are chips on a roll, chips and cheese or chips and curry sauce, all with a can of juice. That is hardly a healthy option, but do the sponsors of the bill really think that, if they provide school meals free, all kids will eat them? At lunch time, I met a party of kids from St Margaret's Primary School in Dunfermline and we talked about this debate. I asked them whether, if fruit were provided free at school, they would eat it. The answer was no. You can take a horse to water but you can't make it drink. We can provide free school meals, but how many kids will eat them? I suspect that the majority of kids would still get pocket money from their parents and go to the local takeaway or chippy, where they can buy the food that they like. Throughout this debate, we have heard from members that their own kids will not eat school meals. The only way in which the plan would work would be if kids were forced to stay on the school premises at lunch time and were banned from bringing in any food with them. I do not see the sponsors of the bill proposing that—although, interestingly enough, independent boarding schools have that option. The evidence from SNP-controlled Angus Council was against providing free school meals. I suggest that SNP members listen to Angus Council. It is far better to provide school meals in a competitive environment, in which pupils have choice, than in a monopolistic system where all are driven down the same road. The Conservatives are committed to improving the health and social well-being of Scotland's young people. However, we seriously doubt that the bill will achieve those objectives. We agree with the findings of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee that providing a universal service is not the best use of limited resources. For the reasons that my colleagues and I have set out, we will not support the bill.

The debate has been enlightening, although I have to say to Nicol Stephen that I cannot see how anybody could look at Brian Monteith and me and describe us as twins. They certainly could not describe us as identical twins, or at least I hope they could not. Much has been said in the debate about diversity in education. Our party has talked about diversity for some time and I am delighted that we seem to be winning converts to the cause. In particular, I welcome the Minister for Education and Young People's conversion to the cause. To talk about rejecting a one-size-fits-all approach, as Cathy Jamieson did at the EIS seminar on 23 May, is to lift language straight from speeches that Brian Monteith and I made at the Scottish Conservative party conference the week before—welcome aboard, minister.

I will cover that in my remarks. If the minister is serious about diversity, why does she take a dogmatic approach to St Mary's Episcopal Primary School in Dunblane, which is a successful school and which works far better outside the local authority system than it did within it? I say to Rhona Brankin that the provision of special needs education at St Mary's improved considerably when it opted out of the local authority system. It is nonsense that opted-out schools cannot provide appropriate special needs education. We do not accept the SNP amendment. I question its logic because we already have schools in Scotland, such as Jordanhill School, that exist outside the local authority system. Is it the SNP's policy to bring those schools back under local authority control? The SNP's narrow ambitions depress me. Normally, SNP spokesmen say that we must examine what other countries, such as Sweden, Denmark and the Netherlands are doing. However, on education, the SNP does not want to consider what happens in those countries, which is a bit sad. Denominational schools are an important aspect of the debate and I am pleased that the minister welcomed their distinctive ethos. The logic of diversity is that we should not stop with Roman Catholic schools, but allow other denominations and faiths the same privileges, where there is parental demand. Those who defend Catholic schools, but would refuse Protestant, Muslim or Jewish parents the same opportunities, must be careful about the messages that they send to the diverse society that is modern Scotland. We do not anticipate a huge rush to set up faith schools. Where they exist in England, they are popular with parents and deliver a high standard of education. We do not propose that the state should set up such schools, because they should be a response to parental demand. I am pleased that Irene McGugan, who is very sensible when compared to Michael Russell, is here today. Michael Russell has been talking nonsense about us wanting to set up creationist schools. Where are the creationists in Scotland who want to set up schools? Are the streets of Scotland choked with parents burning copies of "The Origin of Species" and demanding that creationist schools be set up? Michael Russell's suggestion is ridiculous.  The key point is that one either supports diversity or one does not. We cannot say, as the SNP does, that there should be diversity, but only if that involves the types of school of which the centre approves. That is a centralising approach, not a diversifying approach.

We are in favour of a state-funded school system. We have never suggested that the system should not be state funded. We are saying that the system should be more responsive and diverse, but still state funded. The problem is that the present system fails Scotland's youngsters. There is a consensus among all the parties that we need a more diverse system. The people who suffer the most are the poorest in our society. The middle classes have always had the option of opting out of the state sector and choosing independent education. That is their right and they should not be condemned for it. However, only around 5 per cent of people are fortunate enough to be in that position. Other parents buy houses in the catchment areas of what are thought of as good schools. There is a degree of hypocrisy in that. Such people can be champagne socialists, who proudly claim to support the state system, but do so only because they can afford to buy a house in the catchment area of Jordanhill School, Lenzie Academy, Balerno High School or James Gillespie's High School. Perhaps some Labour members are in that category. I do not judge them. I simply wish that they were honest and did not try to deprive the less well-off of the same choices that they have been fortunate enough to be able to make. The least well-off have no options. They cannot choose private schooling and do not have the opportunity to buy a house in the catchment area of a good school. They are left with the local comprehensives that are shunned by those who have the resources to make choices. We must extend choice so that not only the better-off benefit. In countries such as Sweden and in some states in the United States, where education vouchers have been introduced, the uptake is not highest among the middle classes, but among the least well-off. Perhaps we should consider similar models here as part of the national debate on education. At least we are moving in the right direction.

I thought that we were having a national debate on education. Is the minister saying that the parameters have been set so narrowly that everything is ruled out? However, I am pleased to hear that she supports her local school. Perhaps she should have a word with some Labour members and find out whether they also support their local schools or whether they are abusing the catchment area system. I am sure that some of them are doing that. All parties in the chamber now say that a more diverse education system is the right direction to move in. The challenge is to devise an education system that provides opportunity for all, regardless of background; that promotes excellence; and that makes Scottish education the best in the world once again. That is what our motion seeks to achieve, and I urge members to support it.

Will Mr Rumbles take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Will the member join me in condemning the hypocrisy of Labour party members who, while claiming to support the comprehensive system, buy houses in the catchment areas of good schools such as Jordanhill School or Lenzie Academy in order to benefit from a standard of education that is denied to those who live in poorer areas?

All parties agree that participation in sports should be widened. Several members have referred to the problems of ill health. Despite increasing affluence, ill health in the population is increasing. As several members have said, Scotland has serious problems with heart disease, cancer and stroke, which could be countered in some cases by exercise. Furthermore, the level of obesity is growing among young people. We must examine ways of countering those problems, if for no other reason than to reduce the burden on the NHS that is a result of those health problems. That is why we want to encourage participation in sports. I have never believed that sporting excellence is a measure of a country's standing. Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, and before that, athletes from the Soviet Union and East Germany cleaned up Olympic medals, while people in their home countries suffered under evil socialist regimes. Meanwhile, we in the free world did not win as many medals, but at least we had our freedom. I know which I prefer. I do not suggest that the minister recommends Soviet-style concentration on sports, but a small improvement in the quality of our football team would not go amiss. The world cup is rather sad when the Scots are not there. Alex Johnstone referred to Scotland's lack of sporting success, but we are world leaders in sports such as darts and snooker. Perhaps they are not the sort of sports that the minister is talking about.

The member has more expertise in the matter than I have. I was not sure that women were excluded from darts or snooker. In my local pub, as many women as men play darts, but my experience must be different from Cathy Peattie's. My colleague James Douglas-Hamilton—our very own pugilistic peer—referred to the importance of amateur and professional boxing. If we accept that we all want greater participation in sports, how will that best be achieved? More sport in our schools must be the starting point. Not so long ago, the idea of competitive sport in schools was condemned as  elitist by some on the left. I hope that those days are gone. Perhaps, as Peter Mandelson has said, "we are all 'Thatcherite' now." School sport is vital, as it encourages activity and promotes physical well-being. It also teaches young people about competition and the need to value others, whatever their abilities. The education system must be at the heart of any strategy to promote sport. That is why Scottish Conservatives want more physical education teachers in our primary schools. We are calling for a full-time equivalent PE teacher in every primary school in Scotland. That would be the single most important measure that the Executive could take to promote participation in sport in Scotland.

I ask Rhona Brankin to give me a second; I want to make another point. Margo MacDonald said that there is no shortage of PE teachers available to be recruited. That would have a cost. We have costed our proposal at £11 million. That is real money, but it is a drop in a bucket compared with some Executive initiatives in its strategies, consultation documents and glossy leaflets. We have heard much about considering things. Many members have said, "We must consider this and we must consider that." We have had three years of the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Executive—it is time to stop considering things. Let us do something positive. Let us get some PE teachers in our schools.

Indeed. I want to see everybody being encouraged to take up sport. At the moment, there are those, including young women, who are not participating as much as they should. It is clear that they would benefit if resources were to be put into sport. I will deal briefly with the idea of full-time equivalent PE teachers, as there seems to be some confusion on the subject.

I can tell members that The Times Educational Supplement Scotland  is in no doubt about the meaning of full-time equivalent. The meaning is clear. There should be a full-time PE teacher in schools of sufficient size and, in smaller schools, a peripatetic teacher should be used for the appropriate number of hours. The  number of hours will depend on the number of pupils in the school. That is not a complicated idea. I suspect that the members who take issue with it are simply looking for an excuse to cop out of showing support for the idea of full-time equivalent PE teachers in schools. If we are to see a real improvement in the level of sports activity in our schools, we need to have PE teachers in our schools. Rather than saying that we must consider this and consider that, let us see some real action. Action has to start in schools—let us get some PE teachers. I urge members to support the Conservative amendment.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to carry out a safety review of the A9 south of Perth. (S1O-5247)

The minister will be aware of the concerns of residents of Auchterarder and Blackford about the safety of the junctions that serve those communities. Can the minister assure us that those junctions will be upgraded before any further housing development takes place in those areas?

I wonder why the Executive is only now waking up to the problem when the Conservatives identified it at the time of the 1999 elections. Could the reason be that we have had three ministers with responsibility for education in the past three years?

Like Nicol Stephen, I was a student at the University of Aberdeen. Of course, that was in the  good old days of the Conservative Government, before we had tuition fees and graduate taxes. However, before I am overcome by nostalgia, I will deal with the Executive's programme and what it offers rural Scotland. What does the programme offer rural Scotland? The conclusion must be that it offers nothing of any value. This week, the revised farm income forecast for 2001 was announced. It made depressing reading. Since 1997, farm incomes have plummeted. There cannot be a farmer in Scotland who would not trade his income today for the one that he had under the previous Conservative Government. On Friday, I was speaking to farmers in Fife who expressed dismay at the current state of Scottish agriculture and could see little hope for the future. They see the Executive doing nothing that might help them. What galls them in particular is the fact that the Minister for Environment and Rural Development spends his time introducing bills that will increase the burdens on the farming community rather than reduce them. The Land Reform (Scotland) Bill opens up access to lowland farms and will increase the costs on farmers. Whatever the Executive believes, that is the view of the farming community.

I might let George Lyon in later.

No. The draft agricultural holdings bill should have been a piece of legislation that delivered long-overdue modernisation of the law in that area. A consensus as to the way forward had been reached between the National Farmers Union Scotland and the Scottish Landowners Federation. However, the minister has thrown a spanner in the works by introducing a tenant right to buy. That is causing huge concern in the agriculture community across Scotland. As I speak, land agents across Scotland are desperately trying to find ways to terminate existing limited partnership agreements, fearful that any sort of tenancy will eventually be granted a right to buy. Landowners who wish to preserve the integrity of their estates are refusing to let land under any arrangements. In the foreword to the draft bill consultation paper, the minister writes: "The industry's adaptability and rejuvenation will be aided by encouraging new blood and new ideas into agriculture. Stimulating a healthy tenanted sector is an important step in attracting that new blood and those new ideas." Those are fine words, which were echoed by the  First Minister today. However, I presume that they were written before the right to buy was included in the bill. It is as clear as day that the bill is already having precisely the opposite effect.

I will take an intervention as I know that George Lyon has a deep personal interest in this matter.

George Lyon was not a council tenant, but he is a farm tenant. The fact is, the council houses belonged to the state and the state was quite right to change the contract between landlord and tenant. In relation to farms, the landlord and the tenant are private individuals. The introduction to the consultation paper goes on to say: "Landowners need to feel able to let land with assurance". That is another failure, because no landowner is letting any land as a result of this bill, with assurance or otherwise. The introduction also says: "Greater certainty over the length and terms of leases ... should also help to cultivate a positive, forward-looking relationship between landlord and tenant." That would be fine, but the bill does nothing to encourage positive and forward-looking relationships. It does quite the opposite. All the evidence is that the right-to-buy proposals in the bill will be a disaster for the tenanted sector. Even Ross Finnie agrees with that. During a ministerial statement on the matter in May 2000, he outlined the Executive's opposition to right-to-buy proposals in these words: "We are trying to move towards a situation of greater diversity, in which more leases will be offered. Neither the consultative group that existed before we took office nor that which was set up afterwards proved that instituting a tenant's right to buy would do anything other than dry up a limited supply. We were not persuaded that that was consistent with our aim of getting new tenants."— [ Official Report , 17 May 2000; Vol 6, c 695.]  I could not agree more. Why the change of heart? Could it have something to do with the lobbying by George Lyon who, as a tenant farmer, stands to benefit from the right to buy? We should be told. The Land Reform (Scotland) Bill is likely to have a more sinister and damaging effect on Scottish agriculture. If the letting of land is no longer acceptable to landowners, many will put their land on the market for sale. The sudden deluge of land on the property market will reduce land values.  Why are land values important? They are important because farmers use the value of land to support their bank borrowings, especially in difficult times such as those that we have now. If land values fall and banks start to call in their borrowings, that will have a catastrophic effect on Scottish farming. Has the minister considered that? The Land Reform (Scotland) Bill is another misguided measure from an Executive that does not understand rural Scotland. Scottish farmers look to the Executive for help in their present time of crisis and all that the Executive does is introduce a bill and tenant's right to buy that, at best, are distractions from the real problems of rural Scotland. The Executive thinks that, when the elections come next year, it can tick the box that is marked "rural Scotland" and say, "We've dealt with that. It hasn't cost us anything, but we have legislated and demonstrated our concern." I have news for the Executive: rural Scotland can see through its cynical ploy. In three years, it has done nothing for rural communities. There is nothing for them in the legislative programme that the Executive announced today. They will not forget that at the elections next year.

I rise briefly to support the motion in the name of the First Minister and to oppose Mr Sheridan's amendment. Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth has been a fine role model for the past 50 years. As the motion says, she is held in respect by the Scottish people. That may stick in the throat of the minority in Scotland who are republicans, but it is a fact. All the critics and carpers said that there would be no interest in the recent funeral of Her Majesty the Queen Mother, but the massive public reaction and the queues of people outside Westminster Hall waiting to view the Queen Mother's coffin while it lay in state far exceeded expectations. It is clear that there is a great reservoir of admiration for the monarchy. The critics might have had a point had the monarchy made no attempt to modernise. However, the monarchy has modernised over the past decade—it is responsive, it has slimmed down and it even pays income tax. The Queen is not paying inheritance tax because that was the agreement that she reached with the Government of the day. It would be quite wrong to call for that agreement to be broken. The monarchy might reflect on the position for some future event, but it would be quite wrong to call for a retrospective imposition of inheritance tax at this stage. Quite simply, the monarchy is popular. Her Majesty the Queen in particular commands respect throughout Scotland. Mr Sheridan's rather spiteful amendment typifies the politics of envy that are the hallmark of his party. Queen Elizabeth shall be remembered and admired in Scotland long after Mr Sheridan is forgotten. I ask members to reject his amendment.

At any future meeting of European education ministers that the minister might attend, will she take the opportunity to discuss with the Danish education minister the scheme that operates in Denmark, whereby any group of parents can come together to establish a school, which—provided that there is a minimum of 28 pupils—receives state funding? Would the minister consider a pilot scheme for Scotland along those lines?

I was interested in the minister's comments on standard grades. Will she confirm that she is content for individual schools to decide for themselves which exams—whether higher still or standard grades—to present candidates for?

For a moment, I thought that Donald Gorrie was about to cross the aisle and join the Conservatives. However, that will clearly have to wait for another day. I welcome the Social Justice Committee's report. I am sure that all members are familiar with the vital role that voluntary groups play in their areas. Groups that I have come into contact with recently include: the Perthshire Association for Mental Health; the Samaritans' hospital car system, which provides elderly and ill people and their carers with transport to hospital; the Princess Royal Trust for Carers in Blairgowrie, which provides day care for those who suffer from Alzheimer's to ensure that their carers can have a much-needed break; and the young folk from Kirriemuir and Forfar who, with the support of their communities, are actively raising funds for a skateboard park. If we look at any local paper on any typical day, we will find  many stories about what the voluntary sector is doing. In echoing something that Donald Gorrie highlighted in his speech, I want first to mention the situation that faces Youth Scotland, which is the umbrella group for Scotland's youth clubs and whose representatives I met last Friday. Six hundred and nineteen groups from throughout Scotland, involving 42,000 youngsters and 4,200 adult volunteers, are affiliated to Youth Scotland. Every town in Scotland has a youth club, which provides a valuable resource of activities for young folk. At a time when we hear so much in the chamber and elsewhere about youth crime and disorder, we should value an organisation that promotes diversionary activities. After inspecting Youth Scotland in September 2001, Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education stated that Youth Scotland was a very effective organisation that had purpose and direction. Furthermore, it said that Youth Scotland showed a creative approach to attracting funding, was highly valued by its membership and made very good use of external expertise to facilitate that process. However, following that glowing report, Youth Scotland was shocked to discover that its headquarters' core grant funding from the Scottish Executive was cut. It will receive £5,000 less in 2002-03 than it received in 1985-86. It will not have escaped members' attention that, as Donald Gorrie kindly pointed out, we had a Conservative Government in 1985-86, whereas we now have a Labour-Liberal coalition. Worse still, Youth Scotland's HQ training grant, which has been paid for the past 20 years, has now been withdrawn without any consultation or warning and after the organisation had drawn up staff and board development policies. It goes without saying that—given its good report from HMI and that it feels that it has done everything right—Youth Scotland finds that decision inexplicable. I invite the minister in his winding-up to comment on those points and to tell us whether the Scottish Executive is committed to the youth voluntary sector. My second point relates to quite a different matter: faith-based social projects. The largest provider of social services in Scotland outwith the state is the Church of Scotland Board of Social Responsibility, which my colleague Lyndsay McIntosh mentioned. At this point, I must declare an interest, as my wife works for the organisation. A few weeks ago, it was forced to close eight care homes and other projects because of inadequate funding from the Executive. However, it is not just funding issues that affect faith-based providers. A couple of months ago, I had the opportunity to visit the Bethany Christian Trust with the shadow home secretary, Oliver  Letwin. Bethany is one of the largest providers of social services in Edinburgh, and concentrates on the disadvantaged, rough sleepers and drug abusers. Some might see such people as the lowest level of humanity and beyond hope, but it was impossible not to be moved by meeting people who had once been in the gutter and who are now leading fulfilling lives because of Bethany's help. Bethany offers an holistic approach and never turns people away. The commitment and care of its staff are second to none. It works because it is a Christian organisation, with an added value that comes from its workers' beliefs. However, the Christian ethos that makes Bethany so attractive and effective also acts as a barrier to its accessing council funding. The Labour-run City of Edinburgh Council will not fund certain Bethany projects because the organisation will not, for faith reasons, sign up to the council's equal opportunities programme. The result is that political correctness is preventing the best standard of care from being given to the poorest and most vulnerable people in our society. If the Parliament is serious about having a thriving voluntary sector in Scotland, we must treat the sector seriously. As Donald Gorrie said, that means having proper core funding, which must be signalled well in advance. It also requires the removal of barriers to faith-based welfare projects. I trust that the minister will address those points.

The Scottish Conservatives welcome the opportunity to debate the participation of young people in politics and community affairs. We generally approve of the wording of the Executive motion but believe that the emphasis should be slightly different. I welcome the minister's comments and state that we intend to be constructive in the debate. I am disappointed that the minister felt that she could not accept the terms of our amendment, but there we are. We are anxious to make the point that we need young people to be involved in the mainstream political process, not just corralled into groups for  young people alone. I will elaborate on that later, when I will also make some points about the low number of young people who vote. I was especially keen to speak in the debate as I have a history in youth politics. Ten years ago, I was the national chairman of the Young Conservatives, at that time by far the largest political youth group in the UK. That led to my involvement in international groups such as the Democratic Youth Community of Europe, the European Young Conservatives, which I helped to set up in Helsinki in 1992, and the International Youth Democrat Union. I was interested to hear the minister mention the European angle of the Scottish youth parliament, as the experience of meeting and debating with young people from across Europe and the rest of the world is an experience that I will always remember and cherish. Last Thursday, I was a guest at the annual dinner of Dundee University Conservative and Unionist Association. The Dundee monsters, as they are fondly known, are the only active party-political group on campus. The sabbatical president-elect of Dundee University Students Association is an active Tory, as is the vice-president. While that is good news for the Scottish Tories, it is disappointing that there is so little opposition from other parties.

I am sorry, but the Tories at the University of Dundee have never heard of the SSP. Our greatest concern should be the low participation rate of young people in mainstream politics, as Mike Russell and the text of my amendment point out. The percentage of young people voting in elections continues to decline at an alarming rate. It is common knowledge that more young people vote in polls for television programmes such as "Big Brother" and "Pop Idol" than vote in elections. When I raised that fact at the question-and-answer session earlier today, one of the MSYPs pointed out that that affected all sectors of the population, not just young people. That is true, but there is a particular problem with young people not participating in the mainstream political process. Why is that happening? Young people are becoming increasingly cynical about politics. Far be it from me to introduce a partisan tone to the debate, but there can be no doubt that such cynicism has been fuelled by the advent of new Labour, with its emphasis on style over substance, the pre-eminence of spin doctors and the reannouncements of sums of money over and  over again. When a Government behaves like that, it is little wonder that young people are turned off politics.

Unusually, I do not disagree with Scott Barrie. However, the difficulty that we face as party politicians is how to get people involved in the political process at this level. That is the gap that we have to bridge. If people are turned off politics, not only is there an abstract difficulty, but the situation becomes dangerous, as we have seen from events in France in the past couple of weeks. The best thing that politicians can do is not to worship the false god of consensus but to encourage honesty in politics and genuine debate. Perhaps by doing so, we will attract young people back to mainstream politics. Earlier today, I and other MSPs met representatives of the Scottish youth parliament. It is a worthwhile organisation, especially for those who are involved. It brings young people into contact with the political process. At a local level, local authority youth councils perform a similar function, with varying degrees of success. However, we would be making a mistake if we thought that that was the end of the story and that those groups were truly representative of youth opinion. That should not be their function. I was interested to read some of the policies of the Scottish youth parliament, which include: abolishing the monarchy; legalising cannabis; and unilateral nuclear disarmament. Those policies are not supported by me or, I suspect, the vast majority of the Scottish public, but that does not particularly matter and there are other policies on the list—for example, a three-strikes policy for criminal justice and a suggestion that courts should be more young-people friendly—that I would support. The Scottish youth parliament has produced some radical policies, but we should not be afraid of radical policies. When I was in the Conservative Students 15 years ago, we produced some very radical policies. Even within our party, people said that we were a bunch of loony right-wingers. The irony is that those self-same policies are the policies not only of today's Conservative party, but of today's Labour party. The important aspect of the Scottish youth parliament is the opportunity that it gives for participation. Perhaps it is more  relevant for young people that they be encouraged to play an active role in their communities, in improving facilities for their use and in encouraging other young people to vote and to join community councils and other local organisations. The irony is that young people are interested in current affairs. I agree with Scott Barrie on that. In my region—Mid Scotland and Fife—I have been lobbied actively by young people who are engaging in the democratic process without getting involved in bodies such as the youth parliament. I will give examples. I have been working with Adam Ramsay in an effort to improve recycling facilities at the Perthshire school at which he is a pupil. The young people who are involved in the Alyth youth partnership asked to meet me to stress the need for a youth worker to run activities and to keep their youth centre open. The former pupils of Kilry Primary School attended public meetings and voiced their support for their old school in the face of threatened closure by Angus Council. All those young people, who are from a variety of backgrounds, have involved themselves in achieving results that will benefit them and the wider community. They do not need to do that through a formal structure, such as a youth parliament. They need teachers, parents, youth leaders and volunteers to encourage them to write letters, attend public meetings and lobby MSPs, MPs, councillors and anyone they can find to help them to achieve results. One of the great pleasures of being an MSP is the opportunity to visit schools, meet teachers and talk with pupils. I have participated in many question-and-answer sessions, which have ranged from primary 2 pupils asking me what I do as an MSP to senior pupils wanting to know whether I think that MSPs are worth their salaries. I visited Glenisla Primary School in Angus when Mike Watson's Protection of Wild Mammals (Scotland) Bill was going through the Parliament. There, young people who live in rural communities told me firmly what they thought of the bill. They did not support it. Debating is another area in which young people have an opportunity to participate. We have a fine history of school debating throughout Scotland. We have events such as the debating competition that is run by The Courier and Advertiser and sponsored by the Royal Bank of Scotland. The competition is annual, is open to schools throughout Tayside and provides an excellent forum for developing debating skills. On a visit to Craigclowan School in Perth in March, I met Duncan Clark, who, along with Robert McMorrine, got to the grand final of the competition. He thoroughly enjoyed the experience. I am sure that,  in years to come, some of the young people who were involved may sit in the Parliament. Young people in schools and voluntary groups are interested in the communities around them and participate actively. However, they do not participate in mainstream politics, join political parties or vote. If initiatives such as the Scottish youth parliament encourage young people to become involved in the mainstream political process, we welcome them. The challenge for us all is to find ways to bridge the growing divide between our young people and us, the politicians. I move amendment S1M-3048.2, to leave out from "agrees" to "Youth Parliament" and insert: "pays tribute to the important role of voluntary organisations in developing the awareness of, and involving, young people in civic society; emphasises the crucial role of Scotland's schools; agrees to support constructive work with young people as they engage in civic society and democratic processes whether at local level through local authority youth councils, or at national level through organisations such as the Scottish Youth Parliament; believes that, given the alarming decrease in young people voting in elections in recent years, schools and voluntary groups should take a lead in encouraging young people to re-engage in the mainstream political process".

Does the minister accept that the current provision of nursery education follows on from the success of the previous Conservative Government's introduction of nursery vouchers and that, as the voucher system provides greater flexibility and more parental choice, it is a preferable method for delivering nursery education?

As my colleague Brian Monteith said, the Scottish Conservatives welcome the bill. I have no wish to detain members unduly—I know that we are getting into end-of-term mode—but I have one point to make briefly. It follows on from what I said in the stage 1 debate about the costs of implementation. A few other members have also raised that issue. I shall address the costs as they affect independent schools, a number of which I have visited in the past few weeks. Independent schools have no problem with the principles of the bill. In fact, many of them have better provision for disabled children than many state schools. However, there is concern over the possible costs of implementation of the bill and the impact on boarding schools especially, of which there are several in Perth and Kinross. The bill follows the recent Regulation of Care (Scotland) Act 2001, which also introduced a burden on independent schools, and there is concern about an on-going march of regulation that may affect their economic viability. It would be reassuring if the minister could confirm that no attempt is being made at a back-door assault on independent schools; that the Executive understands that independent schools are an important component of the educational framework in Scotland; and that the Executive supports the right of parents to choose independent schools if they are in a position to do so. I close by reiterating that we support the bill.

I am delighted to support David Mundell's motion. Unlike Bill Aitken, who said that he did not wish to be parochial, I fully intend to be parochial and will raise two issues that affect the region that I represent. I am sure that many members, especially those who commute into Parliament daily, will be familiar with the problem of rail services in Fife. I should declare an interest at this point, because a member of my staff who commutes on that route is  constantly late because of the railway. At least, that is what she tells me. We accept the need to get more traffic off the roads and more people on to the railway. However, there is a real problem with the state of rail infrastructure and the lack of capacity on the tracks. Despite all the spin that we hear from the Executive and today's self-congratulatory amendment, in the real world commuters face a dismal experience. They know what the situation is on the ground. As on health service, all that we get from the Executive is fine talk; the reality does not match the rhetoric. We need proper management of the railways so that confidence can be restored to the sector. The railways need the private sector to invest, but the private sector will not do so with all the dithering that we have seen from Stephen Byers and the Department of Transport, Local Government and the Regions. Six months ago, Stephen Byers was saying that not a penny of taxpayers' money would go to Railtrack's shareholders. This week, in another dramatic U-turn by the Labour Government, £300 million is to be spent on compensation. How can anybody have any confidence in the Government's approach when Byers's priority is saving his own neck rather than sorting out the problems on the railways?

Plans to reassess the capacity of Waverley have been in place for years. The fact is that the private sector will not invest in Railtrack and the railways because of what has happened with Byers. The Government has completely lost the confidence of the private sector. I shall move on to talk about roads. Mr Muldoon talked the most nonsense that I have heard in the chamber for a long time when he talked about our record. Under the Conservative Government in the years between 1992 and 1997, the average spend on trunk roads and motorway construction in Scotland was £150 million a year. In 2002-03, the spend on trunk roads and motorways will be £43 million. The improvements that were delivered under the Conservative Government can be seen: the dualling of the A90 from Perth to Aberdeen; the dualling of the A9 from Stirling to Perth; improvements on the A9 north of Perth; and the Dornoch and Kessock bridges. Bristow Muldoon would not have to look too far to see where those  road improvements were made. We have a good record to be proud of.

As I understand it, a proper assessment was undertaken at the time and incorporating rail on the Dornoch bridge was deemed not to be a viable project. I welcome the fact that work will shortly start at the Inchture junction on the A90. I also welcome the work that is being done at the Forfar and Glamis junctions to deal with accident blackspots. However, work also needs to be done on the A9. South of Perth, a considerable number of junctions are in need of upgrading. The problem is that there has been an exponential growth in traffic on the A9 since it was dualled. Because of the growth in communities such as Greenloaning, Blackford and Auchterarder, the junctions that serve those communities have become substandard. I recently spent a day in that area, meeting local councillors and community councillors who all had the same message: the accident rate is unacceptable. If there is to be further housing development in the area, there must be improvements. In the long term, we must also consider dualling the entire stretch of the A9 north of Perth to Inverness. That would have to be done over several years. The Conservative Government made good progress on that, but investment has dried up under the Labour-Liberal coalition. Good roads are required not just to make the lives of locals easier. Poor and congested roads inhibit economic growth, especially tourism, which is the life-blood of local communities. If the Executive is serious about promoting enterprise in Scotland, it should listen to local people and business organisations and loosen the purse strings so that we can build the roads that we need to get Scotland moving again.

The Conservatives, too, support community schools. Will the First Minister say what the point is of a national debate on education if the Executive prejudges the issue, which it did today in relation to community schools and yesterday in relation to the role of local authorities?

Over the past few weeks I have visited a number of small rural post offices and have heard the same story from sub-postmasters—they need support to continue to provide a service to their communities. I welcome the debate and hope that it will be the first step in providing that support. I commend Robert Brown for securing the debate. An article in the Perthshire Advertiser last Friday appealed for a local person to come forward to provide a post office service for the community of Calvine near Pitlochry. In the article, the rural transfer adviser for the Post Office Ltd said: "We have been advertising locally, but so far have been  unable to find someone who is willing to take on this vital community service." We hear that in communities throughout rural Scotland and it is a sad story indeed. The postmasters whom I have met in rural areas act as advice centres and tourist officers and provide a service that goes much further than simply selling stamps and paying out pensions. I give special mention to Ted Benfield, who runs the post office in Memus, from his pub in the village. He is a businessman who acknowledges the need to keep a local post office to service the Angus glens, following the closure of some of the local post offices. He is a hotel owner and opens a post office in his pub during the morning before the pub starts serving drinks. He hopes that his post office will become a focus for the local communities and enable them to survive for a bit longer. Further down the road at Peel Farm in Lintrathen, there is a sub-post office in a coffee shop. The sub-postmaster told me when I visited her last week that she does little more than deal with a couple of pensions and half a dozen stamps a week, but she provides a vital service. I am sure that during the bleak winter months in particular she is a vital contact for the elderly people in the community. The post office in Edzell is the hub of the community and serves a huge area, operating as an information centre for tourists and locals alike. Perth and Kinross Council, which covers a huge rural area, last week agreed unanimously that the proposals to promote competitiveness in the postal service would have an adverse effect on the rural economy and put the universal service that is available at present at considerable risk. Councillors of all political persuasions were united in their appreciation for the level of service provided by the Post Office and expressed concerns about the impact of opening up the market. I sympathise with their view that that will lead to higher prices, fewer post offices and a possible end to the universal door-to-door delivery, which would not help our rural communities. We need Consignia to ensure that the service that is provided through local post offices is expanded. "Your Guide" outlines new services that have been made available through a one-stop shop. I welcome that initiative, but we need to go further. If post offices are to offer increased services, such as information from Government departments, internet access and dedicated telephone lines to contact the Benefits Agency, it is vital that sub-postmasters are properly rewarded for providing them. Many who operate post offices in rural areas have to give up, because it costs them to operate the service.  The Parliament has to say that we give the 1,800 sub-post offices throughout Scotland our full support; that we support moves to ensure that local post offices are economically viable; and that measures will be put in place to encourage people who live in rural areas to set up local post offices to offer their communities this vital service.

The bill is an ill-conceived and ill-timed piece of legislation, which the Scottish Conservatives will vigorously oppose. The empty expanses on the Labour benches speak volumes about the Executive's commitment to rural Scotland. At one point, only seven Labour members were in the chamber for a debate on what is supposed to be a flagship policy. My colleagues have set out our position on part 1 of the bill, which is about access. Let me make it clear that the Conservative party has no difficulties with responsible access. However, part 1 contains serious flaws. Perhaps the worst of them can be dealt with at stages 2 and 3, if the Executive is prepared to listen to representations. Members have raised a number of serious concerns about, for example, the lack of balance between the competing interests of land managers and access takers, commercial access, temporary closure and liability. I find myself in the bizarre and rather unwelcome position of allying myself with Roseanna Cunningham on the issue of commercial access.

I assure Roseanna Cunningham that I do not want to make a habit of it. I was pleased that Ross Finnie said in his opening remarks he that he would address some  of those concerns. However, there are also serious concerns about ministers' sweeping powers to amend the access provisions under sections 4 and 8. The Subordinate Legislation Committee raised that point. It is a pity that the access provisions were not brought forward as a separate bill, with which the Conservative party could have engaged constructively. The diverse subjects covered by the Land Reform (Scotland) Bill should have been dealt with by three separate bills. As the access provisions are lumped in with the nonsense in parts 2 and 3, we have no alternative but to oppose them as part of the whole. Jamie McGrigor talked about part 3 of the bill. In light of the evidence that we heard in committee from the Highlands and Islands Rivers Association, the Crofting Counties Fishing Rights Group and even from Highland Council, which is hardly a hotbed of Conservative opinion, it is extraordinary that the Executive is pressing ahead with the right to buy salmon fishings. All the evidence indicated that that right to buy would destroy investment and jobs in our remote areas. Why does the Executive treat hard-working highlanders with contempt? Will a Liberal minister throw those people out of work? Part 2 deals with the community right to buy. We accept that there are circumstances in which community ownership can be preferable to private ownership.

Mr Rumbles seems to have ignored all the evidence that was given by the river workers and the ghillies from the north of Scotland. They said that the bill would put them out of work. Why does he treat those people with contempt? The proposals on the community right to buy are based on a flawed assumption that community ownership is always better than private ownership. There is no evidence to back that up as a general principle. Many remote estates are not financially self-sufficient but depend on inward investment from the owner to sustain jobs on the land and to employ local contractors in repairing and maintaining buildings and fixed equipment.

No. I am sorry, but I am running out of time. Take away that external income and what will replace it? Will it be more public subsidy? It is  ironic that, at a time when the Executive is encouraging council tenants in Glasgow to vote to transfer themselves away from the state, the Land Reform (Scotland) Bill seems intent on creating more dependency on the public purse. It is inevitable that investment will be lost, and with it jobs. The evidence from the RICS, which is professionally involved in the valuation of land, was that the bill would have a blighting effect. Investors will not put money into sustaining and creating jobs when there is no guarantee that the money will be recovered. We should have more community ownership. However, on the balance of interests, part 2 of the bill will do more harm than good to rural areas. At best, the bill is a distraction from the real problems that face rural Scotland. We all know what they are: the collapse in farm incomes, the decline in tourism, high transport costs, the closure of rural schools, the failure of local businesses and the closure of local post offices. I could continue. The Executive's response to those problems is the Land Reform (Scotland) Bill, which is not relevant to any of the issues that I mentioned. If the bill's effect were neutral, it would not be so bad. The problem is that the bill will damage further the economy of rural Scotland. Investment will dry up and jobs will be lost. We are in danger of creating a desert in the Highlands. In the Rural Development Committee, Alasdair Morrison let the cat out of the bag when he said that the bill was "about the redistribution of wealth".—[ Official Report, Rural Development Committee , 8 January 2002; c 2723.] He was wrong; it is about the destruction of wealth and it comes from people who know nothing and care less about the economics of rural Scotland. It comes from a Liberal Democrat Minister for Justice and a Liberal Democrat Minister for Environment and Rural Development. Soon enough, the Liberal Democrat members who hold rural seats will have to answer to their voters for supporting the bill. They can rest assured that we will lose no opportunity during the next 14 months to remind the electorate in rural Scotland that the Liberals are behind the bill—the Liberals will be held responsible for the damage that the bill does to rural Scotland. The bill will not create one job in rural areas; it will destroy jobs and, where there are thriving communities, it will create a wasteland. For that reason, the Scottish Conservatives will stand—alone if we must—and oppose it vigorously.

Nobody.

Will the minister take an intervention?

Alasdair Morrison, the former Deputy Minister for Highlands and Islands and Gaelic, said that the land reform bill was "about the redistribution of wealth".—[ Official Report, Rural Development Committee , 8 January 2002; c 2723.] Does the minister agree with that statement?

Debate is always welcome, but I am interested in the question of how genuine the debate that we are having is. Will the Executive change its policy on exclusions if the clear view that it is wrong emerges from the consultation? What will happen if the clear view emerges that we should have a policy of compulsory school uniforms or that we should get rid of Catholic schools? I support Catholic schools, but would the minister defend them if that view were to emerge? The key question is whether the consultation is a cosmetic exercise or whether the minister is prepared to consult and listen to responses even if they contradict existing policy.

Perhaps I had too large a lunch, but there is a rather soporific atmosphere in the chamber this  afternoon. Although the debate has been worthy, the subject is perhaps not the most exciting. Indeed, we seem to have had a recent run of fairly uncontroversial education bills on Thursday afternoons. Like Linda Fabiani, I am not a member of either the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee or the Education, Culture and Sport Committee. However, I commend the work of both committees in making representations to the ministers on the bill. As my colleague Brian Monteith said, we consider this to be a timely and necessary bill and welcome it, especially given the recent, troubled history of the SQA. Ian Jenkins and other members have referred to the debacle of the 2000 diet in the SQA, and we join Ian in hoping that the new structure will help to ensure that such a situation does not happen again. I will make one or two brief points. As Alex Neil said, one of the key points is the frequency of meetings. The evidence shows that the lack of frequent meetings led to the previous problems. Although I understand the need for flexibility, it might make sense to have more regular meetings. The Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee recommended that they should be held monthly. I certainly think that some sort of regular pattern must be specified. Jamie Stone, Stewart Stevenson and others talked about moving towards a paperless office. I have to declare a small interest in the matter. Before I became an MSP, I was a solicitor, and one of my jobs was to negotiate with the SQA a lease on behalf of landlords of storage space in Dalkeith so that the agency could store all its paperwork. So having too much paper is not always a bad thing, especially if one is a landlord. In this case, it was the Scottish Mining Museum at Newtongrange that was glad of the extra income. By all means, let us move towards paperless offices, but we should bear it in mind that paper is not always a bad thing. The related question of the returning of marked scripts must be considered. That happens in England—not all ideas that come out of England are bad—and it is something that we should consider doing here too. The issue of the advisory council should be fleshed out a little—other speakers referred to that. Ian Jenkins mentioned that more information is required on the composition of the council. There is a statutory duty for the SQA and the advisory council to consult each other—I would like to hear from the ministers how they see that relationship developing. Is the advisory council to be in effect a watchdog? It is important that the relationship is one of mutual co-operation. I welcome the fact that part-privatisation in future has not been ruled out in the policy memorandum.  Contracting out and the market testing of individual functions have not been ruled out either.

It has not been ruled out in the policy memorandum. We have streaming one day and privatisation the next—who knows where we will end up? I endorse what Brian Monteith said earlier. The Conservatives welcome the bill.

The minister referred to a ballot of musical instrument instructors. Is she aware that that ballot took place only among musical instrument instructors who are members of the Educational Institute of Scotland and that a substantial proportion of instrument instructors are not EIS members? Is she concerned that their views have not been properly taken into account?

Does Des McNulty accept that private care home owners and operators, many of whom are individuals—rather than large companies—who live in the homes themselves, would be delighted to give their staff better terms and conditions, but that they simply cannot afford to do so under the present settlement?

On Monday, I met representatives of the Alyth and district Alzheimer's carers group—a group of people who care for elderly relatives with dementia. Many are elderly themselves, and live with a spouse who is unable to feed themselves, bathe, go to the toilet or even get in or out of bed. In many ways, the caring is a labour of love. It would be an easy option for those carers to put their loved one into full-time care, but they would rather care for them themselves in their home, and will go on doing so for as long as they are able. I was encouraged to hear the minister praise people who care in the home and say that that is a model to be encouraged. Time does not permit me to recount individual stories, but the carers in Alyth and district are clear  that they are inadequately supported by the social services. What they are looking for is quite simple: respite day care, together with residential respite care for the occasional weekend, and a week or two a year to have a holiday. For those who are literally devoting their lives to the task of caring, that does not seem too much to ask. However, the services are just not there. What respite residential care is available is often many miles away, entailing a long journey to visit relatives. The irony of the situation is that, by caring in the home, those carers are saving the taxpayer thousands that would have been spent annually on residential care. They want to care at home, and will continue to do so for as long as they can, but without support some have no alternative but to give up. The burden then falls on the taxpayer. Even if we disregard the human cost and consider the matter purely in cash terms, it makes no economic sense to reduce services to carers. Services are not only failing to improve, they are reducing. The situation in Perth and Kinross is covered in the recent Scottish Health Advisory Service report, of which I have a copy. In Perth and Kinross, under the care together project, primary care, health and social work have come together. The Conservatives warmly endorse that approach as a step in the right direction. However, there are still many problems to resolve. The SHAS report makes disturbing reading. It says: "Specialist services for older people have recently been reduced at Perth Royal Infirmary as a result of financial pressures. Six assessment and rehabilitation beds were closed. We found over half of the remaining beds occupied by people whose discharge was delayed either by a lack of an available bed in a nursing home or by lack of funding. An unacceptable number of people still remain in a delayed discharge situation, some of whom have been in hospital for over 12 months waiting for discharge." That confirms the points made by my colleague Mary Scanlon. The report goes on: "In Pitlochry, where NHS continuing care beds have closed, older people are moving out of their community away from friends and family as there are no nursing home beds available locally." Referring to the situation in Blairgowrie, the report says that there will be a reduction in the number of beds, so "there will be no NHS continuing care for the frail elderly." I could go on and read further from the report, but that gives a flavour. There will be a reduction in the number of beds throughout the area, while bedblocking will reduce still further the beds that are available. That is the reality in Perth and Kinross. We have heard a lot from the Executive about how the situation is improving. If the minister were to come with me and speak to people on the  ground, he would find that that is not the impression that the people in Alyth are getting. We hear self-congratulatory talk from the minister, but the carers of Alyth know that the situation is not improving. The Scottish Health Advisory Service report says that the situation is not improving; everyone knows that it is not improving, apart from the Executive. People look back to the days of the Conservative Government and see that services were better under a Conservative Government. Under the Labour-Liberal Democrat coalition, services are being withdrawn and beds are being blocked. Despite its self-congratulatory amendment to the motion, the Executive is failing Scotland on health and community care. I support Mary Scanlon's motion.

Does the member accept that, even with the new funding package, it is likely that bodies such as the Church of Scotland will still have to consider closing down nursing homes and reducing the number of available beds?

rose—

I reiterate Brian Monteith's comment that the Scottish Conservatives welcome the bill. I will make two brief points on disability strategies, both of which relate to the question of costs. A number of members, including Ian Jenkins, referred to the costs involved in first drawing up and then implementing a strategy and to the burden that those costs would put on education authorities. I trust that the deputy minister will address that question when he winds up. Ian Jenkins also made a good point about the impact that such costs might have on small rural schools. A related issue is that of the costs for independent schools. I have an interest in independent schools, not because I went to an independent school but because I believe in freedom of choice for parents. In an area such as Perth and Kinross, which falls within the Mid Scotland and Fife region, independent schools are an important part of the local economy. They directly employ around 700 people and indirectly support many other jobs in the community. The Minister for Education and Young People is aware that I have been in correspondence with her on the subject of the impact of disability strategies on independent schools—in fact, this week she wrote to me on that very topic. Not so long ago, the Labour party had a policy of opposing independent schools, but I trust that we are in a new age and in more enlightened times. I also want to mention the situation of independent schools that are grant aided, such as specialist schools for the deaf and the blind. Independent schools often find themselves in a difficult economic position. In Perth and Kinross over the past two years, Croftinloan School in Pitlochry has closed and Rannoch School has come under pressure. There is a misconception that independent schools are dripping in wealth. Extra burdens that are put upon them could  threaten their future viability. The briefing from the Scottish Parliament information centre refers to correspondence from the bursar of Fettes College—the alma mater of the Labour Prime Minister—in which concern was expressed about the "potential financial consequences of adequately resourcing disability access strategies." The Executive estimates that the cost of drawing up a strategy will be £8,400. In itself, that is not a substantial sum, but it all adds up. The cost of implementing a strategy is of more concern. For example, the costs could be very high for a boarding school. The bursar of Fettes College referred to the problems associated with listed buildings, which could involve substantial costs. For some listed buildings, such as Fettes College or George Heriot's School, the alterations that would be required to comply with a disability strategy would be extremely expensive, if not impossible to meet. There is concern in the independent school sector about those issues and I ask the deputy minister to respond to them when he winds up the debate. I conclude by welcoming the bill, which will promote equal access to schools for pupils with disabilities.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will carry out a safety audit on junctions on the A9 trunk road in Perth and Kinross. (S1O-4733)

The minister will be aware of my previous interest in the Ballinluig junction on the A9. I have in my hand a copy of the closed-circuit television surveillance report from BEAR Scotland, which was published today. It recommends that consideration be given to re-siting the camera to provide an improved view of through traffic and vehicle manoeuvres, which seems to vindicate local people's opinion that the CCTV camera was sited in the wrong place. Given that there seems to be an admission of inadequacy in the report and that the view of local representatives is that we need a grade-separated junction, will the minister now instruct a further report that is based on a re-sited camera?

I commend Donald Gorrie on his motion and on securing the debate. Donald will be aware that I supported his motion a week or two ago. I also commend the lobbying by instrument teachers, particularly Alistair Orr from Stirling, who is in the public gallery. Those teachers have been active in approaching members of the Parliament on the issue. My speech will be brief because many of the points that I would like to make have been well made by others. There is general consensus in the chamber on what should be done. I oppose the proposals to sever the link between instrument teachers' pay and conditions and those of classroom teachers. Instrumental teachers play a vital part in education. I have no particular interest to declare: I am one of the least musical people around. However, through friends, I have seen the benefits of instrumental tuition. They include the opportunity for self-expression and, in the same way as organised sports, team building. People get involved in sports and team games at school, which is important for learning life skills. Not everyone is sporty, but by joining an orchestra people can learn team-building skills. I am neither sporty nor musical, which perhaps explains why I am an MSP instead of having a proper job. I want to mention one point about the motion. It is important that we use the term "instrument teachers" and not "music instructors". It is important that we see instrument teachers as teachers; they should be treated as teachers and their status should not be downgraded. In fact, it should be upgraded in recognition of their important function. Terminology is important, so we should avoid the term "music instructors". Instrumental teachers should be treated in the same way as other teachers. They should have the same pay and conditions, the same access to accredited courses and the same right to GTC registration. On 26 January, The Herald quoted Alistair Orr as saying that "the statutory link with teachers' pay is essential as it is a badge of our professionalism and gives us status with the teaching profession". I am sure that he speaks for many of his colleagues. Maureen Macmillan, who has now left the chamber, referred to the EIS. Members of the profession to whom I have spoken feel let down by the EIS, which is supposed to represent all teachers and not exclude instrument teachers. There is real anger among the ranks of instrument teachers about the way in which they have been abandoned by the EIS. The EIS puts great store  on instrument teachers being taken under the wing of the Scottish negotiating committee for teachers. The problem is that instrument teachers have no confidence in the SNCT because it recommended severing the link with classroom teachers' pay. The EIS does not properly represent the views of instrument teachers on those issues. As Donald Gorrie said, many instrument teachers are members of the Musicians Union, not the EIS. If the EIS wants to have credibility on the issue, it must take into account the views of all instrument teachers, not simply its members. I commend and support Donald Gorrie's motion. I oppose the downgrading of the status of instrument teachers, which was brought about by the McCrone settlement.

I am sure that the minister realises that implementing the measures that are contained in the bill involves a cost implication for schools. What assistance will the Executive give to schools in the independent sector to help them to meet those additional costs?

Will the member give way?

Michael Russell deliberately misquoted what I said. I said that in some instances the question of class size is irrelevant. I ask Michael Russell not to misquote me when he is trying to make a point about my argument.

This has been a good debate and we have had excellent contributions from different parts of the chamber. I should say that I know a little bit about baby boomers because my parents are of that generation. Today's motion is typical of the SNP. It is not an attempt at any real debate. It is posturing, playing to the gallery and going for an easy headline. As my colleague Brian Monteith said in his contribution, the question of class sizes is, to a degree, irrelevant to the future of Scottish education. Large class sizes often occur in popular schools. There is often no educational disadvantage and the existing research is conflicting. All sorts of research has been done, some of which suggests that there is no link between class size and pupil attainment. Johann Lamont and Frank McAveety referred to that when they said that class size is only one factor in determining pupil outcomes.

With respect, the answer is obvious. As I understand it, it is all to do with health and safety. In classes where pupils are dealing with equipment that might be dangerous, it  is appropriate to have a certain pupil-teacher ratio. However, it is not appropriate in other classes. The SNP is giving undue prominence to the issue. Its proposals would be hugely expensive. As we heard from Mike Russell, they would cost £105 million a year plus the cost of teacher training on a revenue basis. There would also be a capital cost. Karen Gillon referred to that in her excellent contribution. There is an unquantifiable capital cost for new classrooms—not just new buildings but equipment. The SNP might argue that there is spare capacity in some schools and that we could simply bus pupils around the country to take up that spare capacity. However, as Brian Monteith said, that would be denying parental choice, which the Conservatives consider a cornerstone of education. Of course, the SNP has always taken the view that the state knows better than parents. Not everywhere has spare capacity. In Perth and Kinross, primary classrooms are at 85 per cent to 88 per cent capacity. The proposed reduction in class sizes would mean a requirement for one third more primary schools—an extra 30 or so in addition to the existing 92. That is just one local authority area. Where will the money come from? Will the SNP cut other budgets or raise taxes? If it is going to raise taxes, by how much? It strikes at the heart of the contradiction in SNP policy. Some SNP members, such as Andrew Wilson, who has sadly left the chamber, appear to support a low-tax, enterprise-focused Scotland. The party's tourism spokesman was in the papers at the weekend calling for a cut in rates and VAT for tourism enterprises, but the majority of SNP members come to the chamber every week to call for more money to be spent by the Government on every issue under the sun. That is the case today. When will the SNP stand up and tell us what its policy really is?

I shall drone on, Presiding Officer. We did not hear from Mike Russell why SNP councillors in Dumfries and Galloway are voting to close small schools so that the council of whose administration they form part can bid for PPP finance. We did not hear from Mike Russell why SNP-controlled Angus Council closed St Vigean's  Primary School in Arbroath and put a threat on Kilry Primary School just outside Kirriemuir. Those things are happening at the grass roots.

What we need in Scottish education is not pie-in-the-sky proposals from the SNP that cannot be afforded and are simply proposed to get a headline. We do not need a top-down approach, but greater choice and diversity in education and more local decision making, giving more power to parents. If parents decide to make smaller class sizes a priority, all well and good. Those decisions must be taken at a local level. The Scottish Conservatives will continue to address the real issues in education and to propose sensible solutions. We reject the flag-waving we have seen today from the SNP.

The minister will be aware that mature entrants to the teaching profession stand to lose up to £10,000 because of the McCrone deal. Will the minister assure those students that they will  receive the benefit of the pay deal that they thought they had signed up to when they decided to enter the teaching profession?

The Scottish Conservatives welcome the bill for the reasons that Keith Harding set out. The bill is  not particularly controversial. I have a few brief points to make but, as I think we have had a good thrash at the subject already, I signal to those who are still to speak that it is unlikely that I will take up my allotted time. I agree with the serious point that Keith Harding made about timing. It seems odd that we are spending most of this morning on this rather uncontroversial stage 1 debate and that we spent an hour and a half yesterday debating the Fur Farming (Prohibition) (Scotland) Bill when we could be spending our time debating rather more important topics.

We could talk about the state of the national health service and the fall in the number of nurses in Scotland that was announced last week. We could talk about the state of the roads as a result of lack of investment. We could discuss all sorts of Executive failures, but the Executive does not want to bring those subjects to the chamber. However, let us talk about the matter in hand. Before I came to the Scottish Parliament, I was a lawyer in private practice and I had some experience of advising clients and taking cases to the local government ombudsman. I believe that the system, though not without faults, works well. What is frustrating is the time that it takes to investigate matters, particularly where delays are caused by the time that it takes public authorities to reply to the ombudsman's inquiries. As Mary Scanlon said, although it is all very well to say that the ombudsman has got the time that it takes to get a determination down to 42 weeks—and those of us who are used to dealing with public agencies might regard that as a move in the right direction—for members of the public who are faced with a wait of 42 weeks, that seems a long time. However, I suspect that that is a matter of good practice rather than a matter for legislation. We generally welcome the principle of putting various departments into one department and we hope that there might be some economies of scale—Scottish Conservatives are always on the side of the taxpayer. We welcome the fact that the public will be able to complain directly to the ombudsman in relation to what were the powers of the Scottish parliamentary commissioner for administration. Not all citizens want to have to go through an MSP. That might also have a marginally beneficial effect on our work load, although I doubt that the public will have much sympathy with us on that score. The ombudsman should be a one-stop shop. The last thing that a member of the public who is  complaining about a public body wants is for the situation to be made worse as they are passed from pillar to post. The Government and the various public agencies need to be more responsive in dealing with public complaints. I congratulate the Executive on its decision to retain the good old title "ombudsman" rather than going down the road of political correctness by trying to find some title that is not gender specific. That is a marvellous development. I do not wish to take up any more time so I will simply say that the Scottish Conservatives support the general principles of the bill.

Is the minister aware that on all recently published performance indicators, Perth and Kinross Council performs well above the Scottish average, and that it outperforms the adjacent Angus Council, which is SNP controlled? Will the minister join me in congratulating the partnership administration of Perth and Kinross Council on its performance?

Of course I understand the difference between a right in law and no right in law. My point was that the bill is so hedged with exemptions and get-out clauses for the Executive that it does virtually nothing to increase the rights of individuals.

Let us be clear about something from the start. The Scottish Tories support the principle of freedom of information. We are proud of our record in government. My colleagues James Douglas-Hamilton and David McLetchie have already referred to the many measures that we introduced when we were in government to allow open access to information, including the 1994 code of practice on access to Government information, which ensured the release of records by Government departments and the Public Record Office. If we support the principle of freedom of information, why do we not support the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Bill? I shall try to answer that question. Before I came to the Parliament, I practised law, as did many other members. In that profession and while studying for it, I needed to understand the nature of laws. Governments should not legislate just for the sake of it. They should not legislate just to appear to be active and thus fill up the statute book with unnecessary legislation for which there is little or no demand. The poor law students of tomorrow will have an unnecessarily heavy work load if that is what Governments or the Executive do, and the functions of the Government and the Parliament will begin to fall into disrepute. I am not sure whether we are allowed these days to call the Executive a Government, but Governments should legislate only where there is a clear need for new laws to deal with a new situation that has arisen, to reflect a change in attitudes in society or to right some dreadful wrong. None of those events has occurred in relation to the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Bill. Is information currently being withheld? We trust not. Is it likely to be withheld in the future? There is no reason to believe that that is likely, under this Executive or any future Executive, so where is the pressing need for legislation? If the Executive wishes to provide freedom of information—as it should—it should just get on with it. It does not need an act of Parliament to say so. The Executive is either committed to open government or it is not. If it is, it does not need legislation to support that commitment. I am sorry to see that Bruce Crawford has left the chamber. He made an interesting point which, rather unusually, I agreed with in part. He said that if there is to be more freedom of information, we  need a change of culture. To an extent, he is probably right. We do not need legislation. If a change of culture has to come, it must come from within the Executive. We do not need legislation such as the bill that is before us, which is hedged around with all sorts of exemptions and get-out clauses for the Executive. Members of the public, people who come to surgeries and others who contact me raise many different topics, including the state of the health service and transport infrastructure, the lack of police, failures in the justice system and the decline of the rural economy. That list will be familiar to all members. Not a single one of those people has complained to me about the lack of a freedom of information bill or about the need for the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Bill. When I questioned the Deputy First Minister on that point, he confirmed that nobody coming to his surgeries had expressed that concern either. If any other members have had that concern raised at their surgeries, I would be happy to hear from them.

It is up to the Executive to provide the information. The point that I am making is that the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Bill will do nothing to progress the cause of freedom of information. The Executive says that it is committed to open government. It is up to the Executive to make that information available if it is not currently being made available.

No. I would like to make some progress. It does the Parliament no credit to be spending its time discussing matters that are of a minority interest. When people outside see our health service crumbling, our roads in need of improvement, our railways not running, businesses being closed down in rural areas and criminals escaping with lenient sentences, they want to see Parliament addressing those issues. What do they see instead? Endless strategy documents for dealing with this and that; words in place of action; a bill to ban fox hunting; land reform; and freedom of information. It does us no credit whatever.

No. There is one further point that I would like to make. Members have mentioned the fees chargeable for providing information. As it is an important matter, I make no apology for raising it again. Section 9 provides that the fees that may be charged by public bodies will be set by Scottish ministers by regulation. The bill does not say that those fees should be reasonable, nor are Scottish ministers required to consult on the level of those fees. It would therefore be possible for Scottish ministers to set the level of fees at some outrageous figure, in effect preventing access to information. The Executive will say that that is inconceivable and that such a move would defeat the purposes of the bill. However, that right remains. In practice, the public will have no more guaranteed a right to freedom of information, should the bill become law, than they do at present. That brings me back to where I started. The bill will do precisely nothing to improve access to Government information.

It appears that Mr Fitzpatrick was not listening to the point that I was making. The bill is so hedged around with exemptions that it does not actually give any additional rights. On the specific point about fees, if ministers can set fees by regulation, what is to stop them setting the fees at a level that would prevent the information being accessed by members of the public? The fact is that the bill is flawed in relation to fees. In concluding, I reiterate that my party supports freedom of information. We are proud of our record in that respect, but the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Bill will do nothing to make information more freely available. My party will oppose it as an irrelevance to the real concerns of the Scottish people, which the Executive continually fails to address.

Will the minister give way?

Will the Deputy First Minister tell us what percentage of visitors to his constituency surgeries over the past year have pressed him to introduce a bill on freedom of information?

Does the minister accept the principle that parents should be given as much information as possible to allow them to make informed choices about their children's education and that league tables or lists of exam results are an important part of that information?

Can the minister tell us whether the accounting takes into consideration the additional cost to the farming community of travelling to and from the office in Perth? Can he detail the consultation that took place with the farming community when the Executive made its decision?

I congratulate my colleague Brian Monteith on securing the debate. He, like other members who have spoken, has been lobbied. I, too, have been lobbied by the NFU branch in Angus over the closure of the offices in Dundee and Forfar. I understand that there was no consultation of the local NFU branch by the Scottish Executive. The office in Forfar is small and consists of only two members of staff, both of whom are vets. That is not so important in the broader scheme of things, but the office in Dundee is important, because it is the local office for farmers in Angus. Local members of the Angus branch of the NFU expressed the view that the decision was taken on purely financial grounds, with no consideration for the additional burden that it would place on local farmers, who are already struggling under the piles of paperwork and red tape that Government bodies have imposed on them. The closure of the office in Dundee will have a huge effect on potato farmers in particular and on seed growers in Angus. The procedure at present for potato seed growers is as follows. An order comes in and the seed grower telephones SEERAD to give it the particulars of that order. The farmer then has to make a trip to the SEERAD office to pick up the labels for that order. The farmer then dresses the potatoes, bags them up and labels them. A representative of the department then has to visit the farm to inspect the order. There may then be another trip for the farmer for further paperwork. Each visit, if taken from north Angus to Perth, can take upwards of an hour. The inconvenience of the arrangement works both ways. The farmer and the representative of the department face trips up and down the A90 or the A94 between Perth and Angus to deal with the paperwork. The journeys will take at least twice as long as they would if farmers could make a quick trip into Dundee. In the peak season, a tattie seed farmer from Angus might make two or three trips to the SEERAD office every week. The centralisation of the offices in Perth will be an additional burden on the already overburdened farming industry. The situation is worse for farmers from Arbroath or Montrose, whose choice is to go to Perth or all the way to Thainstone, which is near Inverurie.  The closure of the offices and the lack of consultation with local farming representatives highlights the breakdown in communication between Government officials and local farmers. In previous years, the local staff in the department knew the farmers in the area and there was more two-way communication. In recent times, that has been eroded and the loss of local offices will make matters worse. At the moment, 18 SEERAD offices serve the eight areas and farmers are stretched in dealing with the paperwork. Will the minister say whether the closure of the three offices is a Trojan horse for the closure of more offices and for further centralisation of services? If that is the case, it is deplorable and will increase the burdens on farmers. I want to take issue with something that Sylvia Jackson said. There should not be competition between different areas for new offices. We should try to maintain the current arrangement of having local offices that are readily accessible to the farming community.

That is a fair point. Perhaps I misunderstood Dr Jackson. I thought that she made a bid for the new office to go to Stirling.

I appreciate that the member has a local interest to consider, but from the point of view of farmers in Angus, Stirling would be a much worse location than Perth, because they would have to travel even further. I look forward to hearing the minister's response to my comments, particularly on the extra burdens on the farming community and the lack of consultation.

This Monday, I met representatives of the eating disorder service at Murray royal hospital in Perth. Although Roseanna Cunningham referred to that service in her speech, I make no apology for mentioning it again. This is a topical subject and what is happening in Perth is symptomatic of what is happening elsewhere in Scotland. The eating disorder service at Murray royal hospital is innovative and provides good value for the taxpayer. Eating disorders in Scotland appear to be on the increase—at least, they are coming to the attention of medical staff more and more. They affect men as well as women. The most startling statistic relating to eating disorders is that more sufferers die from them than from any other form of mental illness, be it depression, paranoia or schizophrenia. The Perth unit has an enviable reputation throughout Scotland for its expertise in treating eating disorders. The shocking news is that, because of budget shortfalls in NHS Tayside, the service is about to be withdrawn. That is happening despite the fact that the Scottish Executive, on 9 October this year, issued a paper setting out proposals for the treatment of eating disorders. The irony is that the Perth unit would meet all the requirements that were outlined in that paper. Once the unit has gone, there will be little, if any, provision in Tayside for those who suffer from eating disorders. I raise this issue in the full knowledge that many members will regard it as a minority interest, affecting just one part of Scotland. However, the situation in Perth is indicative of what is happening elsewhere in the country. Elsewhere in Tayside, there has been a consistent reduction in services at Stracathro hospital, which serves Angus and from which all acute services have now been withdrawn. A few years ago Stracathro was an excellent local hospital, which provided a range of  surgical services, was hugely well regarded by the local community and had a highly trained and dedicated staff. Now it is a shadow of its former self, and patients from Angus and the Mearns face a long journey to Ninewells hospital in Dundee. The minister, in his opening speech, said that he wants patients to be treated in a hospital that is near to where they live. That is exactly what patients in Angus and the Mearns want and what is depriving them of. Members on all sides of the chamber will be aware that experience on the ground is that, far from making progress, the NHS in Scotland is in a desperately poor state and getting worse all the time. The Executive's response to the situation is the self-congratulatory nonsense in the motion, which talks about progress being made. The only progress that the Executive is making is backwards. If members were to stop anyone in the street and ask them whether they thought that the NHS in Scotland was getting better, they would find that the answer is that it is not. Waiting lists and waiting times are up, staff morale is down and there are fewer beds and nurses. Only in the fantasy land of the Scottish Executive could that situation be described as progress.

The uncomfortable fact for the Executive and its cheerleaders in the Liberal Democrats is that the NHS was better under the Conservatives. By every measure, the NHS has got worse in the past four and a half years under Labour and worse under the Labour-Liberal coalition of the past two and a half years.

Members should try to tell the people in Perth and Angus that the NHS has got better in the face of what is happening at Stracathro hospital and at Murray royal hospital. Members should try going—

As the Presiding Officer said, I am over my time already. While the Executive and its friends in the Liberals pat themselves on the back, we know that no progress is being made and that things are getting worse.

I commend Ken Macintosh for lodging the motion. I also commend the Scottish Society for Autism. I had the pleasure of visiting the headquarters some weeks ago and I visited Struan House School. I am delighted to lend my support to the campaign, mentioned by George Reid, to build a new school there. I was extremely impressed at the work that is being done, albeit in substandard accommodation. I welcome Christopher Marley, who is in the gallery. I had the pleasure of meeting him earlier and it is great to see him here with us. I want to touch on a slightly different topic—although Lloyd Quinan mentioned it briefly—which is the problem of adults with autism. Many adults with autism came through their formative years without being diagnosed, or were diagnosed as they faced some sort of trauma. Diagnosis may not be made until some years later, when a professional with knowledge of autism identifies the specific problem. That is particularly true of higher autistic spectrum disorder, or Asperger's  syndrome, patients. It is rather disturbing that many staff in psychiatric units have little or no knowledge of the condition, which was first documented in the 1940s. The course material for training psychiatric staff, from doctors down to nurses, must be changed to make them more aware of the problem, so that they are able to deal with such patients. There should be continuing training for staff and encouragement for them to become experts in the field. There are large gaps in service provision in Scotland. There is a severe shortage of trained personnel to provide care in the community. In many cases, parents want to care for their children at home with appropriate help, but hospitals and social services are reluctant to allow that to happen. In certain severe cases, patients can be detained in hospital under the Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984. In reality, they have no legal rights. Their parents have no legal rights, as the patient is technically an adult. The experience of some parents is that the Mental Welfare Commission is unable or unwilling to help. Because of their underlying autistic spectrum disorder, patients are often unable to understand the legal procedures. Being in hospital is a traumatic experience for ASD patients, which makes them even more unsettled and anxious. In applying for detention orders, psychiatrists declare that the patient is unable to give consent or instruct a lawyer. The court appoints a curator on behalf of the patient to ensure that the legalities of the procedure are in order. That is a formality, and it is rare for a curator to contact the family or to investigate the background to the application. The patient has the right to appeal against the detention order, but they are often unable to understand the procedures involved. The parents cannot instruct the curator or be involved in the legal process. The question here is whether the human rights of patients are being properly considered. To fight the treatment that is being given, the patient must take their case to court and have an independent psychiatrist give a second opinion. It is the experience of families in Scotland that there are no psychiatrists who are willing or able to become involved in such cases. The only redress for parents is to apply to the Court of Session under an act of 1585 to appoint a tutor dative. Although the patient is entitled to legal aid, the parents are not. The cost of pursuing legal action is prohibitive, so it is rarely done. Eventually, a patient can become so damaged by the drugs that they are given that they are physically and mentally disfigured and turn into drug addicts with a much shortened life expectancy.  We need a full, independent inquiry, led by a senior law officer, into the care and treatment of adult autistic spectrum patients in Scotland. As we are entering autism awareness year 2002, that would be a welcome move for parents involved in such situations.

To ask the Scottish Executive when the report on the surveillance of the A9 at Ballinluig junction will be published. (S1O-4170)

I thank the Deputy Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning for his reply and congratulate him on his new portfolio—and for keeping his head while all about him others were losing theirs. Will the deputy minister and the Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning, who is new in her transport role, accept an invitation from me to visit the Ballinluig junction and see for themselves the safety measures that have been put in place? I have spoken to representatives of the local community who have to cross the junction on a daily basis, and they put their lives at risk in doing so.

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with the Department for Culture, Media and Sport in relation to the powers granted to the Secretary of State for that department to determine the boundary between English and Scottish territorial waters by virtue of section 1(3) of the National Heritage Bill. (S1O-4120)

As the bill will allow the boundary between English and Scottish territorial waters to be determined solely by the minister in London without any need for consultation with the Scottish ministers or with the Parliament, is the minister concerned that it is contrary to the spirit of devolution? Does it not set an unwelcome precedent for future bills?

The chamber is filling up, so word has obviously got out about the shortness of the debate. My colleagues Brian Monteith and Keith Harding have succinctly set out the Conservative position on the bill. It is open to me to waffle on for four minutes about matters tangential to the bill or to seek to emulate Colin Campbell, by name-checking my former teachers. Indeed, I met one of them earlier today. My maths teacher, Miss Forbes, who is down from Inverness on a trip, appeared in the public gallery. I shall therefore take the opportunity to name-check her. [MEMBERS: "Where is she?"] Sadly, she is no longer with us. [Laughter.]  The Scottish Conservatives agree with the general principles of the bill for the reasons set out by my colleagues. I shall not detain the chamber longer.

I commend Bruce Crawford for lodging the motion and for his doggedness in pursuing the issue over a year or two. It gives me pleasure to say that the Conservatives support the motion and look forward to the roll-on-roll-off ferry coming on stream next May. It is important to the economy of Mid Scotland and Fife, particularly Dunfermline and the surrounding area, that the ferry link is in place next year. It will assist the tourism industry in Fife, Perthshire and Angus, which has suffered some dismal seasons in recent years. Over the past couple of weeks, I have met the chief executives of Perthshire Tourist Board and Angus & Dundee Tourist Board. Both of them stressed to me the importance of the fast ferry link to Europe being in place by the start of the next summer season. Perthshire Tourist Board in particular is optimistic that it will benefit from the link. Experience elsewhere suggests that visitors who drive off a ferry will drive for an hour or an hour and a half before they stop and begin their holiday proper. Perthshire is well placed to benefit from tourists heading north, as are Angus, Dundee, Stirling, Stirlingshire, north-east Fife and St Andrews. Areas further afield will also benefit; the more people we can get to go to the area, the more we can get to go further north. I know that my colleagues in the Highlands and Islands have been lobbied by tourism groups in that area about supporting the ro-ro ferry. I do not wish to denigrate Rosyth itself as a tourist attraction, but the last time I was there it was pretty smelly. I hope that the town has now dealt with that smell. Perhaps the local member can confirm that for me.

That is excellent news. I am sure that we would not wish the first experience of Scotland for those driving off the ferry to be a rather unpleasant whiff. I echo the comments that Bruce Crawford made about VisitScotland. VisitScotland must get on the  ball and ensure that it makes the most of the ferry link by encouraging tourists to come to Scotland. That means working closely with local tourist boards and marketing Scotland as a destination to our target markets. The biggest tourist market for Scotland is England. Most visitors come from the south of England. After that market, the biggest non-Scottish market is northern Europe—areas and countries such as northern France, Germany, Holland and Belgium. We must target the people in those countries. They are best placed to make use of a direct link from Zeebrugge to Rosyth. VisitScotland has a vital role to play and must begin to produce effective marketing campaigns now so that we can make the most of the ferry when it begins operations. We must also consider how the infrastructure in Fife will cope with the extra pressure that we hope the ferry will bring. The Executive must examine the A985 on the north side of the Forth to Kincardine and ensure that it is upgraded to cope with the extra traffic. The Executive must try to alleviate extra pressure on the Forth bridge. A bypass for Rosyth must also be considered. The extra jobs that the ferry service will bring will be a welcome boost to the Fife economy, particularly Rosyth. All that is left is for the First Minister to stick to the promise he made this week: that the target for the launch of the service is May 2002 and that that target will be met. The Executive and the Minister for Transport and Planning must ensure that there is no hold-up in the European Commission clearing the United Kingdom freight facilities grant that was announced yesterday. The ferry link has a crucial role to play in the development of the economy of Mid Scotland and Fife. Its establishment has been plagued by no end of technicalities; that is the official reason, not mine. A lot still has to be done before the link is operational but it is essential that a date is set and that that date is stuck to. I again commend Bruce Crawford for his motion and we look forward to the benefits of the ro-ro ferry when it is established.

Is the minister aware of the long distances that must be travelled from north Angus and the Mearns to Dundee? Will he instruct Tayside Health Board to ensure that it puts patient care first and that the pilot scheme is not put into operation until we are clear about patient safety?

I welcome the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee's report and commend the committee for its thorough research. I would like to widen the debate a little and examine the future of higher education funding. The difficulties that are identified in the committee's report will continue to arise as long as the present system for allocating resources to universities and colleges exists. Whatever formulae are devised, it will always be argued that they are unfair to one institution or another. There will always be winners and losers. In the long term, we should consider a wholesale review of higher education funding. We should free our universities from the dead hand of state control. Universities must be able to make long-term plans for the future, but the existing funding arrangements do not permit that. The Scottish Conservatives want the Government to endow our universities, giving them financial security and the ability to plan ahead. Endowed universities would be provided with a lump sum from the Treasury from which they would generate their own income streams. The necessary funds could come from securitising the student loan books and selling future student loans or from the proceeds of future privatisations or asset sales, such as third-generation licences.  Reducing the burden on the taxpayer would be a more efficient use of resources than simply repaying debt. The great advantage of endowment is that it would give universities back their independence. They would have the chance to compete and excel in an increasingly global higher education market. The unnecessary rules that hold them back would be replaced by variety and competition.

Of course the highest priority should be teaching future generations, but what is the best mechanism for achieving that objective and delivering higher standards of education? By removing the uncertainties in the present system and moving towards endowed universities, we could aim for that objective. We want universities to forge new relationships with business and enterprise, as happens in the US. Endowment would mean an end to the annual readjustments in funding that create redundancies and uncertainty for university staff as student numbers fluctuate. Universities would be freed from political control. They would be free to determine staff salary structures and the number of student admissions. They would be free to run high-quality courses that reflect the demand for skills from the public and private sectors. They would be free to grow as centres of excellence and establish themselves as world leaders. All parties in the chamber should support those aspirations and I am sure that if they were to lay dogma aside, they would see that it is the way forward for higher education. It is clear that endowing universities would not be an inexpensive business, nor would it happen overnight. It would be a staged process and could take place over a time scale of several years. As the level of endowment increased over the years, our universities would move from being dependent on the state for funding and would start to enjoy the benefits of greater freedom. As my colleague Brian Monteith said, universities are already private bodies. Therefore, my proposal is not about the privatisation of higher education; rather it is about leaving the institutions to set their own priorities and to decide how their money should be spent.

I do not think that Pauline McNeill should describe my proposal as nonsense. It has been interesting to see the number of Conservative policies that were once described by the Labour party as nonsense that Labour has adopted over the past four years. On responsiveness, we should look back to the glory days of Scottish education. During the 18 th and 19 th centuries, Scottish universities led the world. They did not need state control to dictate how they should set their courses or how they should be run. Let us look at the examples of the past. Universities that are endowed by a future Conservative Government would have to give a guarantee that they would not charge top-up fees, so that they did not restrict access for those from less well-off backgrounds. Other than that, they would enjoy the freedom of not being dependent on the drip-feed of Government money. The result would be universities that provide a better service to students, employers and the nation. Scottish universities built an international reputation in the 19 th century, when they educated the doctors, clergymen and lawyers of the day. We want to regain that pre-eminent position. We will achieve that if we endow our universities and let them break free from the system of state funding.

I start with the good news: I welcome the minister's support for Inverness's bid to become the European city of culture. As an Invernessian, I am sure that the citizens of Scotland's newest city will look forward to displaying their wares to the rest of Europe. Sadly, I cannot give a more general welcome to the rest of the minister's speech or to the strategy report. Frank McAveety and Pauline McNeill referred to popular music. Every Sunday afternoon throughout the year, hundreds of thousands of Scots tune into Radio 1 to listen to the top 40 show. That is real popular culture. The pop chart represents perfectly the desires of the music-listening population. The ranking of records is not done by a committee of ministers, civil servants or quango appointees and not a penny of taxpayers money is spent. The ranking is done entirely on the basis of record sales, so the chart reflects what is popular. As we know from the many nostalgia programmes such as "I Love 1985" that use popular music as the backdrop, which are watched by sad people such as me who are trying to recreate their youth, popular music becomes the culture of the day. We do not need a culture strategy to create popular culture. Real culture comes from the grass roots up; it is not dictated top-down by Governments. I will give an example from closer to home. The biggest cultural event in Scotland in terms of ticket  sales is the Edinburgh military tattoo. It attracts tens of thousands of visitors to Edinburgh and Scotland every summer. This year, every ticket for the entire run was sold before the first show commenced. I say to Ian Jenkins that there is no finer example of cultural tourism than the tattoo. Visitors and locals alike pack the castle esplanade—underneath the union jack, which flutters proudly above the castle—to watch an unsurpassed display of Scottish and international culture. The tattoo reflects our military past, our imperial past and Scotland's role in the empire, which is also celebrated today with the publication of a new book, "The Scottish Empire", by my good friend Michael Fry. The tattoo also brings aspects of international culture to a Scottish audience. It does all that without a penny of subsidy and without the need for a culture strategy from ministers. The amendment lodged by Brian Monteith notes that the Scottish people are the only source of Scottish culture—not politicians, civil servants, or so-called experts.

Forgive me, I am short of time and have been told to be as quick as possible.

I am sorry, but I have no time to take an intervention. Mr Monteith's tastes are somewhat more expansive than mine. I do not remember seeing any of the productions to which he refers in his motion. I am sure that my mother is pleased to hear that. Scottish culture, in whatever form, has thrived and will continue to thrive without culture strategies. The problem with the document—as Kenny Gibson said—is that it contains no initiatives to promote Scottish history in schools. It misses what should be the only role of Government in relation to culture: the preservation and promotion of our historical traditions, records and artistic achievements, which might otherwise be lost to the world. I say to John Farquhar Munro that that includes Gaelic culture. Governments should not be in the business of picking winners and losers in the arts.

Forgive me. I will not take an intervention due to time constraints. Governments should not be picking winners and losers. That is the business of the market, whether it affects the pop music charts or the tattoo. That is why the Executive's strategy is flawed and why Scottish culture will flourish regardless of what the Executive does.

I have the pleasure of moving the amendment in the name of Brian Monteith on behalf of the Scottish Conservatives. The amendment seeks to strengthen the motion by highlighting the key role that the promotion of the merits of sport in schools must have if we are to make progress. That progress can come only from increased awareness and participation by all those who are involved in sport and education in Scotland, not least through its promotion among parents and pupils. Our amendment is meant to make a positive contribution and I am delighted that it will be accepted by the Executive in that light. The principle that sport in school is valuable is unlikely to be challenged today, although I am wary of the thought police in the collectivist education establishment who tried to remove competitive sport from the Scottish education  system because they believed, for ideological reasons, that any form of competition was elitist. Thankfully, that approach is finally receding, as its basis was clearly nonsense. It failed to recognise the important lessons that competition teaches about future life and valuing others, whatever their outcomes. School sport should encourage competition and epitomise that philosophy, to allow everyone to take part and find a sport and a level of participation that fits their abilities and to encourage physical activity.

My concern is that, in the 1980s, there was a trend towards anti-competitive education, which meant that some schools, for example, did away with sports days altogether. That was a sad thing for the children who were good at sports, especially those who did not excel in other areas, but who could have had the opportunity to compete and win prizes. Competition is good because it equips children for later life. The Conservatives oppose the SNP amendment because it suggests a prescriptive, top-down approach to the provision of sport in schools. We want to encourage participation in sports from the bottom up; therefore we would have schools setting the priorities. That would allow, for example, an emphasis on minority sports, which may vary from school to school. When I was at school in Inverness, I participated in the school shinty team. That opportunity was made available, not as part of the curriculum, but through an after-school club run by a physics teacher. I would like schools in the Highlands and elsewhere to be able to include in the curriculum shinty and other minority sports for which there was a demand. However, we do not need a national curriculum telling us what to do.

That would be unusual.

I am glad to acknowledge both how exciting shinty is and how dangerous it can be. I shall be happy to discuss with Mr Russell how I can help to promote the cause of Scotland's traditional sport. To improve standards, we must allow schools to set local priorities. It would be tempting to set standards for specialist teaching involvement but I do not think that that is the way forward for the culture that we need. Decent budgets for specialist provision must be devolved to clusters of schools. That would allow schools to choose the amount of specialist provision that they need, involving parents in the decision. It will come as no surprise that we argue for parental involvement. The case for that in relation to sport and PE is overwhelming. In the independent sector, PE is usually taught for three periods a week in primary and sport is a major part of school life during and after school hours. Sport is used as a selling point for many independent schools and applications this year indicate that more and more parents want to buy into that type of education. Academic standards are not affected—indeed, they are extremely good in the independent sector—and parents will pay more on top of their taxes for what they feel is a more rounded education. Not all parents are in the fortunate position of being able to opt into independent education—my parents could not afford to do so. However, we should use the ethos of the independent sector to improve sport in state schools, get the parents involved and allow them to help improve the facilities. Let the parents participate. We must change the culture and have specialist teaching of primary PE, which should be seen as indispensable rather than as an add-on for interested head teachers, those with spare money in their budget and those who cannot access specialist music tuition. The Scottish Conservatives want there to be greater diversity in education through community school boards. There is no reason why they should not encourage far greater sporting participation in state schools through local control of budgets, which I have talked about. We would encourage schools to specialise in sport, as already happens, to an extent, at Bellahouston Academy. We must allow all our children to achieve through the most appropriate type of schooling for their needs and potential. For many children, PE and sport will play a major part in that. Doing so will require a culture change in Scotland rather than more Government direction. That culture already exists in the independent sector, where it  is successful and encourages sport, which sells schools to parents. There is no reason why that culture should not exist in the state sector. Our amendment encourages the required culture change and I urge Parliament to back the opportunities that we speak of and support the amendment. I move amendment S1M-2285.2, to leave out from "and others" to end and insert: "head teachers, teachers, school boards and other sports and educational bodies to embrace and participate fully in these healthy initiatives."

I have enjoyed my first debate on education in my new role as the deputy Conservative spokesman. I have particularly enjoyed it because it has proved that this party has won every argument on education over the past 10 years. We are the party that introduced testing as part of the five-to-14 curriculum and the party that encouraged parental involvement in education through the publication of more information on attainment. Today, Jack McConnell has effectively been saying that Michael Forsyth was right. I would say to Jamie Stone—although I note that he has left the chamber—that we hark back to Michael Forsyth because we know that we won all the arguments. In our amendment, we are saying that the benefits of testing should be brought to the entire publicly funded school system.

The minister may well believe that, but his actions say something different. The Tory challenge, which changed the education consensus in Scotland that has undermined Scottish education for so long, is now almost wholly accepted. We have just a little further to go on the policy for the local management of schools. We also have high hopes for the minister's review of devolved school management—but perhaps I will not hold my breath, given his decision in relation to St Mary's Episcopal Primary School in Dunblane, which was a political decision. Some people, no matter how much they try, cannot divorce politics from education. That is precisely what happened 10 years ago, when we tried to introduce primary school testing. Referring to what Frank McAveety said—

Just a second. I will quote Fred Forrester, formerly of the EIS, who admitted a few weeks ago that the campaign against testing was political. He now admits that "The opposition around the country to this plan was largely about opposition to Michael Forsyth".

No thank you. I will carry on for the time being.

I will give way to Mr McAveety.

What I am saying is that the opposition to testing was engineered by people in the educational establishment, against a Conservative minister.

No thank you; I will make some progress.

I will make some progress.

We will see. The opposition that I have described was opposition for its own sake. Opposition to any change in education still exists today. It does not come from the Labour Executive, but it is  manifested in the unthinking reaction of the SNP. The SNP is a party stuck in the past. It brings to this chamber a 1970s agenda for Scottish education. It has failed to notice that parents' greatest concern in education is for output by way of standards, not for inputs such as resources or class sizes.

I will not give way. The SNP's political pitch is based on opportunistically picking up support from those who are disgruntled at new Labour's move to the centre. The SNP's policy owes more to attempts to mimic the reactionary stance of the educational establishment and the teaching unions in Scotland than to any consideration of what is best for Scotland's pupils. The debate has moved on. I am pleased that the Labour-Liberal Democrat Executive is moving in the direction of the Tories, while the SNP remains stuck in the past.

I will not take an intervention from Mike Russell. With verifiable, standardised national tests we can genuinely measure what works and what does not. That allows the promotion of excellence and the ending of some of the well-meaning but misguided teaching practices that can be so damaging. It does not mean uniformity, as some suggest; it is about finding what is best for each school and each pupil, based on local needs. Active use of testing, with new flexibility in the curriculum and greater diversity in provision, will meet local needs. That is precisely what the Scottish Conservatives have been promoting for a number of years. Teachers working with parents and pupils, based on realistic information, is the best way forward. Parental expectations have been released and there can be no turning back now. I am pleased that at least some members of this Parliament and Scotland's educational establishment are beginning to catch up with us. The minister deserves praise for that. It is time that the opponents of progress in the SNP and elsewhere gave up their dogma, listened to parents and joined us in the new, coherent debate that is taking place in Scottish education.

rose—

Does the member accept that the opposition to Michael Forsyth's testing proposals in the early 1990s was a purely political campaign? It had nothing to do with what was best for education. It was a party-political Opposition campaign because the proposals were Conservative proposals.

On Monday evening, Tayside Health Board and the Tayside NHS trusts held a public meeting in Forfar to present their annual report and accounts. No members of the public turned up. In light of the fact that the NHS in Tayside accrued a cumulative  deficit of £16.7 million over the past two years, it is perhaps not surprising that members of the public show no interest in hearing the presentations of health service managers. That is regrettable, because a lot of time and effort must have gone into preparing those presentations. It is clear that the focus of interest of health service users in Tayside is on patient care, not on reports and not on well-publicised overspends. There is a perception locally that patient care and the interests of health service users have been ignored in recent years. At a time when the future of Stracathro hospital in Brechin, which has served Angus and the Mearns well over many years, is still uncertain, and as Perth royal infirmary will maintain maternity and children's services only because of the tireless efforts of local campaigners who took on the bureaucrats and won, it is hardly surprising that the public are somewhat disenchanted with the local health board. Across Tayside, patient groups have spent the past two years fighting to ensure the provision of the best possible locally provided health care, whether at Stracathro, at Perth royal infirmary or more locally, and I applaud their efforts. We should remember that the reason given by Tayside Health Board for the removal of acute services from Stracathro was the budget deficit. Now that the minister has announced that the deficit is to be written off, will she tell Tayside Health Board that the acute services have to go back to Stracathro? That decision has to be reviewed.

Richard Simpson will appreciate that Stracathro is not a community hospital. It was an acute hospital.

Stracathro was an acute hospital, and it is the removal of the acute services from Stracathro that concerns me. I welcome the introduction of schemes such as care together in Perth and Kinross, and I am delighted that PRI will be a demonstration model for the delivery of maternity services in Scotland through the introduction of midwife-consultant partnerships. However, I am concerned that there is still uncertainty about the long-term future of  paediatric services at PRI. I have met many parents from across highland Perthshire, some of whom have to cover great distances to get access to maternity services. It is for them that we must ensure 24-hour cover. Mothers must be given the choice of giving birth at their local hospital and we must ensure that, wherever possible, first-class local services are available.

I am running out of time. I welcome moves to improve health care provision in Angus, another area where patients often have to make long journeys to receive care. It is vital that the new hospital that we are promised for Angus is constructed on the Stracathro site and not at Arbroath or elsewhere in the county. The necessary infrastructure is already in place at Stracathro and the site is readily accessible from most parts of Angus. Most important, an excellent, dedicated work force is already available. The economy of north Angus, which has suffered a great deal in recent years and months, needs the jobs at Stracathro. Just as there was a cross-party campaign to fight for services at Stracathro, I hope that there will be a cross-party campaign to fight for the new Angus hospital to go to the Stracathro site. It should not be elsewhere in the county and, in particular, it should not be split between different sites. It is essential that any future changes to health care in Tayside take into consideration the need to ensure that the patient's experience is a satisfactory one. Transportation of patients to and from hospital, and arrangements for visitors, are issues that directly affect an elderly patient's experience of hospital. Communication systems between those who deliver health care and those who receive it must be improved. In its report on the consultation on the acute services review, Tayside Health Board concluded: "It is no longer sensible to plan services in any one part of the system in isolation." I am sure that none of us would argue with that sentiment. It is for the Parliament to ensure that every person in Scotland receives the highest possible standards of health care.

The Conservatives, too, welcome the minister's statement—I thank him for making an advance copy available to us. We welcome the fact that the 2001 exams round was a success and join others in paying tribute to all those involved in making that happen, including the civil servants. However, we should not forget that it was a success benchmarked against the disaster that happened the previous year, under the minister's predecessor. The minister says that monitoring of the SQA and accountability are to be improved. That is very welcome, as there are still serious administrative difficulties within the SQA. How does the minister see improved accountability and monitoring working in the future if, as he said in his statement, the SQA must be independent of political pressures?

Thank you for calling me to make my maiden speech in today's important debate on the new economy. I shall make reference to that topic in a moment, but if members will permit, I will digress briefly. It would be appropriate for me to start by paying tribute to my predecessor list MSP for Mid Scotland and Fife, Nick Johnston, who served for a while on the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee. I am sure that his valuable contributions to the political debate will be sadly missed by all members. It must be a matter of regret that ill health prevented Nick Johnston from completing a full term in the Parliament and I am sure that members will join me in wishing him a full recovery and a speedy return to his business career. It is important that the Parliament has proper concern for our nation's pensioners. My journey to the Parliament has been a rather long one. I contested the elections in 1999 for the constituency of North Tayside, where I was pipped at the post by John Swinney. Thereafter, I set my sights elsewhere and contested the same constituency for the Westminster elections. Despite achieving a swing from the SNP to my party, I was not able to emulate the success of my party colleague, Peter Duncan, in Galloway and Upper Nithsdale. I had rather resigned myself to a career in the legal profession when the news of my unexpected elevation to the Parliament came through. Members who take the Ken Clarke approach to  legislation—and have therefore not read the Scotland Act 1998—may have been surprised to learn that one can become a member of the Parliament in mid term without contesting a by-election. I can assure members that any surprise that they may have felt was nothing compared to my surprise when I was telephoned on a Thursday afternoon to say that I was about to become a member of the Parliament. It says a lot about politics today that that call came not from the office of the Presiding Officer or from a party colleague but from a member of the press. I am pleased to take my seat in the Parliament and can comfort myself that I have, in a small way, made history by becoming the first ever replacement list MSP. If anyone still plays Trivial Pursuit, that may be a question in years to come. I now represent the region of Mid Scotland and Fife, with which I have an existing connection. As members may know, there is a great deal of concern throughout Perthshire and Angus about hospital services at Perth royal infirmary and Stracathro hospital. That issue is of particular interest to me. As a Highlander, I also take a particular interest is the future of the rural economy, which has suffered so much in recent years. The new economy offers opportunities to those who live in rural areas, in Mid Scotland and Fife and throughout Scotland. I therefore welcome the opportunity to contribute to today's debate. A priority for the Executive must be to encourage the development of the infrastructure to permit access to the new economy from all areas of Scotland. Some months ago, I had the pleasure of visiting an internet business called Cali Net, which is based in Kinloch Rannoch and provides website design for the hotel industry. The location offers low overheads and an enviable lifestyle for the workers. The business provides employment for graduates in an area in which many other jobs are low paid and seasonal. Cali Net has been set up by bright young entrepreneurs and represents exactly the sort of enterprise that we should encourage. Cali Net's problem is that it is constantly battling against a poor standard of infrastructure. Because it is based in Perthshire, it is at a competitive disadvantage compared to similar enterprises in the Highlands and Islands, where there has been much greater investment. If businesses such as Cali Net are to succeed—and we certainly need them in Scotland—the Executive must be committed to improving the communication network. I welcome the committee's report and I trust that the Executive will take action.