At stage 1, I supported a budget that I believed would protect and grow Scotland’s economy, maintain the social contract with Scotland’s people and offer support and assistance, where it can be offered, to those in our society who are most in need. My view has not changed. However, I believe that there are significant additions to the draft budget that will be welcomed across the chamber. I was particularly pleased by the recent announcement that an additional £13 million will be levered into the college sector, creating 3,500 new full-time places.

Apologies, Presiding Officer. I am not in the mood for my usual bombastic method of delivery. I am trying to be somewhat more restrained, which is perhaps why some members cannot hear me as well as they usually can. I also have a very sore throat. I apologise to everyone in the chamber. In my area, that investment will see Ayrshire College secure more than £1.1 million in funding, which will be used to support 300 additional college places and enhance employability activities. That will provide opportunities to work with employers, invest in delivering skills to Ayrshire college graduates and increase employment opportunities in key growth sectors of the Scottish economy, such as renewable energy, engineering, the creative industries and food and drink. It will also build on Scotland’s relatively strong employment figures and will, in particular, drive youth employment. Although I was unable to touch on the issue in the previous debate, I was also pleased to note the allocation of £77 million of additional business rates relief in order to maintain parity with rates in England and Wales and expand the small business bonus scheme. Given that small and medium-sized enterprises account for 99 per cent of all Scottish businesses and over half of all private sector employment, it is clear that we must continue that vital business support during tough economic times. Indeed, the Federation of Small Businesses warmly welcomed the announcement, stating that the scheme had “injected Scottish smaller enterprises with working capital at a time when they needed it most.” and that “the Scottish Government has put these firms on a level playing field with their English and Welsh competitors.” The Scottish Government is also investing in our young people, with an additional £125 million over three years to support young people towards and into work, including cash for recruitment incentives to help small companies to recruit young people by paying half the wage for the first six months of a new job. The £30 million opportunities for all funding supports our commitment that all 16 to 19-year-olds in Scotland who are not already in work, education or training will be offered a learning or training opportunity, and £5 million supports up to 2,500 young people into opportunities that are linked to major cultural and sporting events. There is also a record number of apprenticeships. Supporting public services in challenging financial times is vital, and this budget will protect the national health service budget; maintain the council tax reduction scheme; maintain a Scottish living wage for public sector workers for whom the Scottish Government is responsible; continue support for the three change funds, driving a shift to more preventative approaches; and provide £120 million in funding in 2015-16 to assist health and social care integration. The Scottish Government is also on track to deliver 30,000 affordable homes by 2016, of which 20,000 will be for social rent. Over the four years to 2015-16, the Scottish Government will have driven investment in affordable housing to more than £1.35 billion. The SNP supports free prescriptions, free tuition, concessionary travel and free personal care and the council tax freeze across Scotland continues to put money into people’s pockets. As far as infrastructure is concerned, £8 billion of investment will take place in Scotland over the next two years. Last month, a degree of consensus broke out between the two largest parties in the Parliament. Although the debate was, at times, heated and plenty of differences remain, it was refreshing to see the Labour Party and the Scottish Government working together to reach what seems to be a point of agreement on at least one aspect of the welfare reforms that are being imposed on Scotland by the Tory-Liberal coalition at Westminster. The bedroom tax represents all that is wrong with the welfare reforms that have been haphazardly enforced by the coalition. Those reforms have been idealistically driven, with little or no thought being given to the people affected. Westminster’s solution—that people should somehow just find smaller accommodation—is entirely compassionless, capricious and impractical. There can be no doubt that the bedroom tax is one of the most unpopular, iniquitous and idiotic policy decisions that has been taken by a UK Government since the poll tax. As it stands, some 76,000 Scots, including more than 12,000 children, are suffering as a result of the bedroom tax, and 80 per cent of the households that are affected contain at least one disabled adult. It is also clear that Scotland is being disproportionately hit by the policy. Recent freedom of information requests by the Trades Union Congress’s false economy campaign show that Scottish councils have among the highest proportion of tenants—

Most important, I would like to commend the Scottish Government for working with other parties to find a proper solution. Labour support for the budget will send a strong, united message to Westminster that the Scottish Parliament and the people of Scotland do not accept the bedroom tax. As the Daily Record editorial pointed out yesterday, the UK Minister for Welfare Reform “could have lifted the discretionary housing payments cap with the stroke of a pen. That would have been the easiest solution and brought immediate relief to the thousands of Scots plunged into poverty.” This Parliament has had to pick up the pieces and find money from its devolved budget to cover the costs of a reserved matter. That again demonstrates how out of touch Westminster is and surely adds weight to the argument that such matters are best placed and would be better managed in the hands of a Scottish Parliament that works with the interests of the Scottish people at heart. The budget gives us the opportunity to vote to stimulate growth in our economy, to create and protect jobs, to deliver free school meals for pupils in primaries 1 to 3 and expand childcare, to offer opportunities to our young people and to help those who need it most. In areas in which we have control over the economy, we can do things better and more effectively for Scotland. Westminster’s failed austerity agenda is holding Scotland back, but with independence we can bring about lasting growth and make Scotland fairer. I ask members to support the budget.

I congratulate Jenny Marra on securing the debate and on her opening speech. Female genital mutilation is abhorrent. More than 12 years ago, on 10 December 2001, I lodged a parliamentary motion condemning the practice and I find it shocking that it continues to be such a huge issue. Many cultures in Africa, Asia, South America and the middle east condone and encourage the partial or total removal of the external female genitalia and other injuries to the female genital organs for non-medical reasons, supposedly to preserve a young woman’s purity in their society. The procedure is often carried out without anaesthesia, sterile tools or medication to help the child heal. Parents force their daughters to have their genitals mutilated when they are as young as only a few weeks old to improve the likelihood of a favourable marriage and to enhance the family’s prosperity and status. Those cultures believe that the practice will prevent their young women from having sex outside marriage and keep them pure for their future husband. Of course, in patriarchal societies, there is no such imposition on men. The horrible tradition is enforced and perpetuated by women who see the ritual as an essential part of becoming a woman and a legitimate member of the community. Leaders of different faiths have rejected FGM, although some communities believe that it is done for religious reasons. In Niger, 55 per cent of Christian girls and women have undergone the practice, compared with only 2 per cent of Muslim girls and women. In Togo, 21 per cent of Muslim girls and women have undergone FGM, compared with only 1 per cent of Christian girls and women. That shows how the practice differs even within religious groups and that it not as faith based as might be assumed. Although those cultures see the practice as an essential part of a woman’s life, female genital mutilation is an inhumane and repressive practice that is done to young females to suppress their sexuality and control their bodies. The cruel practice of FGM can cause many adverse health problems for the victim throughout her lifetime. When the procedure is first performed, the girl is at high risk of having severe pain, shock, bleeding, bacterial infection, injury to nearby tissue and psychological damage that is comparable to post-traumatic stress disorder. In the long term, girls and women who suffered the procedure often suffer recurrent bladder and urinary tract infections, cysts, infertility and complications during intercourse and childbirth. Forced female circumcision is a human rights violation, child abuse, torture and demeaning to the female population. Even in 19th century Britain and America, funnily enough—it is not funny in an amusing sense; I should say “strangely”—FGM was considered a cure for women with a variety of clinical diagnoses. Again, that was in an era in which women’s sexuality was often severely suppressed. The ritual may still be practised by minority ethnic groups that have immigrated to Scotland and have the cultural pressure to uphold the tradition. However, as Jenny Marra pointed out, two acts have outlawed the practice. The Prohibition of Female Genital Mutilation (Scotland) Act 2005 furthered provisions to make it illegal, following the Prohibition of Female Circumcision Act 1985, and ensured that the practice could result in a prison term of five to 14 years. Not one case has been brought, of course, although I understand that 10 have officially been reported. Many woman and children who have undergone painful mutilation may be too frightened or ashamed to speak out about the harm that has been done to them, as they face pressure from within their cultural group to remain silent and fear the stigma that could be placed on them by those who do not share their cultural identity. Tomorrow is the international day of zero tolerance for female genital mutilation. People in Scotland and countries around the world will gather to show that they will not stand idly by and permit the horrible practice to continue. Advocacy groups have attempted to eliminate the inhumane practice over the past four decades and they continue to work, often in very difficult conditions. Our country cannot be seen to have a soft stance on female circumcision. It is, of course, alleged that it takes place here, although we want to hear more evidence that it does. It is a form of racism to stand by and let it happen to people from ethnic minorities when we would not tolerate it in other groups. Everyone’s individual rights and freedoms should be equally protected, and more needs to be done to stop people subjecting their daughters, granddaughters and nieces to that horrible and scarring torture. I had more to say, but I realise that other members wish to speak, so I will conclude there.

I congratulate Stewart Maxwell on securing the debate and on the excellence of his opening speech. The Holocaust or Shoah was specifically a Jewish experience and the full weight of Nazi terror was directed against the Jewish people. Last year, I read two books on the Jewish communities of Europe before the Holocaust: “On The Eve: The Jews of Europe before the Second World War” by Bernard Wasserstein, and “Yiddish Civilisation: The Rise and Fall of a Forgotten Nation” by Paul Kriwaczek. “On The Eve” details the increasing sense of foreboding and impending catastrophe among many of Europe’s Jewish communities in the late 1930s, caused by not just the rise of Hitler but a growing and almost endemic anti-Semitism across much of Europe, and feelings of claustrophobia, as Jewish people seeking physical security, let alone a better life, often had nowhere to go. Countries across the world, including the United States and the UK, severely restricted Jewish immigration, while France and the Netherlands set up internment camps for Jews who were escaping from Germany. As portrayed in the 1976 film, “Voyage of the Damned”, in 1939 the SS St Louis carried 937 Jewish refugees from Hamburg to Cuba, which refused to take any, as did the US. Eventually a few nations, including the UK, took several hundred refugees. The rest returned to Hamburg and 254 later perished in the Holocaust. After Kristallnacht, in the months before the commencement of hostilities, the UK did allow 10,000 unaccompanied Jewish children to come to the UK in what was known as the Kindertransport, which has already been mentioned. Most of those children became orphans when the parents they had to leave behind were murdered by the Nazis. The book “Yiddish Civilisation” explores the incredible religious, cultural and political diversity of the Jewish people—a people that has lasted for centuries and once numbered some 10 million. The Holocaust, assimilation, emigration and decades of Communist repression led to Yiddish becoming very much a minority language, although the culture lives on and is undergoing something of a revival. Auschwitz-Birkenau was the largest concentration camp in Europe—this death camp held more than 90,000 prisoners at any one time. Between 1.1 million and 1.6 million people are estimated to have been exterminated at Auschwitz-Birkenau during the war. Ninety per cent of those people were of Jewish descent. The remaining 10 per cent who were murdered there were Gypsies, Soviet prisoners of war, the disabled, Polish patriots and those who acted against the Nazi regime. Auschwitz is the most notorious Nazi death camp but, ironically, that is probably because there were about 7,000 survivors who lived to tell the tale. A further 1.8 million Jewish men, women and children were exterminated in camps such as Belzec, Chelmno and Treblinka, where a total of only 42 people are known to have survived. One of the two survivors of Belzec, out of at least 434,000 people who were sent there, was Chaim Hirszman, who was murdered the year after the war ended by anti-Semitic Poles. A further 3 million Jewish people were starved, beaten, shot or worked to death in labour camps and in ghettos or killed in huge forest massacres such as Babi Yar in Ukraine, Ponary in Lithuania and Maly Trostenets in Belarus. Often, local collaborators aided those killings, enriching themselves in the process. There were many individual tragedies. For example, on 24 February 1942, the MV Struma, which was carrying 791 Jewish refugees and crew, was refused access to Palestine by the British and was then sunk by a Soviet submarine. All but one person aboard the MV Struma died. We should remember that there were many Jewish people who were heroic not only in resisting the Nazis—such as the Bielski brothers—but in fighting to save their families. Indeed, the many Gentiles who assisted them were heroic too. However, we should also realise that the Holocaust never left many of the people who suffered from it. After the writer Primo Levi threw himself to his death in 1987, Elie Wiesel commented: “Primo Levi died at Auschwitz forty years earlier”. Richard Glazar, the architect who survived Treblinka, was one of many others who killed himself, so the Holocaust never left people. We must recognise those who suffered through the Holocaust yet live on as witnesses to the atrocities that occurred throughout Europe. Their persecution teaches us the horrifying consequences of unimpeded racism, hatred and bigotry. Holocaust memorial day is a call to the people of Scotland to stand against prejudice and intolerance every day. As Robert Burns opined, “Man’s inhumanity to Man Makes countless thousands mourn!” We must try to make the world a better place. Holocaust memorial day reminds us of the consequences of not so doing.

7. To ask the Scottish Government whether Scotland’s farmers now receive the lowest farm payments in the European Union and, if so, whether this is due to a lack of direct representation. (S4O-02823)

As the cabinet secretary will know, Scottish farmers are losing €1 billion a year that would have boosted the economies of our rural farms, villages and towns. Does the cabinet secretary agree that we need the powers of independence, with direct representation in Europe, to empower our rural and island communities and to grow their place in our society and economy?

I congratulate the finance secretary on again putting together a budget to bolster the recovery that Scotland is experiencing, to protect our public services, to help families who are struggling with the cost of living and to make Scotland a fairer and more equitable society. Scotland is outperforming the UK on a number of key economic indicators. Scotland continues to punch above its weight on foreign direct investment and, outwith London, it was the top-performing area of the UK last year. This morning’s heartening figures show that, although the UK unemployment rate stands at 7.1 per cent, the unemployment rate in Scotland stands at 6.4 per cent—its lowest level since the first quarter of 2009—and the divergence is growing. The chief economist’s most recent report predicts that, in 2014, Scotland’s economy will at last move beyond 2008’s pre-recession output levels. All that is encouraging and has been achieved despite—not because of—the UK Government’s discredited austerity measures. It should be remembered that the Scottish Government called for years for a boost in capital spending to grow the economy and create employment, to which the chancellor is only a belated convert. It is undoubtedly the result of the UK Government’s commitment to austerity that virtually every forecast that the Office for Budget Responsibility has made for UK growth has had to be revised downwards. On new year’s day, Jonathan Portes of the Financial Times said: “This remains the weakest recovery in recorded UK economic history. In June 2010 ... the Office for Budget Responsibility predicted that by now, the economy would be about 7 per cent larger.” It is clear that the Scottish Government’s decision to switch resource spending to capital projects was wise and has contributed to the considerably lower levels of unemployment in Scotland as opposed to the UK as a whole. I am pleased that the budget recognises that link and maintains a strong commitment to capital investment. As Mr Swinney said, the Scottish Government is to invest more than £8 billion in Scotland’s infrastructure over the next two years. That will improve the transport network, the college estate, our national health service and schools; aid the delivery of public services; and ensure that Scotland is a more attractive place to live, work and invest in. As members know, it is estimated that every additional £100 million of capital spending creates or supports about 1,400 jobs in the Scottish economy. On 19 December, Gavin Brown tried to pull the wool over our eyes by pretending that a cash increase in annually managed expenditure from 2012-13 to 2015-16 does not represent a real-terms cut in the Scottish Government’s budget, despite the rate of inflation that we have experienced over the past two years and anticipate over the next two years. Today he repeated that mantra. I point out to Mr Brown that a true measure of available resource is its real rather than its notional value. Indeed, is it not Conservative policy to reduce Scotland’s budget in real terms? If so, why does Mr Brown hide behind cash figures year on year, whether he is talking about departmental expenditure limits or annually managed expenditure? Given the arguments that Mr Brown has been making, it seems that, if he had been the finance minister in the Weimar republic, he would have been arguing that the increase in budget every year represented good husbandry.

Mr Brown makes the same intervention every time we debate the matter, and I always respond that, as the First Minister and Mr Swinney said, what matters are the real-terms figures—what we can actually do with the money and spend it on—and not the cash numbers behind them. On 11 December, Mr Brown said, somewhat triumphantly: “Our economy is now growing faster than any other major economy in the industrialised world, apart from that of the United States of America.”—[Official Report, 11 December 2013; c 25581.] Mr Brown will recall—painfully, I have no doubt—that I had to point out to him that growth in the UK is sluggish in comparison with growth in dozens of other nations across the globe, and that the UK ranked 28th in terms of growth rates, according to that week’s edition of The Economist. Six weeks later, The Economist is pointing out that the UK is now in 27th place. Things are not moving as fast as they would have done if we had had an effective economic policy. There is a long way to go. I am pleased to note that the budget ensures that Scotland will continue to maintain its place as the most progressive nation in these islands, preserving our proud commitment to universal services such as free personal care for the elderly, the free bus pass, free prescriptions and access to university tuition that is based on the ability to learn and not the ability to pay—or, as some call it, the “something-for-nothing society”. Not only has the Scottish Government protected those policies but it will enhance social provision through the introduction of universal free school meals for all children in primary 1 to 3. The policy, which will cost £55 million over two years, will remove the perceived stigma of free school meals and ensure that children from all backgrounds are properly nourished, alert and ready to learn. For that reason, the policy has been welcomed by the Educational Institute of Scotland, the Scottish Trades Union Congress, Unison, Save the Children and the Child Poverty Action Group. To their shame, Labour members voted against the move.

I am in my last minute, sadly. To judge by the farcical bickering on the Labour benches at decision time that day, it is obvious that many Labour members fully supported the idea but voted against the policy because it was proposed by the SNP, proving again that Labour remains unfit not only for office but for opposition. Indeed, when a Daily Record editorial criticises the Labour Party, Labour knows that it is in trouble. Although our progressive policy, along with a substantial extension of childcare provision, will improve the lives of families and children, it is evident that only independence will release the resources that are necessary if we are to introduce the transformational policies on learning, childhood development and childcare that Scotland needs. The benefits of such policies, which have been implemented by our Nordic and Scandinavian neighbours, are manifest. We have heard that the changes that we want to bring about could be achieved under devolution, but that ignores the reality that the maintenance of such radical policies requires funds and access to the increased tax revenue that would accrue. By the end of this parliamentary session, the Scottish Government will have spent £224 million of our devolved budget in an effort to mitigate some of the UK Government’s Dickensian welfare policies.

The cabinet secretary’s budget does much, with the resources that are available to this Parliament, to build on the economic and social progress that we have made in recent years. I urge all members to support it at decision time.

Will the member take an intervention?

Is it not the case that since the recession the UK has been the second lowest among the G7 countries in relation to economic growth? Only Italy has a lower growth rate. That is hardly an endorsement of the coalition’s policies over the past four years.

Would the member not accept that, given that 80,000 of those people spent less than 10 hours a year at college and the average was only five hours a year, that is hardly affecting their lifetime chances?

Dr Sir Thomas Browne created the word “suicide” meaning “to kill oneself” in the 17th century, but it has always been with us. The early Christian church exalted self-sacrifice and martyrdom, yet by the middle ages the church would dissuade people from committing suicide by preaching damnation, and people who had committed suicide were often denied a Christian burial, hung in chains, impaled on a stake or disembowelled. Thankfully, the modern faith and secular worlds are much more enlightened in their approach to suicide. My own family has suffered from suicide. My great-grandmother drowned herself in the River Shannon, and an uncle burned himself to death in his car. A cousin in the 1960s often came home from school to find his mother attempting self-destruction by putting her head in the oven or standing on the window ledge; at 10, he found her strangled by the washing line. In this debate, therefore, I will focus not on the wish to die of the terminally ill or of those who are in permanent pain without quality of life, which I believe will be debated another day, but on the suicide of despair by people who see little hope in their own life now or ever. Suicide can destroy the future because of a failed exam, a broken relationship or a loss of home or job that someone cannot see past but which the passage of time would surely have resolved. Studies show that the children of suicides are more likely to kill themselves, as are members of the immediate family and close friends, inflicting, as some have argued, a posthumous homicide. In the past 45 years, there has been a 60 per cent increase in the incidence of suicide worldwide. As Neil Findlay pointed out, between 800,000 and 1 million people kill themselves in the world every year now; every one of them is, of course, a tragedy. Scotland has not been immune from the global trend, as we have heard in the debate. The latest study from the Prince’s Trust revealed that a third of young unemployed people had considered suicide and that 9 per cent felt that they have nothing to live for. Furthermore, the rate of suicide is three times higher in the most deprived populations of Scotland than in the general population. The decline in living standards is therefore something that must be considered as we look at the matter and attempt to establish a strategy towards preventing suicide. We have heard in the debate of suicide’s devastating impact on families and communities and of efforts to tackle the issue, but it is important to remember that specific groups in society are more at risk of suicide, and it is wise to focus on assisting those groups where possible. Of course, not all groups who suffer from suicide are deprived. As Nanette Milne said, there is a higher instance of suicide among farmers; there is also a higher rate among doctors, nurses and veterinarians. One might consider that access to the means of suicide is another reason for it. Veterans of the armed forces form another group whose rate of suicide is higher than that of the wider population, for reasons that include difficulty in adapting to life outside the forces, living with the trauma of conflict or suffering from mental and physical problems related to time in service. I am therefore pleased that Scotland is the first nation in the UK to appoint a veterans commissioner to work with charities, local authorities and health boards to identify public services that might provide greater support to veterans. That commitment will complement the £1.4 million annual funding from the Scottish Government for specialist mental health and community outreach services provided by Combat Stress to help veterans who need support. As deputy convener of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on adult survivors of childhood sexual abuse, I know that people with a history of childhood sexual abuse have a greater likelihood of suicide. The “Beyond Trauma” study by Dr Sarah Nelson of the University of Edinburgh focused specifically on the mental health needs of female survivors, half of whom revealed that they had tried, sometimes repeatedly, to kill themselves. In an NHS Lothian needs assessment of adult male survivors of childhood sexual abuse, it was found that male suicidal behaviour was even more acute than that in female survivors, with most male survivors having attempted suicide—again, often on several occasions. Very often, survivors of childhood sexual abuse not only have to live with their experiences but they struggle with addictions that are developed as a result of them. As is pointed out in the suicide prevention strategy, substance abuse often increases the likelihood of an individual attempting to take their life, making that group, too, particularly vulnerable. Often, the best way for survivors to rebuild their lives is to discuss their experiences, understand what happened to them, know that they are not alone and rediscover their self-esteem and trust in others. Organisations across the country support survivors of childhood sexual abuse and carry out vital work to help those who are most in need tackle their problems as a result of trauma. I am pleased that Survivor Scotland was allocated £1.65 million from the Scottish Government between 2012 and 2014 to fund a variety of projects to continue that invaluable work, as individuals who are at risk of suicidal behaviour require continued support to ensure that they do not end their lives. A couple of years ago, I chaired a Samaritans and University of Edinburgh seminar here in the Parliament on the media impact of suicide. The National Union of Journalists attended the seminar and it must be commended for its serious approach to suicide prevention, encouraging as it does journalists to report suicide sensitively, as sensationalist coverage or reporting that appears to glorify or romanticise suicide can lead to many more copycat suicides. Although suicide clusters thankfully remain rare, they can have a devastating impact on local areas. To see that, we need only cast our minds back a few years to the tragic events in Bridgend in south Wales, where dozens of teenagers and young adults committed suicide in the space of a few short years. At the time, many people blamed sensational and excessive media coverage of those tragedies for the increased number of suicides. In 2010, the police asked the media to cease reporting on them in an effort to deter copycats, and eventually the trend subsided. The continued dialogue between the NUJ and the Scottish Government is welcome, as are efforts to ensure that there is sensitive reporting on mental health issues and suicide through the publication of practical guidelines and journalist training.

I have never watched that programme so I find it difficult to comment on that one in particular, but all stereotypes involving people with mental health issues should certainly be challenged if we are to have a much healthier society. I have taken a great interest in this most tragic of subjects during my time in the Parliament. It has been encouraging to see the work that each and every Administration since devolution has done to reduce the number of suicides in Scotland, and to see such strong cross-party support for that work. It is clear that it is essential to take a comprehensive, far-reaching and national approach to suicide prevention, and I am pleased that all members are able to unite to provide the best outcomes for those individuals and families who most need our support.

4. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s response is to the Treasury announcement that it will honour all United Kingdom Government debt up to the date of the independence referendum. (S4F-01814)

I thank the First Minister for reiterating that Scotland is willing to take its share of the UK’s debt and liabilities following a yes vote. Will the First Minister join me in calling on the no campaign to exercise more of that new-found common sense in its approach, specifically regarding the formation of an optimal sterling currency area if Scotland votes yes?

I thank James Dornan for securing this valuable debating time and Sandra White for stepping up to the plate following his understandable absence. I am pleased to discuss this important topic of domestic abuse and the vital work carried out by the CEDAR network in helping those affected to rebuild their lives. While domestic abuse is without doubt perpetrated on some men by some women, there is no ignoring the fact that the vast majority of cases involve men abusing their female partners. This violence in the home—the place where they expect to feel safe and secure—can have a hugely traumatic effect on children and lead to a host of problems for them in later life. As Stewart Stevenson and Margaret Mitchell have already said, it is estimated that 100,000 children in Scotland live with domestic abuse. Sadly, there will be many who we do not yet know about who live with the trauma of such experiences past and present. While the Scottish Government continues to tackle violence against women and assist survivors who are recovering from the experience, the work of the CEDAR project and others is invaluable in developing best practice and support and care for those in need. The CEDAR evaluation report and the feedback received from those involved in CEDAR projects certainly show that the approach that has been taken has been highly effective, delivering impressive outcomes and engaging with children and mothers in a way that puts them in control and helps them to gain a greater understanding of the domestic abuse that they have suffered. Indeed, previously many children and mothers felt that domestic abuse was somehow their fault and often children blamed themselves for not doing something to stop it. The CEDAR network, through discussions with peers and group activities, allows both children and mothers to realise that they are not the ones in the wrong and helps to rebuild their self-esteem. The evaluation report also makes the financial case for CEDAR’s approach. Its approach to multi-agency working, which draws on the expertise and resources of both the public sector and the third sector, has proven to be highly effective. CEDAR’s focus on early intervention also ensures that the impact on services, including the education system, the criminal justice system, social work departments, the police and the national health service, is reduced as children affected by domestic abuse are less likely to place pressure on them in the long run. I was pleased to note that the CEDAR project is now active in my constituency, following its launch in North Ayrshire Council’s headquarters in May last year. The launch was attended by representatives from a raft of organisations involved with children and families in the area. They attended the event to find out more about the project and were given information on how to refer families to it. Attendees were also shown a film presentation, in which they heard directly from children who have already taken part in the project talking about how important and helpful it has been to them. I have no doubt that such a presentation would have proven more effective than a briefing or a pamphlet. Locally, the CEDAR project is being driven by North Ayrshire’s violence against women partnership and delivered by North Ayrshire Women’s Aid, with the project being funded by the Big Lottery Fund for three years. From discussions with my local authority colleagues, it is clear that the CEDAR project is now integral to North Ayrshire Council’s early intervention and prevention strategy, which aims to improve the life chances of children and young people in North Ayrshire. The council is delighted to be working alongside those local organisations towards a common goal. I understand that rural areas—North Ayrshire has a number of those—have experienced unique challenges, including lack of childcare provision, transport issues and low referrals, to name but a few. However, I am aware that CEDAR, in partnership with Dr Sarah Skerratt, director of the rural policy unit at Scotland’s Rural College, recently hosted an event to discuss those challenges with representatives from all the CEDAR projects that operate in areas defined as rural, in order to explore what needs to change to make the project more effective in a rural context. I also understand that CEDAR has been invited to attend the cross-party group on rural policy to discuss those matters further. It is clear from members’ contributions this evening that the innovative approach that CEDAR is taking and the support that it offers to mothers and children recovering from their experience of domestic abuse are invaluable. I am sure that all members and the Scottish Government will continue to offer CEDAR the support that it needs to continue providing its vital services.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I raise a point under rule 7.3.1 of standing orders. At First Minister’s question time, Ruth Davidson made various claims about a public servant of long standing who recently left the civil service’s employ. First, that individual had been in the civil service’s employ for more than 30 years—not the 30 months that Ms Davidson suggested. Secondly, Ms Davidson failed to tell us that the paragraph that she quoted from the Scottish public finance manual makes it clear that ministerial approval is not required for an existing voluntary scheme such as that concerned. Thirdly, although the Scottish ministers approved the severance scheme that formed the basis for her questions, the terms were set by none other than the United Kingdom Government, which she supports. That information is readily available from the most basic search. I urge Ms Davidson to correct the record formally at the earliest opportunity, to ensure that no accusations of incompetence or hypocrisy are made against her. I ask you, Presiding Officer, to support that.

It is with pleasure that I open this debate on the Finance Committee’s consideration of, and report on, the Scottish Government’s draft budget for 2014-15. I thank all those who assisted in our consideration of the draft budget, including those who submitted written evidence and witnesses who gave oral evidence. I also thank the Finance Committee clerks; our budget adviser, Angela Scott; and the Scottish Parliament information centre for its very helpful briefings. The budget process works to a tight and demanding schedule, and this year was no exception. We agreed before the summer recess that our main focus would be on the national performance framework and the Scotland performs website. However, not wishing to lose sight of topics on which we had concentrated in previous years, we also continued our on-going scrutiny of the Government’s progress in moving towards a preventative spend agenda, particularly with regard to the ways in which public bodies might work more closely with one another. In addition to those significant and substantive themes, the committee continued its on-going consideration of where the Government’s spending decisions are aligned with its stated purpose of increasing sustainable economic growth. To support our scrutiny of the draft budget, we issued a call for evidence prior to summer recess, in response to which we received 34 written submissions. We also took oral evidence through the autumn from witnesses including economists, academics and representatives of the public, private and third sectors. In early November we held an external meeting in Arbroath, which gave us the invaluable opportunity to hold workshops with local businesses, voluntary organisations and public bodies, from whom we heard at first hand about issues that mattered most to them. We then took evidence from the cabinet secretary and put questions to him based on the evidence that we had heard. In addition to our own scrutiny, each of the subject committees, along with the Equal Opportunities Committee and the European and External Relations Committee, conducted its own inquiry into the draft budget. Those inquiries focused on the impact of the budget on the areas in the committee remit. Each committee then submitted a report to us highlighting its findings and priorities. I turn to the national performance framework, which is intended to support an outcomes-based approach to performance. It is underpinned by five objectives and consists of 16 national outcomes that describe what the Scottish Government wants to achieve over a 10-year period. There are 50 national indicators that track progress towards the achievement of those outcomes, which ultimately contribute towards the delivery of the Government’s stated purpose. All those measures are tracked and reported on the Scotland performs website, which is intended to show at a glance whether performance is improving, worsening or remaining steady. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth has described Scotland performs as “the primary source of information ... against the outcomes set out in the National Performance Framework.” He also stated at committee that it “is not a report card on the Government; it is an assessment of Scotland’s performance. Of course the Government contributes to that, but so do many other players.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 4 November 2013; c 3235.] We heard from a number of witnesses that the NPF is internationally recognised as an exemplar of an outcomes-based approach to the measurement of Government performance. Nevertheless, there was broad consensus that, although the framework itself is commendable, it is not widely known outside policy-making circles. In recognition of that point, we invited the Government in our report to detail the exact purpose of the NPF, its intended audience and how it works in practice. We also recommended that the information should be published on the Scotland performs website. Similarly, we sought clarification from the Government in relation to how it intends to further embed Scotland performs in policy-making circles across the Scottish public sector. Another point that arose during our inquiry is the lack of a clear link between spending and outcomes. The Joseph Rowntree Foundation, for example, suggested that there is a need “for much clearer links between the priority setting and resource allocation decisions that are made by Government and its partners in contributing to the targets and outcomes.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 2 October 2013; c 3080.] Our budget adviser noted that there is “no link between the Government‘s spending plans, as set out in spending reviews and draft budgets, and the intended impact spending will have on future performance.” She also pointed out that some jurisdictions, including the state of Virginia, have moved towards a system of linking expenditure to performance. Expanding on that theme, we asked the Government whether it has any plans to move to a more substantive approach to linking performance and resource. Perhaps unsurprisingly, we heard a number of different views regarding the national indicators, with organisations such as Oxfam and the Scottish Trades Union Congress calling for the inclusion of an indicator measuring median household disposable income, which they stated would be a “much better indicator of national collective prosperity than GDP.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 9 October 2013; c 3120.] The committee was persuaded by that suggestion and has recommended that the Government incorporate such an indicator into the NPF. In keeping with the importance placed on the NPF both by the committee and the witnesses from whom we took evidence, we welcome the Government’s commitment to consulting on the option of putting it on a statutory footing. Turning to another subject of our budget scrutiny focus, I will address the topic of preventative spending. It has been a key area of interest for the committee and its predecessor in the previous session. We also considered the importance of the preventative spend agenda in the context of demographic change and an ageing population, which is an increasingly important issue on which we conducted an inquiry in 2012. We committed to monitoring the progress made with regard to the Government’s various change funds, including those related to the care of older the people, the early years of childhood, and programmes aimed at reducing rates of reoffending. For that reason, we requested that the Government provide an overall assessment of the progress being made towards implementing a preventative spend approach. In doing so, we recognise the need for robust monitoring and evaluation frameworks, and we would welcome an update on the progress made towards putting them in place. The Government committed to investing up to £500 million in change funds in its budget for 2012-13, and the committee welcomed that investment. It is clear that local authorities have responsibility for much of the service delivery that has the greatest impact on people’s daily lives. Local authorities must also contribute towards those funds, but the committee is concerned that not all local authorities appear to be doing so. For that reason, we ask the Government to provide us with details of how much new money has been contributed to change funds by local authorities. We heard from third sector bodies that evidence of the required shift in spending priorities is lacking, with the focus continuing to be on treating the symptoms of problems rather than on preventing them from arising in the first place. NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde summed up the difficulties faced by councils and health boards in seeking to “invest in new programmes of prevention and intervention while managing their budgets in a way that deals effectively with the problems that confront them at present.” It argued that that “balancing act is probably the biggest challenge that health boards and local authorities in the west of Scotland are facing.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 9 October 2013; c 3143.] Our report highlighted the committee’s concerns relating to the apparent lack of evidence of the necessary disinvestment taking place to support the shift towards a preventive spend agenda. Without the disinvestment in existing services, it is difficult to see where the additional resources required for investment in preventative services will come from. We recognise that difficult decisions require to be taken and appreciate that that is not easy. Glasgow City Council said to the committee that disinvestment is “extremely difficult to do at any time ... but it is particularly difficult to do at the moment”.—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 9 October 2013; c 3153.] We ask whether the Government is content with the progress that public bodies are making in that regard and that it provide examples of resources being unlocked for preventative measures through disinvestment in existing services. There is some evidence that the necessary shift in spending is taking place in certain areas. One that stood out as a role model was the Highlands, where a partnership agreement between Highland Council and NHS Highland was signed in 2012. The agreement is intended “to achieve better outcomes for people through directing resources more effectively, and through new and integrated service delivery models.” The committee welcomes that approach. We recognise that it is not possible simply to switch off existing services in order to reallocate funding, and we heard of the importance of bridging funds that allow the temporary double running of services until demand for existing services is reduced. We also recognise that there is a range of challenges and barriers that can prevent the necessary cultural and structural changes from taking place, and we would welcome the Government’s views on how best to address them. As I mentioned in my introductory remarks, another key focus of our scrutiny of the draft budget was the continuation of last year’s consideration of the Government’s progress towards realising its purpose of increasing sustainable economic growth. A key element of the Government’s strategy for realising that goal is capital investment through which it intends to accelerate the country’s economic recovery. Much of that investment is intended to be allocated via the non-profit-distributing model. The draft budget states: “Progress continues to be made on delivering the full Non-Profit Distributing ... pipeline of investments”, with an estimated £809 million-worth of projects due to start construction in 2014-15. However, the cabinet secretary noted in his ministerial statement on the draft budget: “In the short term, NPD investment is lower than was originally forecast.”—[Official Report, 9 October 2013; c 23471.] He attributed that to two reasons: first, some NPD projects are being concluded at lower than expected costs; and, secondly, some are taking longer than expected to be prepared and planned. We took evidence from the Scottish Futures Trust, which stated that, “overall, longer preparation time, rather than confirmed cost savings, is the greater part of what has changed the profile.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 30 October 2013; c 3179.] It also stated that “very significant” progress has been made, yet it explained that some projects “have taken longer than anticipated to bring through early project development and hence the overall build up in construction activity will be slower than that anticipated in the earlier projections which were based on high level information.” The SFT is ambitious in setting targets for the delivery of NPD-funded projects, and the committee agrees that it should be. As the cabinet secretary stated, “it is better to set an ambitious target and not reach it than it is to set an underambitious target purely and simply for the device of passing it.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 4 November 2013; c 3241.] Despite that aim, it would appear that a pattern of consistent overestimation of the delivery of NPD projects has emerged in recent years, so we recommend that the process for formulating those estimates be reviewed. The committee also considered the Government’s plans to switch more than £700 million from resource to capital between 2012-13 and 2014-15. However, the estimated resource to capital switch in the draft budget is £165 million, which is significantly lower than the estimated £270 million that is set out in the 2011 spending review. When we questioned the cabinet secretary on the reasons for that, he explained that he considered it the best way to respond to budgetary changes resulting from Barnett consequentials. He emphasised the fact that it has not affected the planned delivery of any specific projects. Although the committee recognises the need for the cabinet secretary to make budgetary changes in response to changing circumstances during the year, we highlight the need for greater clarity in presenting past proposals for resource to capital switches. We therefore recommend that all future budget revisions provide the latest available figures in relation to the transfer of funding from resource to capital. Another important theme to which the committee returned during its budget scrutiny is improving employability, particularly with regard to young people not in employment, education or training. That was one of the main topics of discussion during our workshop sessions in Arbroath, where we heard of the problems that are faced by some local employers in accessing the modern apprenticeship scheme. The Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee and the Equal Opportunities Committee also expressed concerns relating to access to modern apprenticeships, and we have invited the Government to respond to those concerns. The committee also considered a wide range of other issues during its scrutiny of the draft budget, ranging from the impact of welfare reform and fuel poverty to the Government’s progress towards achieving its climate change targets. I am sure that some of those themes will be touched on later in the debate. Although I could discuss those topics in detail, I have covered a number of issues in the time available and I am conscious that time for the debate is limited. I said at the beginning of my speech that the committee’s budget scrutiny focused on the national performance framework but that we also sought to monitor progress in relation to preventative spending and increasing sustainable economic growth. The committee greatly welcomes the NPF and applauds the Government for developing an internationally recognised exemplar of an outcomes-based approach to performance measurement. However, it is clear that the NPF is not widely known, which would appear to be at least partly due to a lack of clarity with regard to its purpose and intended audience. On preventative spending, the committee has concluded that there is some evidence of progress despite a challenging fiscal environment. Nevertheless, there is less evidence of the necessary disinvestment and the system and cultural changes that are essential for the shift towards a preventative approach to be fully realised. The committee would like to see a much better and clearer alignment between the NPF, draft budgets and the emphasis on a preventative approach. On those key findings, and all other aspects of our report, we look forward to the Scottish Government’s response. I move, That the Parliament notes the Finance Committee’s 10th Report, 2013 (Session 4): Draft Budget 2014-15 (SP Paper 431) and its recommendations to the Scottish Government.

Will Gavin Brown take an intervention?

Thank you very much, Mr Brown. It is a neutral intervention. Last year, Mr Brown made the point that he has just made, so I will make the same point as I did then. In real terms, once one has accounted for inflation, the budget reduction is 7.8 per cent in resource and 26.9 per cent in capital. Is that or is that not the case?

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

Was it not the previous Labour Government that brought in that law?

5. To ask the Scottish Government what the purpose was of the Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs’s recent visit to Denmark and Sweden. (S4O-02721)

I thank the cabinet secretary for her comprehensive answer. What further steps will the Scottish Government take to strengthen ties with our Scandinavian neighbours?

On 11 October, I officially launched Citrus Energy Ltd, a unique and innovative social enterprise that has been developed by Cunninghame Housing Association Ltd and backed by the Scottish National Party Government and the Big Lottery Fund. Citrus Energy provides free, impartial assistance for tenants, homeowners and businesses, helping them to switch to a much cheaper energy supplier. Does the cabinet secretary agree that such initiatives can help households to make substantial savings on energy bills and therefore help to reduce fuel poverty?

I thank Michael McMahon for giving us an amendment to debate. As Michael pointed out, he met the cabinet secretary—

Sorry?

Sorry. As Mr McMahon pointed out, he met the cabinet secretary—I see you preening yourself after saying that and putting me down, Presiding Officer. [Laughter.] Michael—sorry, Mr McMahon—met the cabinet secretary along with me and Jean Urquhart to discuss the issue because there is broad agreement on the committee about it. The issue with which cabinet secretary and, to be frank, all committee members have been wrestling is how we put what Michael and all of us want to achieve in the bill in a way that allows us to deliver it—[Interruption.] Sorry, Mr McMahon. Of course, there are diminishing resources from the landfill tax because we expect the take to decrease as the Government’s zero waste policy continues to progress and achieve the zero waste targets that we all want to achieve. We all want to achieve what Mr McMahon wants to achieve; the difficulty is how we put it in the bill. My concern is that the amendment does not do what we want it to do. I am keen that we have what he proposes, but guidance is a much better way of delivering it because we can include in that some of the nuances that he mentioned. There are so many anomalies, such as those that Mr McDonald mentioned, that we must deliver Mr McMahon’s objective in guidance. As the Finance Committee said in its report, we need the issue to be dealt with in a much less bureaucratic way. The money from the landfill communities fund must also be provided to community groups that do not have particularly high levels of community capacity. At the moment, some of those groups are losing out in favour of bigger organisations that are much slicker and which employ public relations companies and lobbyists. We want to ensure that the money goes to the people who should get it—those who are closest to landfill. As was pointed out, 10 miles might not be a long distance on Skye but, from where I live in Kilbirnie, it is the distance to Paisley. It could be the distance from one side of the Glasgow to the other, and it is really ludicrous to suggest that one part of Glasgow would benefit from a dump on the other side of the city. I am broadly sympathetic to, and supportive of, what Michael McMahon wants; I am just not convinced that the amendment is the way forward.

As convener of the lead committee, I first thank the clerks, officials and witnesses who helped the Finance Committee in its deliberations as the bill progressed. As we know, the Landfill Tax (Scotland) Bill will encourage and promote high levels of recycling and simplify the landfill tax system by making it more straightforward and easy to understand. As Scotland continues to build on the success of recycling and climate change policies, the amount of waste going to landfill will decrease, which is to be expected as we work towards achieving our climate change targets. In evidence to the Finance Committee, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth, John Swinney, said: “My expectation is that, in the coming period, we will see a long-term reduction in the revenue from landfill tax. We accept that the success and effectiveness of recycling policies, which are part and parcel of the Scottish Government’s wider approach to achieving the emissions reductions that are required under climate change legislation, will result in a reduction in receipts from landfill tax. Clearly, we will need to deal with that as a Government.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 19 June 2013; c 2835.] The bill also includes provisions for the taxation of illegal dumping, strengthening business opportunities for landfill operators to dispose of materials properly and effectively in accordance with the wider regulatory infrastructure. It will also bring all the activity into the Government’s wider environmental agenda for more sustainable waste disposal, while deterring criminal activity. Although the Scottish Government has not made a specific estimate of the expected tax receipts from landfill in 2015-16, the Finance Committee recognises the significant difference between the predictions and projections for landfill tax receipts in Scotland, which we discussed in detail at stage 1. In October, the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment launched “Zero Waste—Safeguarding Scotland’s Resources: Blueprint for a More Resource Efficient and Circular Economy”. That plan builds on the success of Scotland’s zero waste plan, identifying actions to shift the focus on to waste prevention and resource efficiency, thereby improving productivity and competitiveness. The strategy sets out how “In a circular economy, we keep products and materials in use for as long as possible, extract the maximum value from them whilst in use, then recover and regenerate new products and materials at the end of each service life.” The action plan aims to reduce waste in Scotland by 15 per cent over the next decade to improve competitiveness. This bill will help Scotland meet its world-leading targets on climate change by establishing a tax system that supports the use of taxes and charges in environmental policy. That approach will compensate for environmental impact and encourage recycling by aligning tax with the aims of the zero waste plan, promoting high levels of recycling and diverting material resources from landfill into more sustainable forms of use. The bill will also help businesses by ensuring that market distortions caused by illegal operations do not undermine legitimate business ventures, and it will simplify and streamline the administration and collection of landfill taxes by establishing a system that is simple, efficient and easy for landfill operators to understand and comply with. Collection and enforcement will align with the principles of better regulation. A tax credit scheme is incorporated that provides an incentive to operators of landfill sites to contribute financially to projects that meet environmental and social objectives.

I pay tribute to Kezia Dugdale for her continued pursuit of this matter and for securing today’s debate. With the winter afoot, many Scots find themselves turning to payday loans, but unfortunately many are still unaware of the dangers that these seemingly helpful loans pose. Some observers contend that the short-term loans offered by payday lenders are important because they provide a lending option for those who otherwise would not qualify. The problem is that any benefits that payday loans offer are far outweighed by their risks. Borrowers commonly face interest rate percentages in the thousands, which makes it difficult for them to pay off their loans and forces them to roll their debt over for later payment, incurring further interest and fees in the process and causing arrears to impede their lives heavily. Many become trapped in a vicious circle where they borrow continuously to pay their arrears. StepChange found that the average Scots payday loan debt was £1,529 and that a staggering 65 per cent of clients with a payday loan had contractual obligations worth more than 100 per cent of their income, making the loans impossible to pay off. Given that perspective, it is important to acknowledge the FCA’s new regulatory measures. However, many of them will not be implemented soon, and we have seen payday lenders bolster advertising just in time for Christmas, as Kezia Dugdale highlighted. To address that, the Scottish Government created the 12 days of debtmas campaign to encourage people to borrow from credit unions, which have far lower interest rates, making borrowing much cheaper and repayment much easier. As my colleague Jamie Hepburn highlighted, borrowers overwhelmingly reported to Citizens Advice Scotland that payday lenders are not adhering to the voluntary code of conduct. Thousands of Scots have felt heavy pressure from debt due to payday obligations. The industry’s reckless business practices are abhorrent and must be curbed. Currently, payday loan regulation falls within the OFT’s jurisdiction. Last May, a report detailed the OFT’s failure to regulate lenders. The report found that when lenders were in violation, punitive measures were rarely, if ever, taken against them, and that when such measures were taken, they were mild. The investigation concluded that the OFT was too “passive” in its role as regulator. The UK Government has proved that it cannot effectively manage the payday loan industry. More stringent measures need to be taken. When regulatory responsibilities are transferred from the OFT to the FCA in April, the FCA plans to introduce mandatory affordability checks, two-time roll-over and continuous payment limits, advertising restrictions and consumer education requirements, all of which are important and welcome. However, more must be done to control such lending. The Scottish Government is concerned that those measures are not enough to curb the payday loan industry—a point that has been put plainly to the UK Government on several occasions. In September, Fergus Ewing met OFT officials to encourage tougher regulatory action. Citizens Advice Scotland recommends an independent study to determine the point at which borrowing becomes too expensive. Similar measures have been successful in the United States, Australia and Canada. Of course, capping interest rates is one of the most crucial steps in reining in debt. The Scottish Government is also taking action. This year’s alterations to the debt arrangement scheme are meant to assist those struggling with high-interest obligations. The DAS has expanded by 40 per cent. Under the scheme, a debt payment programme can be set up, which can result in interest and charges being frozen and can stop creditor harassment. Of course, we are limited in what we can do. Independence would give us the freedom to ensure the accuracy of affordability checks and introduce our own rate caps. With such control, Scotland would be in a better position to protect consumers who have been failed by successive Westminster Governments.

As the cabinet secretary knows, the preventative spend agenda is of great importance, and part of that is about ensuring that every child has a good start in life. As a result, the additional £81 million for early learning and childcare is very welcome. What steps have local authorities taken to prepare for the extension of early years education, and what support and encouragement will the Scottish Government provide to help them to deliver that?

Page 96 of this week’s edition of The Economist, which I am holding up, lists 42 economies. Some of them are pretty major, such as those of Japan, Canada and Australia, but the list also includes Chile, Columbia and Malaysia. Of those 42 economies, 28 have growth rates that are higher than the UK’s at this time, so the member’s words in that regard are somewhat hollow.

Today’s Conservative motion is frankly nothing more than a celebration of mediocrity and a blind refusal to recognise the depressing reality of the UK’s current economic position. The plight of thousands of people across Scotland as a direct result of the UK Government’s—[Interruption.]

The plight of thousands of people across Scotland as a direct result of the UK Government’s wrongheaded austerity agenda and its calamitous mismanagement of the economy has been handily ignored in a motion that unashamedly lauds a deeply unpopular UK Government. Although it is true that there has been some growth in the economy, the rate of growth has been sluggish to say the least and far below the chancellor’s own predictions or those of the OBR. Yesterday, the OBR forecast that, by 2015, the economy will be 7.5 per cent larger than in 2010. However, that compares poorly with its original forecast of June 2010 that the economy would grow by 14.3 per cent over that period. The same 2010 OBR report suggested that public sector debt would be 70.3 per cent of gross domestic product this financial year when, in reality, the most recent forecast puts that figure at 75.5 per cent. The story concerning borrowing, as we have already heard, is perhaps the most shocking of all. It is expected to be a colossal 159 per cent higher than the original projection. On growth, let us look again at this week’s The Economist, which I mentioned in my intervention to Gavin Brown’s speech. On page 96, it publishes economic data for 42 countries, as I mentioned—not just European countries, the USA and Japan but Chile, Malaysia, Israel and so on. The UK comes 28th on that list in terms of growth. Egypt—beset by troubles this year that greatly hit its tourism industry—will grow one and a half times faster than the UK. If we look at other indicators such as inflation, the UK comes only 25th. In response to the autumn statement, the Institute for Fiscal Studies reported that the pace of cuts in public service spending will accelerate from 2.3 per cent a year between 2011 and March 2016 to 3.7 per cent a year until early 2019. The IFS pointed out that only a third of the promised spending cuts had yet been implemented. The IFS also noted that even further austerity will be required to meet George Osborne’s various promises in the autumn statement, including those on marriage tax allowances, while also meeting his pledge to balance the budget by the end of the next Parliament without raising taxes.

I will give way later, Gavin, but I want to make a bit more progress first.

Indeed, Paul Johnson, the director of IFS, said: “The chancellor continues to make specific promises on spending increases whilst stating that he will keep total spending at the same level. He can’t keep doing that.” On the cost of living, Mr Johnson stated that the general standard of living will “surely still be below its 2010 level” by the general election. Indeed, page 16 of chart 2.1 of the Treasury’s distributional analysis that accompanied the autumn statement shows that all households will be worse off in 2015-16 relative to 2010-11, taking into account direct, indirect, tax credit, benefit and public spending changes as a percentage of net income. The poorest quintile will be 3.7 per cent worse off. Earlier this year, the Office for National Statistics published a report showing that real-terms wages are now at roughly 2003 levels. The OBR paints a similarly glum picture, predicting that cuts in Government spending over the next six years will shrink spending back to a level not seen since 1948. In the statement itself, table 1.3 shows a 5.5 per cent decrease in business investment this year and shows net trade either falling or stagnating in six of the seven years from 2012 to 2018 inclusive. In 2015, it will grow by an abysmal 0.1 per cent. Of course, the approximately £232 million in departmental expenditure limit consequentials that the Scottish Government will receive as a result of the autumn statement will be put to good use by the finance secretary, but when the Scottish budget is already being cut by £3.1 billion and capital spending has been cut by 26.9 per cent over the piece, those additional funds are frankly derisory and it is insulting to expect the people of Scotland to be grateful. On the contrary, the chancellor would do well to follow the lead of the Scottish Government and recognise that an increase in capital spending would bring jobs and prosperity to all parts of the UK by helping to stimulate an economy that has a long way to go before living standards approach pre-recession levels.

Yes, time is getting on and I do not want the member to miss his intervention.

Gavin Brown has often criticised the Scottish Futures Trust, but he is strangely silent on the failure of his London bosses as regards their inability to deliver the UK national infrastructure plan, which was published on 4 December. [Interruption.]

According to the Financial Times, it is making minimal progress on that plan. The Labour Party has already pinned its colours to the mast in terms of continued austerity, with Ed Balls claiming that he will be “ruthless” about cutting public spending beyond 2015, further cementing the Labour Party’s undignified lurch to the right. However, the prospect for Scotland could be even worse in the not too distant future. A week past Monday, the Westminster All-Party Parliamentary Taxation Group issued a report that said: “In the case of a No vote, the Barnett Formula must be replaced as a priority, with a needs-based formula for inter-regional resource allocation the best alternative, using the seven indicators of relative need identified by the Holtham Commission.” The report is hugely significant and would, based on the Holtham commission’s findings, see Scotland’s budget cut by a further £4 billion—equivalent to £1,600 for every income tax payer in Scotland—while our oil, gas and whisky revenues continue to head south. The behaviour of the unionist parties on the issue is nothing short of shameless and entirely Janus-faced. I tell the Scottish people who say that we are better together as part of the UK that at Westminster they are plotting to slash Scotland’s budget even further than they already have. There is a better way for Scotland. By securing the economic levers of power for this Parliament; harnessing our vast natural resources; growing our working population; making Scotland a more attractive place in which to do business; and ceasing Scottish subsidies to Westminster, we can pursue a fairer and more aspirational future for Scotland.

I urge members to support Mr Swinney’s amendment.

Will Willie Rennie accept an intervention?

Will Willie Rennie accept an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

3. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with Opposition parties about currency options in an independent Scotland. (S4O-02679)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that it is simply not good enough for Opposition parties to denounce the Scottish Government’s plans to retain the pound? If Opposition parties think that retaining sterling would not be in Scotland’s interests, is it not time for them to say what currency Scotland should have if Scots vote—as I believe that they will—for independence in September?

3. To ask the Scottish Government how it plans to boost vocational education and training in North Ayrshire. (S4O-02644)

In the year to September, youth unemployment in North Ayrshire fell from 560 to 350, which represents a fall of 37.5 per cent and is the fastest decline in Scotland. Does the minister agree that enhanced vocational education and training will reduce that number still further and will also give older unemployed people the necessary skills to return to work?

6. To ask the First Minster what the Scottish Government’s position is on the recent comments by the Secretary of State for Scotland regarding the future of the Barnett formula once the economy has “stabilised”. (S4F-01720)

The secretary of state’s gaffe in saying last Sunday that the United Kingdom economy remains unstable was compounded when he implied that the Barnett formula’s days are numbered. Does the First Minister agree that, as politicians south of the border from all three UK parties are now pressing for substantial cuts to Scotland’s budget—in addition to those that have been endured in recent years—the only way for Scotland to avoid the cuts is for Scotland to vote yes in next year’s independence referendum?

Is the cabinet secretary aware not only that the IFS is incapable of making accurate predictions 50 years into the future, as it admits, but that its report was out of date on the day it was published? It excluded the impact of the £4 billion investment in the Kraken field and the 20,000 skilled jobs that that will create by 2017, for example.

4. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s response is to the report by the Institute of Fiscal Studies on the fiscal sustainability of an independent Scotland. (S4F-01711)

I spoke to Paul Johnson, the IFS director, on Tuesday. He admitted that the IFS has carried out no work on the impact of the UK leaving the European Union following the proposed 2017 referendum. Does the First Minister agree that that would be a better focus for the IFS than attempting to predict Scotland’s economic circumstances half a century into the future? Does the First Minister also agree that what the IFS got right was confirmation that Scotland’s economy performs better than the UK’s at present, with a relative budget surplus of £12.6 billion over the past five years, and that an independent Scotland could reform the tax system to boost the economy and increase growth?

Will the cabinet secretary confirm that the £503 million that the Scottish Futures Trust has saved will be reinvested in capital projects? Will she also confirm that the savings made by the non-profit-distributing model stand in stark contrast to the ridiculously profligate public-private partnerships that the unionist parties imposed on us before?

5. To ask the Scottish Government how the Scottish Ten project is using the latest laser technology to examine data from the eastern Qing tombs in China. (S4O-02576)

I thank the cabinet secretary for her detailed reply. Scientific and education links between Scotland and China are obviously very important as we seek to deepen the relationship between our two nations. Can the cabinet secretary give Parliament further examples of such co-operation?

I am pleased to debate the Landfill Tax (Scotland) Bill and to highlight some key areas that the Finance Committee considered during its stage 1 scrutiny of the bill. The Scotland Act 2012 devolved a range of taxation and borrowing measures—the ability to borrow money for capital projects and to set a Scottish rate of income tax to replace a 10p in the pound reduction in income tax for Scottish taxpayers across all tax bands, as well as powers to set taxes on land and buildings transactions and on disposals of waste to landfill. Our report identifies issues and themes that emerged from the evidence that we considered. I will highlight some of those, starting with the tax framework. The Scottish Government has said that landfill tax will not be set at lower rates than the UK equivalents, and Mr Swinney just confirmed that. Scottish rates will mirror UK rates in 2015-16, meaning £80 per tonne for active materials and £2.50 per tonne for inert materials. The rates are not specified in the bill, which allows the Government the flexibility to change the rates in future without the need for primary legislation. The cabinet secretary mentioned certainty, but a number of witnesses raised concerns about the impact of uncertainty in relation to taxation rates on their financial planning. The submission from the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities said: “It is essential that certainty exists and where it does not that the financial risk to local authorities is appropriately mitigated by Scottish Government.” Similarly, the Scottish Environmental Services Association stated: “We represent an industry that is looking to make investment decisions for alternative non-landfill infrastructure, the viability of which will depend on what landfill tax will be, so it would have been nice to have an indication of what that tax will be.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 12 June 2013; c 2776.] We heard from the cabinet secretary that, although he had yet to make a final decision on the timing of his announcement of landfill tax rates, he was considering doing so around the same time as publication of the draft budget in September 2014. He has reaffirmed that again today. We have invited the Government to clarify why there is a need to wait until then. We would also welcome confirmation of the duration that the rates will apply for and whether there will be an escalator. One issue linked to rate setting is “waste tourism”, whereby waste might be transported across the border—in either direction—in order to take advantage of more favourable rates. The RSPB Scotland submission explained: “Altering rates may encourage the cross-border transfer of waste. Depending on how the rates were set, this would either lead to a loss of revenue from Scotland or an increase in the amount of landfill waste within Scotland.” The committee recognises the potential for such impacts, should there be significant changes to the rates and structure of landfill tax. Therefore, we have invited the Government to outline what discussions it has had with the UK Environment Agency on the issue and to confirm whether it has commissioned any research or analysis. As with land and buildings transaction tax, the Government reserves the power to make future changes to landfill taxation rates via subordinate legislation. The bill provides that the first order to set tax rates will be subject to the affirmative procedure and any future orders will be subject to the “provisional affirmative procedure”, which would allow rate changes to come into force immediately. The committee welcomes the fact that changes to taxation rates will be subject to a form of affirmative procedure and recognises that there may be times when it is necessary for changes to have immediate effect—for example, in response to dramatic changes in market conditions—but it is not clear to us why the standard affirmative procedure should not be used to set future rates in normal circumstances. For that reason, we ask the Government for the rationale behind using the provisional affirmative procedure other than when speed is of the essence. The bill also enables the Government to introduce additional rates of taxation for certain types of waste via secondary legislation. The evidence was generally in favour of that power. The committee recommends that the introduction of any additional rate be made subject to the affirmative procedure. Similarly, while there will initially be an identical set of exemptions to those under the existing UK tax regime, the Government reserves the right to add certain categories of waste to, or to remove them from, the exemptions list. We heard suggestions that hazardous materials, such as asbestos, should be made exempt in order to encourage safe disposal and to reduce illegal dumping. The bill provides for any additions to the list of exemptions to be subject to the negative procedure, but, given the potential for waste tourism, the committee recommends that any adjustment to the list of exemptions be made subject to the affirmative procedure. Evidence was heard about the dangers of illegal landfill sites, which Mr Swinney also touched on. Such sites not only damage the environment but are invariably controlled by tax-dodging criminals. Even when such illegal sites are discovered, the court fines are often less than the tax evaded. The fact that the financial risks of getting caught are outweighed by the benefits makes such activity profitable and attractive to the unscrupulous. If criminals were required to pay landfill tax, the fines would be much higher. Renfrewshire Council noted in its submission that the proposals will “ensure that the punishment is more expensive than the savings made from continuing to commit environmental crime.” The committee therefore welcomes the taxing of unauthorised disposals to landfill. Nevertheless, although respondents were supportive of the imposition of a tax on illegal landfill sites, some suggested that regulatory and enforcement bodies such as SEPA need additional resources to help identify such sites. The Scottish Environmental Services Association stated that the problem required “strong leadership and resources sufficient to create a climate where the fear of being caught is high.” We seek clarification as to whether the resources allocated to revenue Scotland for compliance activity include additional resources for SEPA to identify illegal sites. We also ask whether any additional revenues collected as a result of the new power might be used to identify further illegal landfill sites. Revenue Scotland—a body that will be formally created by the revenue Scotland and tax powers bill, which we expect to scrutinise next year—will administer the new landfill tax and work with SEPA in a similar way to that in which it will work with Registers of Scotland on LBTT. Witnesses agreed that such an approach seems sensible. For example, RSPB Scotland stated that it supports the proposal, “given the expertise and information that SEPA currently hold with regard to landfill in Scotland.” However, we also heard concerns relating to a “potential skills gap” at SEPA. For example, the North Ayrshire Council submission stated that SEPA is “an experienced environmental regulator rather than a tax assessor”. The Chartered Institution of Wastes Management questioned whether SEPA has the expertise to undertake “a tax-policing and revenue-raising role.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 12 June 2013; c 2780.] SEPA acknowledged that staff require training and guidance to fulfil its new role and confirmed that funding is in place to provide that. SEPA is confident that any skills gap will disappear by April 2015. The Delegated Powers and Law Reform Committee noted that the bill allows the tax authority to delegate functions to SEPA. Although that committee agreed that the provision is “sensible”, it “strongly recommends” that publication of any delegation should be required. The Finance Committee supports that and welcomes the cabinet secretary’s commitment to “look very carefully” at the issue and to respond to questions in the Delegated Powers and Law Reform Committee’s report. A clear division of responsibilities between revenue Scotland and SEPA is important. We welcome the confirmation that the position will be defined, and the committee will scrutinise that. Nevertheless, although we recognise that the tax will not be implemented until April 2015, the committee seeks further clarification about the respective roles of revenue Scotland and SEPA. As with the LBTT, the committee will monitor and scrutinise the implementation and delivery of the Scottish landfill tax. We have invited revenue Scotland and SEPA to report on a six-monthly basis. We will receive the first progress report from revenue Scotland and Registers of Scotland on the implementation of the LBTT at tomorrow’s Finance Committee meeting. The cabinet secretary spent some time on the landfill communities fund. At present, landfill operators can give up to 6.8 per cent of their UK tax liabilities to fund community or environmental projects near landfill sites. As the cabinet secretary said, the bill makes provision for the creation of a similar Scottish fund and for a 10 per cent increase in the credit cap. We are pleased that the Government will introduce a new Scottish cap of 7.48 per cent. Concerns were raised about the regulation of the existing fund, with the Scottish Wildlife Trust suggesting that it is “expensive”, that it “duplicates information gathering” and that it is “over-regulated”. The Scottish landfill communities fund forum agreed that current regulatory requirements are “extremely onerous and time consuming”.—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 12 June 2013; c 2796.] The committee is therefore pleased that the Government will consider how to administer the fund more efficiently. At present, to receive funding, a site should be no more than 10 miles from a landfill site. Some witnesses suggested that, as the number of active sites declines, that should be reconsidered, perhaps to consider disruption and pollution that are caused by the transportation of waste through communities en route to sites. Others pointed out that the fund is relatively small and that retention of the 10-mile criterion is important and indeed crucial. The committee noted the arguments for and against and is conscious that local factors vary from place to place. Although 10 miles might seem a considerable distance in Glasgow, it might not in rural and sparsely populated areas. Considering those views, the committee endorsed the principle that those who are most affected by landfill sites should benefit the most. For that reason, we welcome the bill team’s suggestion that we might need something “a little more sophisticated”, and I hope that it will attract the match funding that the cabinet secretary mentioned. We asked the Government to update us on progress on that and we look forward to considering proposals via secondary legislation in advance of the bill’s implementation. We recommend that such secondary legislation should be subject to the affirmative procedure. Members will know that the OBR is responsible for forecasting Scottish tax receipts for the Scottish rate of income tax, the LBTT and the landfill tax. It provided three forecasts for Scottish receipts from landfill tax from 2011-12 to 2017-18, with the second and third much lower than the first. Although the OBR anticipates that landfill tax revenues will remain broadly level from 2015, the Scottish Government expects significant decline, partly due to its environmental policies. It predicts that receipts will fall from £107 million in 2015-16 to about £40.5 million in 2025. As the block grant will be subject to a one-off reduction, the committee believes that it is important that any reduction in tax receipts does not penalise Scotland.

I am in my last minute but, if I am able to, I am happy to take an intervention.

It appears that the Scottish Government’s policies are fairly conservative, as it envisages only a 60 per cent reduction. Clearly, from what the member says, it is important that we have effective negotiations with the UK Government and that forecasting is accurate so that Scotland does not lose out in the way that I indicated. The committee recently published its report on implementing the Scotland Act 2012’s financial powers. Among other things, the report emphasised the importance of forecast methodology and data being published, transparent and open to scrutiny. We ask whether the proposed new independent forecasting body will be established in time to predict landfill tax receipts in advance of the 2015-16 draft budget and, if not, which forecasts would be used to inform the document. The committee reflected carefully on the evidence and supports the general principles of the bill. I look forward to hearing from other members and the cabinet secretary when he winds up the debate.

Who isnae?

In May 1979, the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Association measured atmospheric carbon dioxide levels at the Mauna Loa observatory in Hawaii at just under 340 parts per million; in May this year, levels reached their highest point in human history at 400 ppm. That reminds us yet again of the impact that human activity has had, and continues to have, on our environment. The Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 set ambitious emissions reduction targets of 42 per cent by 2020 and 80 per cent by 2050. If we are to reach those ambitious goals, it is important that we pursue new technologies. Carbon capture and storage is one such technology. It is a step forward and could be an important investment in Scotland’s future. The potential for a thriving CCS programme, which uses the industry skills and expertise that are already in Scotland, is massive. If it is properly integrated in Scotland’s evolving energy sector, carbon capture and sequestration could help us not only to achieve an energy-secure future but to be a global policy leader, setting new energy industry standards. Scotland is ideal for development of this type. As we heard, the central North Sea possesses geological assets that are highly compatible with optimal use of existing infrastructure, which offers us a strong competitive edge. I visited not Germany but Longannet—before the CCS project there was cancelled—with representatives of Fairlie, Largs and West Kilbride community councils. At the time, 64 people were employed on the project. CCS was being delivered, but 1 tonne of coal was needed to clean 3 tonnes. Different amine solutions were being tested, with a view to achieving a much more commercially viable ratio of 1:7. Of course, CCS has to be the right investment in the right place. I am therefore pleased that the project at Hunterston in my constituency, where a CCS coal plant with only 25 per cent carbon capture was planned, is no longer being considered. That relates to what Patrick Harvie said, because 75 per cent of the coal burned at the plant would not have been clean. We must be wary and ensure that CCS projects do not go down that road, as Patrick Harvie warned. Crucial and welcome steps are being taken to realise the prospects of Peterhead, which is the preferred bidder for the £1 billion CCS commercialisation competition. Such programmes spur competition and ingenuity. Corporations such as Shell have been drawn to the project, which they think has the potential to capture up to 10 million tonnes of CO2. Because of such successes, it is necessary to incentivise schemes like the CCS commercialisation programme. Further successes include the highly innovative captain clean energy project, which involves the construction of a new integrated gasification combined cycle power plant at Grangemouth with a full 570MW potential. Future implementations such as those offer a promising glimpse of the possibilities that CCS has to offer. According to DECC, Scotland uses more energy per capita than other parts of the United Kingdom—primarily, one suspects, because of our colder climate. DECC also found that, in a comparison of 12 regions and nations across the UK in 2010, Scotland ranked fifth highest in industrial and commercial gas usage. A further comparison of the aforementioned regions and nations also shows that, in the same year, Scotland had the highest average domestic gas consumption per consumer at just below 16,000kWh. Although part of an overall downward trend, those figures further emphasise the importance of the exploration of critical new technologies such as carbon capture and storage. Scotland has already demonstrated its carbon capture and storage potential, but now is the best time for us to realise the possibilities that CCS has to offer through commercial testing of those technologies. That is the most feasible way of benefiting from CCS. Not only are there positive environmental impacts, but there will be a marked economic benefit. A July 2012 report for Scottish Enterprise estimated that CCS technology could produce an £11.3 billion increase in direct output for the Scottish economy. That report also found that CCS in Scotland could result in £2.7 billion of economic growth value added and a potential additional 5,300 jobs. However, those figures can only be realised with the commercial development of the technology. The IEA estimates that global consumption of coal in 2017 will reach 4.32 billion tonnes, making coal the primary source of energy on earth. The commercialisation of carbon capture and sequestration projects is not just an opportunity for Scotland but for the UK and the wider world to reduce the pollution caused by coal. It is crucial that investments such as the CCS commercialisation programme that is in development move us away from the tradition of the burning of coal towards clean processes such as gasification and that they are celebrated and encouraged. Auspicious plans and proposals for the development of CCS have established that Scotland has the requisite skills, industry, know-how and capability to become a serious competitor and pioneer in the industry. The energy market is changing. CCS has shown that it has promising prospects and a place in the Scottish economy. The technology is vital if we are to meet carbon reduction standards, vital to the future power supply in Scotland and the UK, and vital to the future of the environment. New nuclear power has been touched on. As I have a nuclear power station in my constituency, I am concerned about Mr Gray’s proposals for new nuclear power, which I believe is hard to rationalise. EDF’s call for a strike price that is twice the market price goes against the Labour Party’s recent pledge to freeze electricity prices. As my colleague, Stewart Stevenson, pointed out, the issue for nuclear power is commerciality. No nuclear power stations have been built in the United States of America for 41 years, primarily for that reason, and we already know that Hinkley Point, which will cost £14 billion, is five years late. I am afraid that nuclear power has no future, not just because of the environmental concerns about the waste that lasts for 0.25 million years, but because it simply cannot compete economically at this time.

Will Kezia Dugdale give way?

The 600 hours was a 2011 commitment, not a 2007 commitment. It will be 187.5 hours more than Labour provided in the eight years that it was in power.

SNP members know, of course, that the powers to really deal with the payday loan companies are reserved to Westminster, and Kezia Dugdale and her colleagues do not want us to have them. In 2010, I lodged a motion that called for the then Labour Government to deal with those high interest charges, and not a single Labour MSP dealt with it. There is nothing but cynical hypocrisy from the Labour member. Kezia Dugdale talked about child poverty. We have 10.9 per cent less in resources to deal with child poverty than we inherited.

I will let you in, Kezia, because you let me in, but let me make progress first.

The cost of living is a pressing issue for families and individuals. Unemployment is too high; benefits are under attack from the coalition; the UK state pension is one of the worst in Europe relative to wages; fuel costs are among the highest in the world; and many who are in work face real-terms wage cuts and reduced working hours. No one would deny that, since the recession, people across these islands have had to make a lot less go a lot further. Even before the recession struck, household incomes were under threat from the then UK Labour Government. The “Why do we feel so broke?” report, which was published on 4 February 2008, showed that the average UK disposable family income after tax and housing costs, having declined from £16,544 in 2003 to £16,305 in 2006, plummeted to £15,231 in 2007. The fall of 6.6 per cent in a single year at a time of strong worldwide economic growth shows the economic incompetence of Labour in power. By contrast, despite increasingly difficult Westminster budget settlements, the SNP Government has achieved much since 2007. The Labour motion rightly points to areas in which costs have soared, of which energy and childcare are two examples. It also says: “both the UK and Scottish governments must act urgently to tackle these issues.” Again, there is little to argue with there, but the track records of both Governments are markedly different. Restrictions that are imposed on the Scottish Government severely limit what we are able to do—a situation that those on the no benches are reluctant to change. Nevertheless, the council tax freeze has saved average households up to £1,600, whereas in England council tax bills have risen year on year. In North Ayrshire, where I am an MSP, Labour raised the council tax by 75 per cent in the decade to 2007, while water and sewerage bills soared by an astonishing 592 per cent. Lest we forget, fuel duty in the first three years of the Blair Government was increased by 6 per cent each year above the rate of inflation, making our economy increasingly uncompetitive, which is no doubt one of the reasons why Scotland lost 37 per cent of its manufacturing employment while Labour was in power. Scotland would undoubtedly be hit by further tax hikes were Labour in power, but no one really knows. Indeed, I doubt that many Labour members have a clue as to what their council tax policy is—this week. In 2010, the then Labour leader, lain Gray, said that the council tax freeze was “unsustainable”, but he reversed his position prior to the election, saying that “now is not the time to increase the burden on household budgets.” That of course begs the question: when is the right time?

The SNP policy is indeed to introduce, when the time is right, a local income tax—of course it is. We have frozen council tax, but Labour is a yo-yo party on the issue. For example, Glasgow City Council has pledged to freeze the council tax for a year longer than this Government will be in office. Labour introduced tuition fees, forcing many young people who wanted to go to university to save or go into debt, but the SNP Government reintroduced the proud tradition of access to education based on the ability to learn and not the ability to pay. Our commitment to free school meals, a living wage, maintaining the bus pass for older people and the abolition of prescription charges has helped to ease the strain on household budgets at this difficult time. In Johann Lamont’s view, those services are part of a “something for nothing” culture—a phrase used at the Tory conference yesterday by lain Duncan Smith—and all are under the scrutiny of her cuts commission. For Labour to demand that the SNP Government do more to reduce the cost of living, when Labour consistently attacks or threatens to reverse the very measures helping so many Scots, beggars belief. The real power to reduce the cost of living lies at Westminster. Control over energy policy is key to reducing fuel costs; radical benefit reform would help those struggling to find work; and a decent pension would allow our older people to enjoy later life without worrying about heating their homes or eating properly. If they are serious about addressing the cost of living, why do Opposition MSPs not want the tools for us to do the job here, instead of tinkering around the edges to try to mitigate the impact of UK Governments? Labour tells us that it will deliver change, but it never does. On Labour’s watch, the UK became one of the most unequal countries in the developed world. Labour’s claim to be progressive is a myth debunked many years ago, as the Iraq war, Trident, retention of the House of Lords, tuition fees and trickle-down economics attest. Last week, Ed Miliband promised to take action on energy companies. One wonders what his plan is, how effective it will be and, importantly, why he did not address those matters when in power. Ed Miliband was, of course, Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change for two years, but to say that it was ineffective does not begin to describe his tenure in office—although on taking up his post, he did, very politely, ask the big six energy companies to take voluntary action to ensure that prices were fair.

Age Concern and National Energy Action slated Labour for failing to protect the poorest and most vulnerable from high energy bills. Ed Miliband’s own department’s figures show that fuel poverty continued to rise, and Westminster’s Energy and Climate Change Committee reported that the Labour Government would miss its own fuel poverty reduction targets. What a record! Figures from the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets show that, during the 13 years of the Labour UK Government, average prices rose by 48 per cent but gas bills increased by 67 per cent and electricity increased by a whopping 139 per cent. It is astonishing that Labour demands action to reduce the cost of living, given its abysmal record in government and opposition. The SNP Government is doing what it can within the powers that we have, but Scots should vote yes to change that situation. I say to Labour that it is not what its members say in the chamber now that matters but what it did in government. Unless Labour plans to reverse Tory cuts, its words are meaningless; and unless Labour tells us how it will fund that, its rhetoric is empty.

We have Labour speeches, but what about action rather than speeches? I notice that Lewis Macdonald wanted to come in after my six minutes were up. [Interruption.]

Let me just apologise to Kezia Dugdale, as I said that I would take an intervention from her but unfortunately I did not manage to do so.

This is an important issue for my Arran constituents. The emergency medical retrieval service, which transfers critically ill patients from remote and rural areas, relies on mobile phones to operate and has expressed concern at the lack of coverage. The First Minister will know that, for years, United Kingdom ministers have failed to remedy the situation. Although Ed Vaizey, the UK Minister for Culture, Communications and Creative Industries, said that coverage would be rolled out by 2015, there is no indication when it will happen in the lead-up to that date, despite the fact that the EMRS has said that mobile phone coverage for Arran is the number 1 priority for Scotland.

Does the First Minister agree that the UK Government should redouble its efforts to deliver mobile coverage and will he press it to do so?

3. To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to boost production of both domestic and foreign films in Scotland. (S4O-02414)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that extremely positive answer. For many years, the establishment of a film studio here in Scotland has been mooted. Can the cabinet secretary advise the chamber whether we are any closer to that goal?

Given that Scotland subsidises the BBC with £218 million more than is spent here, what could that £218 million mean for jobs and production in Scotland?

I thank my colleague Gordon MacDonald for securing the debate. Members across the chamber are aware of the impact that alcohol misuse has in Scotland, of its grievous effect on families and communities and of the need to challenge this socially destructive addiction. My father died as a result of his alcoholism, and I remember years when I did not see him sober from month to month, so much of the debate has a personal resonance. The alcohol consumption rate in Scotland is among the highest in Europe. Scottish Government figures suggest that half of men and a third of women regularly drink at levels that are above the recommended weekly limits. With misuse comes a plethora of health-related issues, which range from short-term alcoholic poisoning to long-term kidney and liver failure. Mental health issues may be severe; depression and dependency may be long lasting. Although the personal side-effects are well known, the problems that alcohol misuse causes go deeper and have an impact on communities, the national health service, criminal justice and wider society. The causes of high consumption rates include the availability of cheap, strong alcohol, coupled with special offers in shops. That has normalised consumption and allowed it to become an everyday necessity for many. Such normalisation, however, touches individuals, families, communities and society. This morning, I addressed a well-attended conference of Glasgow Council on Alcohol to launch a new service that was designed as a direct result of my members’ business debate on the origins of addiction on 8 January this year. At the launch, Richard Velleman, emeritus professor of mental health research, discussed the huge scale of alcohol misuse and the negative impact on individual families and children specifically, on family finances, social life, routines, rituals, roles and communication within the family. Problems such as domestic and other types of violence, instability and embarrassment might have to be faced along with denial, living in fear, parental inconsistency and instability, all of which can leave children to deal with problems related to disturbed family functioning, conflict and breakdown. For the children, unsurprisingly, antisocial behaviour, emotional difficulties, precocious maturity, problems with school work and a difficult transition from adolescence can emerge. In the long term, adults who grew up in such households are more likely to have physical illnesses ranging from gynaecological problems and ischaemic heart disease to diabetes and musculoskeletal disorders. Prolonged traumatic childhood stress that is caused or heightened by alcohol misuse in the family can damage the autonomous and sympathetic nervous systems, making one increasingly vulnerable to pain and infections through a weakened autoimmune response. However, although children can have damaged lives stemming from alcohol misuse in the family, the overwhelming majority do not, as Professor Velleman made clear this morning. Children are often highly resilient. Protective factors—most importantly a close bond with a caring adult, a good network of wider family support, and an outside hobby or activity of any description—are all vital to ensuring a counter-balancing stability, attachment and security as opposed to unpredictability, insecurity and isolation. We must build on that and reach out to the children who need such support. I therefore pay tribute to Scotland’s 120 Al-Anon Family Groups and the vital work that they do. Education and support for those who misuse alcohol are essential aspects of rehabilitation and it is important to mention the vital work that is being done by alcohol support groups across Scotland. Care groups, agencies and charities help addicts to face their issues head on by looking not just at the addiction itself but at its underlying causes. They might be related to mental health or an issue of sexual abuse. Amongst others, the use of counselling, relapse and family support are just some of the methods of support that are being provided. I am aware of the work that alcohol and drugs partnerships do in my constituency, and I am encouraged by their dedication. The positive contribution of Al-Anon Family Groups is immeasurable and I whole-heartedly applaud their continuing works. Help and support is necessary to overcome addiction and to provide aid and relief to those who are adversely affected. To end the vicious cycle of addiction, more action is essential to support and safeguard our current and future generations’ health and prosperity.

The First Minister will be aware that the Z Hinchcliffe & Sons Ltd factory in Dalry in my constituency is set to close. Z Hinchcliffe was founded in 1776 and produces quality yarn, which is sought after by some of the most prestigious fashion houses in the world. Sadly, the company feels that it now has too much capacity for its market. Although a few employees will be offered a transfer to Denby Dale in Huddersfield, the Dalry closure will lead to the loss of up to 115 jobs. Will the First Minister ensure that the Scottish Government works with the directors of Z Hinchcliffe & Sons to offer any assistance that it can to mitigate potential job losses and assist those employees whose jobs are under threat?

5. To ask the Scottish Government to what extent personal circumstances are taken into account when considering middle-aged men for a free health check. (S4O-02386)

I first raised this matter with Ayrshire and Arran NHS Board on 31 May. The answer, which I received on 4 September, completely missed the point. A constituent of mine called the free health check number. He was asked for his postcode, only to be told that he did not qualify. He was not asked whether he smoked, had a history of heart disease, was overweight, was in employment—anything. How can we deliver preventative health measures to difficult-to-reach males when their sole criteria is a person’s address?

4. To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government is taking to encourage fostering. (S4F-01535)

Does the First Minister agree that we do not have many people coming forward as potential foster parents because of commonly believed myths about who would be considered unsuitable as foster parents, such as those in rented accommodation, same-sex couples, the over-55s and people not in full-time employment? Given the rise in the number of children requiring fostering and the enriching experience it can provide for child and foster parent alike, does he agree that it is vital to support campaigns, such as Action for Children’s fostering myth-busting academy, which is detailed on its website?

I apologise in advance to members for having to leave the chamber before the debate concludes. As members know, the Presiding Officer has arranged for committee conveners to question the First Minister, and she has chosen me to ask the first question, so I will have to leave quite soon. I thank Claire Baker for securing this valuable debating time and echo her comments on the excellent work that the Dogs Trust carries out to ensure the welfare of dogs. Last year, I visited its rehoming centre in Glasgow, which also serves my constituency, to see at first hand how the charity cares for dogs that may have strayed or been abandoned. I am certain that most members across the chamber appreciate the importance of microchipping and the benefits that it brings to dogs and owners alike. I have been greatly interested in the issue for a while, and am pleased that the benefits of microchipping dogs have already been noted in my constituency after I hosted the first free microchipping event in Scotland this June. That event was tremendously successful. A total of 167 dogs were chipped free of charge. I reiterate my thanks to the Dogs Trust for its dedication, hard work and professionalism on 21 June, when it went above and beyond the call of duty in driving for five hours to the event, beginning early and working for more than four and a half hours without any kind of break, due to the high turnout and long queues. Constituents who attended the event were delighted to be there, and I hope that, as a result of its success, the event will be the first of many. It is important to underline that it is the legal responsibility of dog owners to ensure the welfare of their pet. Indeed, a recommendation is included in the Scottish Government’s “Code of Practice for the Welfare of Dogs” that advocates the use of microchipping. I appreciate that the financial burden of having a dog chipped can be offputting in the current economic climate, but the Dogs Trust has kindly offered to provide free microchipping at its two rehoming centres and at its roadshows. That can save owners the estimated £20 to £30 cost of microchipping their dog. I am sure that members will agree that it is important to advertise that service as widely as possible to increase the number of people who have their dogs chipped. With the recent YouGov figures showing that 82 per cent of the Scottish public support compulsory microchipping, as Claire Baker pointed out, I believe that most owners will be happy to take up the Dogs Trust’s offers where they can, although, of course, many people live in the far-off corners of Scotland and cannot get to either of the two rehoming centres. Microchipping would be more efficient than the licensing system currently in place and would save dog owners time and money. The popularity of microchipping among dog owners is, of course, no mystery, and it is clear that the benefits of microchipping dogs are numerous. Those were spelled out in detail by Claire Baker, who talked about reuniting pets with owners. Stolen dogs can be returned, negligence can be dealt with, prosecution and tracing can be enabled, and hereditary defects can be dealt with. Many dog owners already acknowledge the importance of microchipping, of course. Indeed, I recently dealt with a case in which one of my constituents had had their dog stolen only for it to be retrieved again in England and returned to him, thanks to the dog being microchipped. It is important to emphasise that the benefits of microchipping are not limited to dogs and their owners. The introduction of compulsory microchipping will save local authorities substantial time when they deal with dangerous dogs, considering how lengthy and fruitless the dog control notice system that is currently in place can be. By taking a preventative stance, local authorities will be relieved of the financial burden that the process costs and will make associated savings in areas such as kennelling costs. As Claire Baker mentioned, Scotland is lagging behind thus far. Northern Ireland brought compulsory microchipping into effect in 2012. Wales will do so by March 2015, and England will do so by April 2016. Being left behind should not be an option for Scotland. I believe that an initiative to introduce compulsory microchipping of dogs would help to ensure the safety of dogs and would put at ease the minds of owners and, in relation to dangerous dogs, of the general public. I am confident that, with the support of the Parliament, such an initiative can be created and the benefits realised.

I welcome the cabinet secretary’s statement and the £68 million that the SNP Government will allocate in each of the next two years to mitigate the adverse impact of welfare reform. It is clear that the Government is working hard within its limited powers to protect the most vulnerable Scots from UK Government welfare policy.

I ask the cabinet secretary whether any party has put to him specific proposals to increase funding in relation to welfare and, if so, whether that party has indicated how such an increase would be funded, bearing it in mind that such a proposal must be accompanied by a reduction within the same portfolio.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what reductions it anticipates there will be to the Scottish budget in the years to 2017-18 if Scotland remains part of the United Kingdom. (S4O-02322)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the comments of Professor Jo Armstrong of the Centre for Public Policy for Regions on 7 August, when she said: “The £2.7 billion real-terms projected cut in day-to-day spending still to come will be increasingly hard to accommodate, especially given the £1.8 billion already experienced since 2009-10.” Will the cabinet secretary please say what impact such a draconian cut would have on jobs, growth and services in Scotland? Is this not another argument for Scotland to vote yes in next year’s referendum?

As the minister knows, it is a tiresome Labour tactic to scaremonger and, last year, as we approached the council elections, Labour members did so in relation to train closures. Margaret McDougall lodged motion S4M-01765, which expressed concern that Ardrossan Town station was under threat. Can the minister confirm that neither Ardrossan Town station nor any other station in my constituency is or has been under threat of closure from the current Scottish Government at any time, and does he agree that Margaret McDougall should apologise to rail users in Ardrossan for worrying them unnecessarily about a closure that was never even proposed, let alone planned?

I, too, congratulate Richard Lyle on securing this important debate. The great war undoubtedly changed the social, economic and political fabric of our nation. It was like nothing Scotland—or any nation—had experienced before. The magnitude of the conflict, the scale of the slaughter and the mechanised precision were completely new. The war also reached home in a way that it never had before, and the idea of the home front was born. Volunteers streamed to the colours at the declaration of war, but the buoyant mood was not to last long as the horrible reality dawned and entire communities began losing brothers, fathers and sons in huge numbers. Scotland suffered appalling and horrendously disproportionate losses, sustaining 147,609 fatalities and 410,000 wounded—more than Australia, Canada and New Zealand combined—from the 690,000 Scots who served in the British Army, a casualty rate of 81 per cent. As Hanzala Malik said, only Serbia and Turkey suffered a higher proportion of military casualties. Richard Lyle made Scotland’s sacrifices clear: our losses represented 19 per cent of the British war dead at a time when Scotland had less than 9.5 per cent of Britain’s population, while tens of thousands of other Scots perished serving valiantly in the London Scottish, Liverpool Scottish, Australian, Canadian, New Zealand, South African and other regiments raised throughout the empire. Every community in Scotland and countless Scottish families suffered grievously. My maternal grandfather was gassed at the age of 18 a week before the armistice, and he died of emphysema at only 41. My paternal grandfather served in the Highland Light Infantry, one of only two men of 110 in his company who joined in 1914 to survive physically unscathed, although one can only imagine the psychological scars that he and so many others from that ruined generation suffered. I want to focus on the sacrifices of just one family. Few families endured as much as the Mochrie family of Kilbirnie, the town in my Ayrshire constituency where I live. The Mochrie family had five brothers serving in the British Army, three of whom—19-year-old Private Robert Mochrie of the Royal Scots Fusiliers, 21-year-old Private Matthew Mochrie of the Cameronians, and 28-year-old Corporal James Mochrie of the Gordon Highlanders—were all tragically killed on the first day of the battle of Loos on 25 September 1915, along with many thousands of their compatriots. There was no Scottish equivalent of “Saving Private Ryan”, and their brother, 36-year-old Private Andrew Mochrie, also of the Cameronians, was killed at the battle of Arras on 9 June 1917. John Mochrie, of the Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment, survived the conflict, as did his sister Euphemia, a nurse with the Army Auxiliary Corps. Her son William McKim was tragically killed serving on HMS Hood in the second world war. The McKim family still lives in Kilbirnie. In Scotland, we still suffer to some extent not only from the human losses of the war but from those of the Spanish influenza outbreak, which also killed many hundreds of thousands of people throughout the UK and Europe, and from the economic consequences of the great war. In its aftermath, Scotland—which had been a bustling workshop of shipbuilding, railway manufacture, munitions, coal and steel during the war—was left with a huge overcapacity in each. Economic dislocation, recession, unemployment and poverty in the 1920s led to almost 10 per cent of our population emigrating overseas and thousands more moving south in the decade following the armistice. It is hard to comprehend the suffering of those who fought and of their loved ones who waited anxiously at home during the conflict and in the crisis of confidence that struck Scotland after the war was over. Many of us are the descendants of those who bravely fought and died for their country and of those who were lucky enough to return home—often maimed and traumatised—to an uncertain future. As Richard Lyle poignantly pointed out, it is our solemn duty to remember them and to commemorate their sacrifices, which were made for all of us. The impact of the first world war in Scotland is hard to comprehend and gauge, but it certainly changed Scotland and the world for ever.

As convener of the Finance Committee, which was the lead committee for consideration of the bill, I am pleased to take part in the debate, which is on a subject that has featured heavily in our work this year. The complexity of establishing a fair and workable taxation system is apparent. It has not been easy to iron out inequity and to learn from the mistakes of old, repeatedly altered legislation while trying to simplify the system within the Scottish Parliament’s powers. I thank the committee clerks, committee colleagues and all those who contributed to the evidence-gathering sessions for their input as the bill progressed, which was invaluable and helped to offer a fuller picture of how the new tax could, should and will operate. The bill is the first of three related tax-raising bills to come before the Finance Committee and the Parliament following the passage of the Scotland Act 2012. It is clearly in everyone’s interest to ensure that new taxes are progressive and are relatively simple and effective. LBTT will replace stamp duty land tax, which the Institute for Fiscal Studies described as “wholly ill-conceived”. Perhaps the most notable of SDLT’s faults is the fact that it is charged on the basis of a slab system, which creates significant distortions. For example, as the Ernst & Young report “Grasping the thistle”—which is not to be confused with Mike Russell’s book of the same title—pointed out, a non-residential property that is acquired for £249,000 attracts stamp duty of 1 per cent, or £2,490, whereas one that is bought for £251,000 incurs a charge of 3 per cent, or £7,530. LBTT will offer a more progressive tax that avoids the sudden increases in liabilities that are a feature of the slab system. Furthermore, as an article in The Sunday Times on 28 April pointed out, stamp duty is open to a series of tax avoidance schemes that Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs is trying desperately to close. Although the finer details of stamp duty mitigation schemes are kept secret by some legal firms, it is known that, through a complex system that involves setting up third-party companies, sub-sale relief can be exploited on behalf of a buyer. I am pleased that the bill addresses that issue. I am aware that many property developers use sub-sale relief for wholly commercial purposes, but the bill will properly legislate to cover such specific commercial transactions. It is clear that tax avoidance is an important issue that has received much attention in recent months, so I am pleased that the bill takes steps to close tax loopholes. As the Scottish Government does not intend to increase the overall revenue take, everyone should pay less. Of course, the Scottish Government intends to tighten things up even further by introducing a general anti-avoidance rule through the proposed tax management bill later in the parliamentary session. That move will enjoy public support but, according to the Ernst & Young survey that I cited earlier, it also has the support of 78 per cent of businesses that operate in Scotland across an array of sectors. As an aside, I believe that that shows that the Government can act in the public interest by collecting taxes that are duly owed by businesses without scaring them away or damaging the economy, which is a scenario that some are all too keen to depict. I suggest that the UK Government might wish to reflect on that. The introduction of LBTT is the first step towards a Scottish approach to a fairer taxation system, and it is important that it is achieved with as much consensus as possible. I am encouraged that that has been the case, in committee and in the chamber, with a majority of amendments being agreed to without division. I am confident that, following the bill’s passage and when the improvements and benefits of it are realised, it will become apparent that all—and not some—tax powers should be devolved to the Parliament.

All else being equal, if everyone pays their fair share and avoidance is eliminated, people will pay less than would otherwise be the case. That is what I should have said.

As an enthusiastic supporter of independence, I welcome the cabinet secretary’s statement. Given that the Chief Secretary to the Treasury, Danny Alexander, again cancelled his scheduled appearance before the Finance Committee last month, what explanation has the UK Government provided for its decision to remove £103.5 million of resources from the Scottish budget and replace that with loans less than two weeks before the beginning of the financial year? How has that impacted on the Scottish budget and the Scottish Government’s financial flexibility, notwithstanding what might be announced by the chancellor next week?

4. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on “The Range and Magnitude of Alcohol’s Harm to Others”, which was commissioned by the Foundation for Alcohol Research and Education in Australia. (S4O-02235)

“The Range and Magnitude of Alcohol’s Harm to Others” is the most detailed study of alcohols impact ever, drawing on and analysing a wide variety of existing and newly developed data for the police, health services, treatment and child protection agencies, helplines and so on. The work enumerated the types of harm that can occur due to another’s drinking and the different types of relationship between the drinker and the person harmed. Australia is not Scotland, but I am sure that we can see parallels between our two societies. Given the scale of Scotland’s problems with alcohol, are there policy implications that we can consider deriving from the study?

Just for clarification, I point out that the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development defines “sustainable economic growth” as “the upward trend in environmentally adjusted net domestic product (EDP) under certain conditions and assumptions”. Ergo, it is the rate of growth that can be maintained without exhausting natural resources and creating problems for future generations. I hope that that clarifies it for everyone.

First, I apologise to Anne McTaggart for not thanking her for accepting my intervention earlier. In the current economic climate, it is more important than ever to ensure that we have a well-considered and detailed planning framework, which will help to support recovery, attract investment to Scotland, create the maximum number of jobs and bring the greatest benefit to our society. Of course, economic benefits, although they are vital, must not be allowed to undermine Scotland’s natural environment. We must also be mindful of our commitment on and contribution to the reduction of harmful greenhouse gases. The draft national planning framework meets both key requirements—more so than NPF2 did. I am the member for Cunninghame North, and for my constituents the most important aspect of NPF3 is the removal of any possibility that a coal-fired power station will be built at Hunterston. I have campaigned against the proposal, along with community and environmental groups, for a number of years. Indeed, I contacted every adult in the communities that would have been affected, detailing how they could register their opposition to the proposal, and I submitted a 28-page objection to the Scottish energy consents unit in August 2010. The application to build the power station generated some 21,000 objections—more than any other application has generated in Scottish planning history. I am happy to say that in the face of such vociferous opposition, and as a result of funding uncertainty, Ayrshire Power Ltd withdrew its application to build the unwanted power plant. SNP councillors on North Ayrshire Council supported, and delivered, the removal of the potential coal plant from the local development plan. For a host of other reasons, it is now highly unlikely that a similar application will be submitted. However, the possibility remained of great concern to local residents and environmental groups. Of course, such a decision should not be taken purely on the basis of local opposition. If we consider the proposal in the national context, we can see that its continued inclusion would be contrary to the Scottish Government’s stated objectives. Paul Wheelhouse MSP, the Minister for Environment and Climate Change, recently reaffirmed the Scottish Government’s commitment to combating climate change: “A low carbon economy is not only essential to address our need to reduce global emissions, but it will bring significant economic benefits and opportunities for our communities, businesses and industry and our environment—that is why we are committed to working with the people of Scotland to maximise those opportunities and address possibly the greatest challenge facing society today.” I completely agree. Scotland’s emissions have fallen by 24.3 per cent since 1990. We are ahead of the rest of the UK and are now more than half way towards achieving our world-leading target of reducing emissions by 42 per cent by 2020. Therefore, allowing, let alone encouraging, the construction of a coal-fired power station at Hunterston would have been a step in the wrong direction. On 9 November 2012, I submitted a detailed response to the consultation on NPF3, requesting that a new power station at Hunterston be removed from the framework. I also corresponded and discussed the power station’s removal with the Minister for Local Government and Planning, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth and the Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism. I am particularly pleased that the Scottish Government has listened to my concerns and the concerns of my constituents, and that it now does “not consider there to be a need to retain a new power station at Hunterston as a national development in NPF3.” Taking the decision to remove any potential for a coal-fired power station at Hunterston from NPF3 will reassure my constituents and will be a great relief to them.

We can always do better—there is a lot of truth in that. To be fair, the application took a very long time to come to fruition. There was a public inquiry and the application was withdrawn before the inquiry concluded. We should, of course, always work towards more democratic accountability. Regarding energy production and the environment, I was pleased to note that proposals that are being brought forward may outlaw the construction of wind farms in Scotland’s national parks and designated scenic areas. Onshore wind energy is clearly an important part of Scotland’s progressive blend of energy production, but that step is certainly a welcome development that will do much to ensure that Scotland retains its place as one of the world’s most scenic nations. I attempted to bring forward a member’s bill to protect Scotland’s regional parks from such developments, but found after two years of deliberations and discussions with the non-Executive bills unit that the reserved provisions of the Electricity Act 1989 made that impossible. I am therefore keen to hear from the Government about how that protection for national parks will be achieved and whether it will consider extending such protections to regional parks, which surely should be classified as scenic areas and deserve to be safeguarded. On another matter that relates to my constituency, I am pleased to note that the updated airport enhancements incorporate wider plans for investment, including improvements to surface access, airport facilities and the creation of master plans for Glasgow and Prestwick airports. I am confident that improvements to both those key transport hubs will help to ensure that Scotland continues to punch above its weight in relation to foreign direct investment, will help to mitigate the adverse impact of air passenger duty on those airports, and will create and sustain jobs. Commitments to high-speed rail between Glasgow and Edinburgh and south to London are also extremely welcome. When they are delivered, they will offer Scotland a competitive advantage by creating a rail service to serve those who wish to do business in Scotland as well as the general public. Against the backdrop of cuts to public spending and reduced private investment, the measures in NPF3 are to be welcomed. They set out a clear and ambitious development strategy for the next 20 to 30 years. The framework delivers on a number of fronts. It will help to create jobs and make Scotland an attractive place in which to do business and invest. Further, it is conscious of Scotland’s unique scenic landscapes and mindful of our global responsibility to help to protect our environment for ourselves and future generations.

I congratulate my colleague Christina McKelvie on securing this important debate. I recall the day, just over a decade ago, when I was told that my Aunt Eileen, my father’s older sister, had motor neurone disease. Over the next 22 months prior to her death, my aunt became increasingly trapped in her own body, unable to move or speak, to her great torment. Her suffering caused great distress to the entire family, who felt helpless to assist her or to slow in any way her inexorable decline towards death. Motor neurone disease occurs when specialist motor neurones in the brain and spinal cord stop working properly. Because of its poor prognosis, fewer than 400 people have the illness at any one time in Scotland. Motor neurones control important muscle activity such as gripping, walking, speaking, swallowing and breathing. As the condition progresses, people with MND find those activities increasingly difficult and eventually impossible to do. MND is one of the rarest neurological conditions and mainly affects adults who are over 40. Most cases develop in people who are between 50 and 70 years of age. The causes are unknown, but it seems likely that genes are a factor, at least for some people with the condition. That is because 10 per cent of people who develop MND also have a close family relative with it. Motor neurone disease is a degenerative condition that progresses rapidly and sufferers have complex needs that affect all aspects of their lives. Maintaining the ability to communicate is essential and every effort should be made to encourage advanced care planning to ensure autonomy during the course of the disease. MND Scotland is the only motor neurone disease charity in Scotland providing care, information and funding for research and it believes that “the last months of a person’s life should be spent in the loving care and support of their family—not going through highly stressful Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) questionnaires, interviews and medical assessments with the constant anxiety that the family could have their benefits removed at any point.” MND Scotland also believes that “putting people with MND through this process is illogical and a waste of taxpayers’ money”. Indeed, it is just plain daft. From 1 April 2013, as we have heard, social sector households that contain working age claimants of housing benefit who are deemed to underoccupy their property have had their housing benefit reduced. MND sufferers were inexplicably included. With the forthcoming introduction of universal credit and the resulting reduction of disability premiums, people with MND could also lose up to £70 per week from their benefit entitlement. The DWP and the UK Government have not taken cognisance of specific groups in their blunderbuss approach to welfare reform. As Christina McKelvie said—it is worth repeating—there is a need to exempt people with MND from the work capability assessment, allocate them to the employment and support allowance support group and award full benefit. It is also sensible to exempt from the bedroom tax those who have had their homes significantly adapted to their needs and who are unable to share a bedroom due to an array of medical equipment that is necessary to keep them safe during the night; to automatically transfer, without assessment, people with MND to the enhanced rate of personal independence payments when they are receiving high rates of disability living allowance mobility and care components; and, under special rules, to extend the timescale in which death from terminal illness can reasonably be expected from six to 12 months. Families who are dealing with a devastating terminal illness such as MND should not be forced to go through the additional stress and anxiety that are caused by the cuts to the welfare programme. The UK Government should alleviate some of the burden for people with MND and their families. We urge it to adopt a commonsense approach by acknowledging not only that people with MND are unjustly suffering from welfare reform, but that it is cruel to assess them for welfare benefits that they are clearly entitled to. Volunteers in the Scottish Parliament are being urged to participate in a project to record their speech to help potentially reconstruct patients’ voices that have been damaged through motor neurone disease. Along with Christina McKelvie, I urge people to volunteer to help give patients their voices back as part of the MND voice bank project. The project, which will run in the Scottish Parliament for the next two months, is organised by the Euan MacDonald centre for motor neurone disease and the University of Edinburgh’s informatics team. Many individuals with MND and other devastating conditions such as stroke, multiple sclerosis and Parkinson’s disease lose their voice, and the project aims to use recorded donor voices to reconstruct the patient’s voice, as near to the original as possible.

4. To ask the First Minister what impact the United Kingdom Government’s proposed spending reductions for 2015-16 will have on the Scottish Government’s budget. (S4F-01442)

Yesterday, Ernst & Young published its annual foreign and direct investment survey, which shows that Scotland has a “sparkling investment performance” and that “there is no sign of investors being deterred from coming to Scotland”— by the independence referendum— “if anything, the reverse appears to be true.” The First Minister will know that the Institute for Fiscal Studies informed the Finance Committee that by 2018, if we remain in the UK, the standard of living will be lower than it was in 2001. Does he agree that the gains made for Scotland by his Government are now at the mercy of Westminster’s austerity agenda? Shadow chancellor Ed Balls admitted on Monday that it would lead to even deeper cuts should Labour return to power, and Ed Miliband has confirmed today that he would end universal benefits. Does the First Minister agree that the only way to secure prosperity and social justice for Scotland is with independence through a resounding yes vote next year?

I congratulate Paul Martin on securing the debate. The role of community-based housing associations is integral to the delivery and management of high-quality housing stock in Scotland. The Scottish Government has worked closely with housing associations and local authorities to increase the availability of socially rented and affordable housing across the country. Of course, the collapse in the housing market, and the United Kingdom Government’s frankly misguided decision to cut public spending—both capital and resource—has had a profound impact and set particularly difficult challenges and problems that the Scottish Government has had to react to and mitigate. The challenges in delivering a housing programme are many and varied. Changing demographics, energy efficiency, different housing types, changing household sizes and changes to the welfare system, financing and the blend between social renting and homes for ownership must all be taken into account. Unlike Westminster, the Scottish Government has prioritised the delivery of social and affordable housing. It has achieved a great deal, despite a 26 per cent cut in available capital. In spite of unprecedented budgetary constraints, we are two years into our five-year target of delivering 30,000 additional affordable homes. The Government is on course to meet that commitment, having worked with local authorities and housing associations to deliver almost 12,900 affordable homes so far, almost 10,000 of which are for social rent. To encourage an increase in house building, the Government reduced the level of subsidy per unit delivered through the innovation and investment fund. That reflects the fact that building costs are significantly lower than in previous years, and it encourages providers to make full use of other resources available to them. That is a sensible approach during such straitened times and ensures a maximum return for taxpayers’ money. It should also be remembered that the Scottish Government recently launched a £10 million house-building infrastructure loan fund to unlock stalled sites. The fund has awarded loan support to nine projects across Scotland, with scope to deliver more than 1,100 new homes and the potential to provide a further 800 in subsequent phases. That will ensure increased provision of stock, which will help to satisfy demand and prevent increased rents. In response to demand from councils and developers, a further procurement round of the groundbreaking national housing trust has been launched. The scheme allows developers and councils to jointly fund the purchase of new homes, with local authority loans under the initiative underwritten by the Scottish Government. Approvals have been secured for more than 1,300 homes, with 300 completed and hundreds more on site. Although increasing the housing stock remains a priority, the Scottish Government has introduced many more measures to stimulate the housing market and improve existing stock. For example, it recently committed £120 million over two years to support a new shared equity scheme to help first-time buyers and those looking to buy a new home. Additional funding in the previous budget was allocated to programmes such as those for adaptations, whose budget increased by 25 per cent on the previous year’s figure, and for retrofitting properties with energy efficiency measures to reduce fuel poverty and improve tenants’ lives. The Scottish Government is also providing £2.5 million to social landlords to help tenants to access the advice and assistance that they need following the implementation of the regressive bedroom tax. As we know, the Labour Party has called continually for more investment in housing—as it has in every sphere of public spending. Indeed, Ken Macintosh called for all additional resources received in Barnett consequentials to be spent on housing, at the expense of education, healthcare, justice and infrastructure, while Margaret McDougall called for tens of thousands of one-bedroom flats to be miraculously built in the six-month period running up to the bedroom tax’s imposition. The Scottish Government is pioneering new initiatives and innovative funding methods. It is evident that the Government is committed to improving and expanding Scotland’s affordable housing stock. It will work with community housing associations, local authorities and others to ensure that its achievements thus far are built on.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

You never took any.

In his introductory speech, Paul Martin mentioned Labour’s abysmal record in Glasgow of building poor-quality houses that had to be dynamited in their tens of thousands in subsequent years. Can the minister confirm that social rented houses are now being built to the highest possible standards?

4. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the “State of Nature” report and the challenges it contains to prevent further loss of biodiversity. (S4O-02208)

I have a unique species in my constituency—the Catacol whitebeam, on the Isle of Arran. According to the “State of Nature” report, the reasons for the decline of animal and plant species are “many and varied”. Clearly, we all have to play our part in stemming the decline in Scotland’s wildlife. What is the Scottish Government doing to encourage the public to take practical action to protect wildlife through conscientious gardening and land management?

4. To ask the First Minister what assessment the Scottish Government has made of the claims in the Treasury analysis paper regarding an independent Scotland’s ability to provide protection for savers and pensioners. (S4F-01398)

The First Minister will note that the Treasury is acting not as an honest broker but as an integral part of the no campaign. How concerned is he that the Treasury will again deliberately deceive the Scottish people about Scotland’s oil wealth, as it and the then Labour Government did in the 1970s? The McCrone report exposed that some years ago and the former Labour Chancellor of the Exchequer Denis Healey admitted that only last weekend. Does the First Minister agree that, whether it is scaremongering over an independent Scotland’s place in the world, over pensions or over the currency, people cannot trust a single word that the no campaign says?

8. To ask the Scottish Government what criteria are used when selecting set Scottish texts for the new national qualifications for English. (S4O-02142)

In the past, higher English texts included such classics as “Ivanhoe” by Sir Walter Scott, “The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie” by Muriel Spark and Robert Louis Stevenson’s “The Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde”. Are there any plans to broaden the choice of texts to include such works, which although they are challenging were once commonly used in our schools?

If the measure was so vital, why did the Labour Government not bring it in when it was in power prior to the Scottish National Party coming into office?

Will the member take an intervention?

Yes. I am sorry, but I have almost lost my train of thought. If RET was introduced for the Western Isles for political purposes, why was it not introduced for my constituency? I had a majority of only 48, and Alasdair Allan had a majority of more than 600, which in percentage terms was a significantly higher majority than mine. Liam McArthur has said a lot of nonsense.

First, let me say how delighted my island constituents are with the improvements to ferry services that the Scottish Government is delivering. Tomorrow, for example, there will be the first sailing for 75 years from Ardrossan to Campbeltown, which is a brand-new route that will be delivered three times a week. The MV Isle of Arran began on 6 May a five-month summer season, with sailings three times a day for five months of the year. That is a permanent fixture for the first time on that route. Of course, the Scottish Government plans to roll that out over a year, so we will have a significant increase in sailings. In addition, road equivalent tariff will be rolled out to Arran from October next year, which will bring many more visitors and a great boost to Arran’s tourism economy, and the island of Cumbrae, in my constituency, will benefit from RET before the end of the parliamentary session. Over the next decade, the Scottish Government, through Caledonian Maritime Assets Ltd, will invest £50 million to £56 million in two new vessels, which will come on stream in 2016-17 and 2022-23. Moreover, Brodick’s £18 million harbour development is due to come on stream by December 2015. I do not recall Labour supporting RET much, either in the run-up to 2007 or subsequently. Richard Baker body-swerved my intervention and said that RET was in Labour’s 2011 manifesto. That might be so, but it is only because Labour saw that RET was working well under the SNP. It took the SNP—not the Tories, not Labour and not the Liberals—to bring in RET. In February 2008, Labour’s then transport spokesman, Des McNulty, said that the money should have been used to lower all ferry fares. In September of that year, he said that the policy was “unfair, discriminatory and politically motivated.”—[Official Report, 10 September 2008; c 10624.] It is Labour’s U-turn on the issue that is politically motivated.

In a moment. The Tories also seem to be converts to RET. As for the Lib Dems, in 2004 the Lib Dem Minister for Transport, Nicol Stephen, said: “A road-equivalent tariff scheme would generate significant additional subsidy costs, which could be funded only by displacing high-priority transport projects. We have no current plans to introduce ferry fares based on road-equivalent tariffs.”—[Official Report, Written Answers, 11 May 2004; S2W-7850.] Councillor McNamara, the leader of the opposition in North Ayrshire Council, said that introducing the RET subsidy to the Western Isles meant robbing the taxpayers of North Ayrshire. Perhaps Rhoda Grant agrees with Councillor McNamara.

It is difficult to see where the Labour Party is coming from. It wants to raid the money tree and says that we should have RET and lower fares on every route—as well as all the other commitments that it makes across the entire portfolio. One wonders where such a huge amount of money is meant to come from. I dare say that we will hear nothing whatever about that in the debate. On the TSSA issue, I thank Elaine Murray for her work in organising the meeting and for her support for a motion that I lodged on the matter. Although the motion is in my name, I consider it to have been lodged jointly with Elaine Murray. It has been signed by 41 MSPs. There is great concern among SNP members about the impact of a 25 per cent cut on Caledonian MacBrayne employees—as there would be about any employees facing such a cut. I support what Richard Baker said on the matter. I realise that there are two sides to the story and that CalMac says that cutting wages is about ensuring a healthy work-life balance, but I am not convinced by that. Like the minister and other members, I want the dispute to be resolved in a positive way, as soon as possible and without diminution in pay for workers.

5. To ask the Scottish Government what improvements have been made to dental services in NHS Ayrshire and Arran since May 2007. (S4O-02129)

I thank the cabinet secretary for detailing the tremendous progress that has been made under this Government in providing dental services in Ayrshire and Arran. What further improvements will be made to those services, and what will be the timescale for their delivery?

I congratulate Margaret McDougall on securing this debate, which is on a matter that I first raised at First Minister’s question time on 20 December last year. In the months since, the cabinet secretary, Michael Russell, has chaired a number of meetings that have involved numerous stakeholders, including North Ayrshire Council, Highlands and Islands Enterprise, the University of London, the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council, staff representatives and others such as the marine alliance for science and technology for Scotland and the Scottish Association for Marine Science, to secure the future of the university marine biological station Millport. On Tuesday 30 April, I accompanied Mr Russell when he addressed the staff. On the same day, North Ayrshire Council’s Scottish National Party cabinet met to discuss the proposed marine station closure, the prospect of up to 28 job losses at the facility and what could be done to prevent that. I am delighted that the council has appointed Mr Paul Durrant, director of business development at the University of Abertay Dundee, to act on its behalf and with HIE on proposals for the future development of the Millport facility. The council will also work closely with Cumbrae Community Development Company to deliver local solutions to the closure. CCDC has appointed its company secretary, Mr Stephen White, to prepare an analysis and business plan for the continued educational use of the facility. The aim is to transfer the assets and establish a trust this summer to ensure continuity of the business. Alan Hill, who is a local councillor and CCDC director, has been leading on those issues for the council. Council officers have worked hard to identify solutions, and Mr White has also worked virtually non-stop on the matter in recent weeks. I hope that the new proposals will show a way forward for the station and, in particular, ensure that field studies work on the island is safeguarded and a strategy is developed to allow the business to grow. Discussions are on-going with the University of London to secure a smooth transfer of assets and a legacy commitment. The continued involvement of higher education establishments in the station’s future is also crucial. A huge effort has taken place behind the scenes. Mr Russell secured a delay in closure of several months while co-ordinating work to keep stakeholders involved, informed and working together. His office has also approached all 10 Scottish universities that have an interest in marine biology to seek their involvement in the station, although to date, none has yet indicated an interest in taking over the facility. He has also ensured continuing SFC funding. There is a widely held view that an injection of capital—an issue that I pursued over a number of years, under the leadership of Professor Atkinson before he retired—would resolve the situation. However, while money—capital and revenue—is an issue, and chronic underinvestment over four decades has undoubtedly led to the current state of affairs, academic leadership from a recognised institution is essential if the UMBSM is to continue to deliver the same level of academic excellence as before. While the initial piece of work that is being commissioned will focus on the marine station, the council’s SNP cabinet agreed to a second phase of development aimed at boosting the existing community development plan and building on the potential for tourism and other developments on the island. That will include supporting and developing existing businesses; improving the streetscape and public realm, including the pier; reviewing land allocations to enable better development of the island’s tourism offer; and finding ways to improve and develop the Cumbrae brand through better marketing and tourism development. Plans should be concluded by next month and, once future proposals for the station have been confirmed, potential funding sources will be identified, with a view to allowing the facility to operate self-sufficiently, without the need for on-going revenue support. To that end, there have been significant commitments of funding from HIE and North Ayrshire Council. Everyone with an interest in the wellbeing of Cumbrae, its people, local businesses and, importantly, the staff employed at the UMBSM continues to strive to deliver the best possible outcome for the island at this difficult time. It is solutions that we need now, rather than continued discussion of a situation that we already know exists.

5. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the statement in the Electoral Commission advice on spending limits for the referendum on independence for Scotland that “It is clearly important that the campaign rules should not encourage perceptions of unfairness that could damage voters’ trust in the referendum process or result.” (S4O-02069)

Lord Ashdown, the former United Nations high representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, is the latest figure to condemn the no campaign for accepting money from Tory donor Ian Taylor, because of his allegedly close ties to Balkan war criminals. Does the cabinet secretary share my concern that no campaign leader Alistair Darling’s active defence of questionable donations is failing the high standards that people rightly expect of the referendum process?

Does the cabinet secretary agree that Scotland would have a much stronger manufacturing base if, between 1997 and 2007, when Tony Blair was Prime Minister, we had not lost 37 per cent of all manufacturing employment in Scotland, including more than half of Ayrshire’s manufacturing employment?

I am pleased to highlight key areas that the Finance Committee considered following its stage 1 evidence taking. The Scotland Act 2012 devolves a range of taxation and borrowing measures: powers to borrow for capital projects; powers to set a Scottish rate of income tax to replace a 10p in the pound income tax reduction for Scottish taxpayers across all bands; and powers to set taxes on land transactions and disposal to landfill. The Landfill Tax (Scotland) Bill was introduced last week and the tax management bill will be introduced later this year. The Land and Buildings Transaction Tax (Scotland) Bill provides for the rules and structure of LBTT as a tax levied on anyone buying, leasing or taking rights—such as options to buy—over land and property. It covers residential and non-residential transactions, including the purchase, lease or licence of options over commercial properties such as shops, offices, factories, land for development and agricultural or forestry land. Our report identifies issues that emerged from the evidence that was given. I will first highlight tax bands and rates. The Scottish Government will replace the slab structure of stamp duty land tax—a tax that is to be disapplied under the Scotland Act 2012—with a progressive structure, which will include a nil rate band and at least two others. Witnesses supported that approach. For example, the Edinburgh Solicitors Property Centre is “fully supportive of LBTT being a progressive tax”.—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 6 February 2013; c 2197.] The Council of Mortgage Lenders Scotland said: “While there would be winners and losers out of any new system we believe a progressive system would be more equitable and overcome some of the inefficiencies created by the slab system.” The bill team commented: “The considerations that ministers will take into account will include the expected amount of revenue to be raised”, and said that “the volatility of receipts from stamp duty land tax in Scotland over the past few years will be a factor in ministers’ consideration of how to set rates and thresholds.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 23 January 2013; c 2087.] The committee supports the introduction of a progressive structure. Some witnesses expressed concerns about how far in advance of its introduction on 1 April 2015 the level of LBTT would be known. That is particularly relevant in respect of commercial property transactions, on which some witnesses argued there could be a risk of discouraging investment. Our report highlights the fact that the cabinet secretary is not persuaded of the need to provide too much advance notice and that, as he indicated a few minutes ago, even giving notice in next year’s draft budget may be too early. We recognise the range of views on the timing of the announcement of rates and bands and ask the Scottish Government to consider likely implications for the commercial property market. Regarding scrutiny of the proposed bands and rates, the Subordinate Legislation Committee can see no reason why, if the affirmative procedure is required for the initial use of the power to set them, the same level of scrutiny should not be required for the use of the power thereafter. It also identifies the procedural option that is available should there be a need to act quickly in response to changing market conditions. I note that the cabinet secretary intends to introduce stage 2 amendments to provide a form of provisional affirmative procedure after the first occasion on which the bands and rates are set. In its consultation on the tax management bill, which covers issues that are applicable to each tax such as collection, the use of information, penalties for late payment and tax evasion, the Scottish Government states: “SDLT … has been subject to sustained and aggressive tax avoidance. There is a risk that LBTT could be subject to similar activity.” The policy memorandum on the Land and Buildings Transactions (Scotland) Bill states: “all transactions involving land or buildings in Scotland should be liable for LBTT, except in certain limited and specific circumstances set out in legislation.” The cabinet secretary has said, and he repeated today, that he wants to take a vigorous approach to tax avoidance, and that he will use two different types of anti-avoidance rules. Witnesses broadly supported that approach. There will be an effective general anti-avoidance rule in the tax management bill, and there are targeted anti-avoidance rules in the LBTT bill. The bill team commented on the use of and exemptions from tax relief and on how the Scottish Government has sought to minimise avoidance. The committee considered in detail the absence of sub-sale relief from the bill. The Scottish Government thinks that the sub-sale rules “act as a gateway to a significant amount of avoidance activity.” Some witnesses challenged that. Pinsent Masons said: “There are numerous circumstances where an organisation might legitimately seek to acquire land and then move it on quickly”, and went on to say: “It should be entirely possible to develop subsale relief provisions which protect tax revenues from unacceptable avoidance while retaining the economic benefits which the relief facilitates.” Some witnesses suggested that removal of sub-sale relief would impact on forward funding arrangements, where three parties—the vendor, the property developer and an institutional investor—are involved in the development of a property. Brodies argued that although sub-sale relief has been used to avoid paying SDLT, it has also facilitated development. Brodies thought that, in the absence of sub-sale relief, Scottish developers could face higher costs than developers in the rest of the United Kingdom and concluded: “such proposals for higher taxation cannot be justified or supported.” The Scottish Government gave two reasons for excluding sub-sale relief from the bill. The first was: “although we accept that a piece of land can be bought and sold twice on the same day for perfectly legitimate commercial reasons ... we were not persuaded that there was an obvious case for relieving one of the sets of transactions from tax”, The second reason was: “sub-sale relief has become an avenue for avoidance of quite substantial amounts of stamp duty land tax across the UK. We were anxious to limit opportunities for tax avoidance.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 23 January 2013; c 2088-9.] The cabinet secretary told the committee: “I have not come to a final decision on sub-sale relief.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 27 February 2013; c 2312.] However, today he announced that he has come to a decision. He also distinguished between sub-sale relief and forward funding, expressing a desire to tackle tax avoidance without adversely impacting on economic growth. The committee welcomes that distinction. The cabinet secretary told the committee: “I am not minded to bring forward targeted relief, but my mind is not fixed on that and I will wait until the committee reports in that respect.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 27 February 2013; c 2312.] If sub-sale relief were to be accommodated, Registers of Scotland would be prepared to build functionality in that regard into the system and manage it. However, the committee supported the removal of sub-sale relief from LBTT, on the basis that the necessary amendments will be lodged at stage 2 to ensure that forward funding or other legitimate arrangements are not subject to double taxation. The roles of revenue Scotland and Registers of Scotland are key to the efficient management and collection of LBTT. Revenue Scotland, the tax authority for LBTT and the landfill tax, will be established as a non-ministerial department, which will be accountable to this Parliament rather than to ministers. Its structure, functions and so on will be developed under the tax management bill. Revenue Scotland’s establishment was welcomed, as was the role of ROS in collecting LBTT. However, as the bill team said: “Resourcing is important and we are giving it a lot of thought.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 23 January 2013; c 2092.] The Law Society of Scotland said: “It is essential that the new online system for LBTT is ready in sufficient time for it to be adequately tested by practitioners and for guidance to be prepared well before April 2015.” I note that, in response to Mary Scanlon, the cabinet secretary said that that is work in progress. Concern was expressed about the readiness and suitability of the IT infrastructure. There was concern about the robustness, speed and ease of use of the automated registration of title to land system and about the need to replace it with a fully operational system that has been tested by external users as well as by ROS. There is clearly a role for the Scottish Government in providing efficient oversight and management in that regard. The cabinet secretary is confident that ROS will deliver the necessary IT infrastructure, and ROS thinks that the funding will be sufficient to design and build a new system, with “sufficient contingency”. On information and guidance to taxpayers, provision is made in the financial memorandum to cover costs in relation to staffing, printing and communication and a helpline. The definition of roles and responsibilities is important in ensuring that people know whom to approach for advice and assistance. Well-trained specialist staff and full and accessible guidance will be crucial. Clarity on compliance activity, with revenue Scotland producing milestones and dates for key deliverables, is important. We will monitor and scrutinise the implementation and delivery of LBTT through progress reports from both bodies. On transitional arrangements, costs will arise from work to enable systems to be switched off and from communications, including publicity and guidance. The Office for Budget Responsibility has responsibility for forecasting receipts for the Scottish rate of income tax, SDLT and landfill tax on a six-monthly basis, alongside its economic and fiscal outlook. It has provided forecasts for Scottish taxes to 2017-18 and specific forecasts for SDLT to 2016-17. The financial memorandum states: “It is reasonable to assume that receipts from LBTT will be equivalent to those from SDLT at present and the block grant adjustment will be broadly equal to the level of SDLT receipts.” Homes for Scotland expressed concerns about the strength of the housing market and believes that “significant change is unlikely in the coming years.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 30 January 2013; c 2162.] The Scottish Property Federation believes the OBR forecasts to be “wildly optimistic.” It suggests that the Scottish Government “digs in its heels” when negotiating the SDLT block grant adjustment with Her Majesty’s Treasury. There will be a one-off reduction in the block grant. The cabinet secretary suggests that, given the volatility in SDLT receipts, the fairest and most reliable means of calculating the size of the reduction would be to calculate a five-year receipt average using actual rather than forecast data when calculating the adjustment, given that “the forward estimating of SDLT is very difficult”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 27 February 2013; c 2328.] and that OBR forecasts have already been significantly revised. The committee is taking evidence on the block grant adjustment and will report before the end of May to help inform discussions of the Joint Exchequer Committee. The committee has assessed and reflected carefully on the evidence and supports the general principles of the bill. It will now aim to monitor closely the implementation and delivery of LBTT. Given the time allowed, I have not talked about charities, but I know that colleagues have raised the matter in committee extensively and will do so again in their speeches today. At stage 2, we will consider issues surrounding sub-sale relief, forward funding and non-residential leases. Given the very technical nature of the amendments that we expect, we are keen to see them as early in the stage 2 process as possible. We greatly appreciate the efforts of the bill team and the cabinet secretary in that regard.

I thank Alison for taking an intervention. This is meant to be a helpful intervention. The whole Finance Committee was keen to see something along those lines, but the problem was in finding something that could work in practice. The difficulty that the committee struggled with was not the aim or intention, but the practicality of the legislation. If a practical suggestion were made, I am sure that it would be considered.

I thank Mark McDonald for introducing the bill and for the dedication and hard work he put into ensuring that the bill was coherent and could be delivered effectively. I am sure that the vast majority of members have dealt with high hedge cases. I am happy that the Government is backing this bill, which will provide a solution to a problem that has a serious impact on many Scots’ quality of life. In my constituency, which has large scenic areas with beautiful views, high hedge disputes are an all-too-common occurrence. It is no coincidence that Jackie Baillie and I have had a number of those cases, while Stewart Stevenson has not. That reflects the beauty of the areas in the Firth of Clyde that Jackie and I represent, compared with Stewart’s area—I hope that Stewart will not remember that when I speak at his Burns night next February.

The effect of high hedge disputes cannot be downplayed. Friends and neighbours can become bitter opponents and home owners’ ability to enjoy their surroundings can be severely limited. Property prices can be affected and darkness and reduced natural light in the home are issues of concern. I have dealt with about 50 disputes since 2007. I visited a number of constituents, who invited me to see the situation for myself. A number of times, I was genuinely shocked by the size of the hedge that was the subject of the dispute. When I visited a constituent in West Kilbride, I found that the hedge towered above windows and completely blocked out the light from one side of the house. A house that should have had beautiful views of Arran and the Firth of Clyde was completely shrouded in darkness, even in midsummer. Many neighbours come to amicable agreements about the height of hedges and boundaries, but there is no doubt that resentment and bad feeling can arise when a situation gets out of hand. It was clear that some form of third-party enforcement was required. I attended a number of meetings on the issue in this parliamentary session and the previous one, and I met Derek Park, Colin Watson and Pamala McDougall, from Scothedge, to talk about the matter and hear how it could best be addressed. It was clear from the information that Scothedge supplied, often passionately, that only a legislative approach would be effective. That view is shared by many; more than 90 per cent of respondents to the consultation backed the position. I am pleased that the Local Government and Regeneration Committee thought that the bill as introduced would cover 92 per cent of current cases, which shows how robust the bill is. There is evidence to suggest that an understanding that the matter can be enforced should assist in smoothing out disputes without the need to apply the law. I am pleased that deciduous hedges have been included in the scope of the bill, which will help many of my constituents. I pay tribute to Anne McTaggart and Christine Grahame for their work in that regard. Stuart McMillan’s amendment to the bill at stage 2 has ensured that the bill will be reviewed within five years, to ensure that it is as effective as we want it to be, which is encouraging. I am sure that that will put at ease the minds of many people who fear either that the bill will be ineffective or that it is too drastic. I am optimistic that the bill will effectively tackle most, if not all, high hedge disputes, which impact on many of my constituents. I am delighted that the Scottish Government will support the bill. Such legislation has been talked about in the Parliament since 1999, when Scott Barrie raised the issue. I will certainly support the bill at decision time. I realise that one or two members were keen that single trees be included in the bill, but I note the committee’s recommendation that that should not happen, given the importance of heritage trees, the need for proper assessment of biodiversity and other issues. The bill might not cover every aspect that people wanted it to cover, but as far as most members are concerned, it is as robust a bill as we could have produced in the circumstances. It is a tribute to the Parliament that at last we have legislation that is deliverable and can be effectively enforced.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to assist people without power in Arran, Kintyre and elsewhere following the recent severe weather. (S4T-00296)

I thank the minister for his comprehensive reply. I understand that SSE has 170 engineers working on Arran and has brought in seven mobile food outlets and 30 generators to restore power, and that the police, the fire service, CalMac and others have been working day and night to help the people of the island of Arran, which is in my constituency. Of course, what the island will need ultimately is a permanent upgrade of its electrical infrastructure. When is the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets likely to agree to the provision of new electrical infrastructure for the island?

Given the minister’s visit yesterday, does he agree that what has been happening in the difficult circumstances of the power outage on Arran has shown the high level of community spirit and resilience of the island’s communities, particularly the hard-working volunteers whom he mentioned, who have put in sometimes 18 hours-plus a day to help their fellow islanders keep warm, to deliver food, to clear snow and to aid communications?

Scotland’s financial strength is the key to securing a prosperous independent future—a future that unionist members do not wish us to have. In a democracy, we have choices to make and each of us respects the right of others to have a different opinion and see things from a different perspective. I have often wondered what it must be like to be a unionist MSP, waking up each day wondering how best to make my country look poor, inept and insecure, and wondering which group of citizens to try to scare into the no camp: maybe pensioners, by telling them that there will be no state pension in an independent Scotland; the sick and the vulnerable, by saying that there will be no NHS; or those who are just trying to get by, who are told that economic oblivion will follow a yes vote. Surely—even when it is dressed up a little, as it was, at first, by Ken Macintosh—it cannot provide much job satisfaction to have to make a career out of slagging off the prospects and potential of one’s own country and seeking to undermine our national self-confidence and belittle Scotland at every turn. I hope that, sometime, the scaremongering will stop and a supposedly positive case for the union will be made. However, I have seen little of that today and I am not holding my breath. For decades, the old myth that Scotland—the cradle of the enlightenment—is a subsidy junkie surviving on English handouts has been peddled by myriad unionist politicians in a deliberate attempt to foster an inferiority complex north of the border and keep Scotland in its place. Happily, that myth has been debunked. Time and again, report after report has shown Scotland’s financial position to be stronger than the UK’s. Indeed, the day that we hear a Tory Prime Minister accept that Scotland would “of course” be able to stand on its own two feet, we know the game is up.

If Mr Gray did as we did in the Finance Committee and considered the issue of pensions in the context of all western European countries, he would see that they all face challenges. The Scottish challenge is not worse than anyone else’s. What upsets me is that Labour always tries to put Scotland down, saying that we have a unique problem—pensions, the recession or whatever it happens to be—and that, somehow, our people are too inept to be able to make a better fist of it than the UK. The reality is that Labour would rather that Scotland was run by the Tories in London than was independent. Mr Chisholm talked about oil revenues being less in the 1990s, but if we had been independent in the 1970s—which might have happened, if the Labour Government had not deliberately lied about Scotland’s oil prospects then—we might have saved ourselves 18 years of Tory Government and would have been able to re-equip our economy for the 21st century so that we could enjoy some of the standard of living that we now see in Scandinavia. Scotland does well, and will do much better when it is an independent country, with its own resources. We more than pay our way, but we continue to tolerate the reactionary policies of successive Labour and Tory Governments, which brought us tuition fees; the highest fuel prices in Europe despite the fact that we have 64 per cent of Europe’s oil reserves; the worst state pension in the developed world, in relative terms; the private finance initiative; the poll tax; Trident; and the Iraq war. Scotland, with its great wealth, could choose a different path, using our resources to improve society and making decisions that better reflect the aspirations of Scotland’s people. Imagine what Scotland could do if we were able to utilise our stronger position—£4.4 billion last year—which the cabinet secretary outlined in some detail?

I would like to take Mr McIntosh’s intervention, but time is against us, and I have taken an intervention from his colleague already. With the squandering of that opportunity, how can unionist members assert with sincerity that we are better together, while the dead hand of Westminster jeopardises economic recovery, costs Scotland jobs and attacks some of the most vulnerable in our society? Like any other nation, Scotland could sustain itself through general taxation, but we also have the huge advantage of North Sea oil. Despite the alleged volatility of North Sea oil prices, I see no campaign in Norway to reunite with Sweden in order to surrender control of that resource—and, of course, Norway depends to a much greater extent on oil for economic success than Scotland would.

I have already said that I do not have enough time, Gavin. I have taken an intervention already. Remarkably, the bitter together Con-Lab alliance is desperate to talk down that remarkable natural resource and is quick to scaremonger, claiming that the oil is running out and is not worth all that much anyway. As the First Minister said earlier this afternoon—he has said it twice today—only the finest minds of the Labour and Tory parties could claim that Trident nuclear weapons are an asset and North Sea oil is a liability. We are in the midst of a new oil boom, which will see revenues increase by £3 billion annually by 2017. As the cabinet secretary has already said, we are not using the most optimistic projections. The OECD uses a figure of $150 a barrel; we are using a figure of $113. We have been conservative in our estimates. With oil and gas from known reserves expected to last at least another 40 years, using existing technology, it is imperative that future generations of Scots benefit from that huge wealth. Instead, it is being frittered away by the London Treasury. An independent Scotland would have the flexibility to make better and more progressive choices. Norway enjoys the benefits of huge oil and gas resources. Only 15 years ago, it began investing in the oil fund that has been described this afternoon. That is far more impressive than the £1 trillion-plus debt that the UK Government has accumulated. It is time that Scotland benefited from our great resource and used it to create a more prosperous and egalitarian society. All the evidence shows that smaller nations are more fleet-footed, able to adapt to economic change and operate more efficiently. Indeed, small nations consistently top economic league tables. An independent Scotland would be no exception. Only independence can secure Scotland’s financial future and allow Scotland to become the great success that it could, should and will be.

How volatile is the oil price compared with the City of London, before which successive Government have prostrated themselves?

Will the member give way on that point?

As the minister will know, all Scottish National Party MSPs deplore the changes being imposed by the UK Government. Is it not the case, though, that, three days before the 2010 general election, the then UK Labour Government brought in changes to the qualifying criteria such that, when they were implemented, of the 3,660 people in Scotland who received ILF, only 16 would have qualified if they had reapplied? Therefore, was not one of the last actions of the Labour Government, in effect, to close the ILF to new applicants?

Trident is a cold war relic that was specifically designed to flatten Russian cities. It is a military dinosaur that is rapidly losing public support. Today we have heard no good reasons for retaining nuclear weapons, never mind for renewing them for another half century. There are countless reasons why we should not commit to lumbering future generations with the obscenity of Trident. It makes no military sense, there is a serious moral question about deploying weapons that are designed specifically to slaughter millions of civilians, and the cost is astronomical. The logical conclusion of the pro-Trident argument about the big, bad world out there is that every nation should rush to develop nuclear weapons. Turkey, perhaps, or Saudi Arabia—maybe Japan. How safe would we be then? Strategically, Trident’s worth is minimal. No one believes that it can or ever will be used. In reality, it is a desperate attempt by London to assert the illusion of British power post-empire. Air Commodore Alastair Mackie, vice-president of CND and former hydrogen bomber pilot summed up the situation by saying: “We regard having a deterrent as a virility symbol, like a stick-on hairy chest.” Of course, the notion that Trident acts as a deterrent is demonstrably nonsense. As Field Marshall Lord Bramall explained, Trident renewal “would not deter any of the threats and challenges—now more economic than military—likely to face this country in the foreseeable or even longer-term future.”—[Official Report, House of Lords, 24 January 2013; Vol. 742, c 1229.] Michael Portillo described renewing Trident as “nonsense”; it is strange to see Labour to the right of him on the issue. Well, maybe it is not. Nuclear weapons do not deter terrorist groups, insurgents, rogue states or dictators. They did not deter Argentina from invading the Falklands, Vietnam from fighting the USA and China in the sixties and seventies, or Egypt and Syria from launching the Yom Kippur war. On the contrary, attempting to acquire nuclear weapons led to Israeli air strikes on Iraq’s Osirak reactor in 1981, and on Syria’s al-Kibar nuclear facility in 2007. I do not doubt that Iran’s nuclear ambitions will end in the same way. Of course, committing to an expensive nuclear arsenal necessitates lower spending on conventional forces, which reduces defence capabilities. Ring fencing finance for Trident while cutting genuinely important defence spending means that it is now a case of all fur coat, as they say. Indeed, UK forces have suffered from chronic equipment shortages ranging from helicopters to armoured vehicles to boots and body armour. Service personnel have been sacked by email, strategically important bases have been closed, aircraft carriers have been built although there are no aircraft, and £4 billion-worth of Nimrod aircraft was hacked to pieces without ever having flown. Despite those shortcomings in conventional defence, the UK Government, backed by a Labour Party that is desperate for votes in the south-east of England, looks set to commit to Trident renewal with its eye-watering multibillion pound price tag. The Tories have not wavered in their support for nuclear weapons, but Labour is all over the place, as in every other policy area. Labour members opportunistically bob and weave, trying to face two ways at once; that is hardly surprising, given that they come from a party that believes in nothing but the pursuit of office. On the one hand, Labour claims to support multilateral disarmament, but Ed Miliband and Jim Murphy say that voting no in Scotland’s referendum would guarantee another 50 years of Trident. They are the ones who are bringing Trident into the constitutional debate. It is time that Labour listened to the Scottish people, 81 per cent of whom are against Trident renewal, but the loyalty of Labour’s puppet leadership in north Britain is to the bosses in London, not to Scotland. We hear plenty of scaremongering that, following independence and Trident’s removal, Faslane will close and thousands will lose their jobs. We have heard some of that today. Those claims have been exposed as wildly inaccurate at best and deliberate falsification, which is what I would say. An independent Scotland will base conventional naval forces at Faslane and improve Scotland’s naval defence capability. That will not be difficult, especially considering the fact that Westminster does not take the defence of the North Sea seriously, with no frigates, corvettes or destroyers in Scotland, and all air reconnaissance being provided by Norway following the destruction of the Nimrods. As for those who are directly employed on Trident, only 564 are actually based at Faslane at an annual estimated cost of more than £300,000 per job. There is no doubt that that money could be invested more constructively and create many more jobs in the civilian economy or indeed in conventional armed forces. Of course, as alleged multilateralists, Labour members want those jobs to go as well—just not right now. Once again, they show themselves devoid of principles or conviction, as Ms Baillie made clear in her speech. Her remark about 11,000 jobs was absolute nonsense. Given the assumption that there would not be a boat of any size there— Jackie Baillie rose— Jack and the beanstalk—as predicted.

Actually—

I will reflect on that in due course. No one mentioned this 11,000 figure and Ms Baillie knows fine well that that is complete nonsense. Fourteen of the 15 newly independent republics that emerged from the dissolution of the Soviet Union—

—excluding Russia, removed the 9,775—

I look forward to that, Presiding Officer. Fourteen of the 15 newly independent republics that emerged from the Soviet Union’s dissolution, excluding Russia, removed the 9,775 nuclear warheads collectively on their soil. At the time of its independence, Ukraine had the world’s third-largest nuclear arsenal, bigger, indeed, than China, France and the UK combined; however, in less than five years, it had completely removed all nuclear weapons, which was a far more challenging task than removing Trident from the Clyde. Other post-Soviet nations took even less time. Tactical nuclear weapons were also removed by Poland, the Czech Republic and the former East Germany, and Argentina, Brazil, Egypt, Libya and South Africa have all cancelled their nuclear weapons programmes. In conclusion—

—if Trident leaves, the MOD has already ruled out moving it to England, pointing to the unsuitability of housing Vanguard submarines there and the potential risk to the local population, which was not taken into account in Scotland. With Labour flip-flopping on the issue and the Tories’ bloody-minded commitment to this nuclear vanity project it is clear that only independence will ensure that weapons of mass destruction are forever banished from Scotland.

I appreciate Mr Griffin taking my intervention. What has happened to the Christian, Yazidi, Mandaean and other religious minority communities in Iraq during the 10 years since the invasion?

On 17 September last year, Ms McDougall issued a press release calling on the Scottish Government to show some sense of urgency by putting in place new housing stock so that people would not be hit by the bedroom tax. Does the minister agree that it is ludicrous to suggest that 100,000 or so homes could magically be put in place in a few short months and that Labour is simply using the bedroom tax to attack this Government, rather than finding realistic solutions or criticising the UK Government that introduced this unwanted measure?

8. To ask the Scottish Government what recent assessment it has made of the reserves of oil and gas remaining in Scottish waters. (S4O-01869)

Fergus Ewing will be well aware of the McCrone report, which showed that the Labour Government in the 1970s deliberately lied to the Scottish people about the extent of our oil and gas wealth. How confident is he, as we approach next year’s independence referendum, that the better together campaign will refrain from talking down the extent of our oil and gas resources and how those resources could help to transform an independent Scotland into a more prosperous and equal society?

I will just add another 10 minutes then, Presiding Officer, if that is okay.

I am pleased to open this debate on the Finance Committee’s inquiry and report into demographic change and an ageing population. I thank my committee colleagues, our clerks and all those who gave evidence. The inquiry arose following our fiscal sustainability discussions in early 2012 and sought to identify the impacts of demographic change and an ageing population in three core areas—health and social care, housing and pensions and the labour force—and the planning that was being undertaken by the Scottish Government, councils, national health boards and others to mitigate such impacts. Our evidence sessions showed the enormity of the challenge ahead. The Office for Budget Responsibility stated: “demographic change is a key source of long-term pressure on ... public finances”. The International Monetary Fund reported: “In spite of the large fiscal cost of the crisis, the major threat to long-term fiscal solvency is still represented, at least in advanced countries, by unfavourable demographic trends.” The registrar general for Scotland said that the most elderly age groups of the population are projected to increase most dramatically. Between 2010 and 2035, the number of those aged 75 and over is projected to increase by 82 per cent. The estimated number of 820 centenarians in Scotland in 2010 is projected to increase to 7,600 by 2035. The committee recognises the extremely positive contributions, including economic contributions, that older people make to wider society and the general good. That positive contribution is recognised in Age Scotland’s report, for example. Age Scotland featured in the committee’s demography roundtable discussion. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth also acknowledged the vibrant contribution that older people can make, and that they fulfil a great commitment to their communities. A major influence on the type, level and volume of services that our ageing population require is healthy life expectancy, which is the length of time an individual can expect to live free of chronic or debilitating disease. Of course, ageing does not equate to an automatic increase in demand for services. NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde stated: “figures on healthy life expectancy demonstrate that the areas with the longest life expectancy ... also have the longest healthy life expectancy and therefore the shortest time in need of health services.” Similarly, the Scottish Social Services Council said: “The extent to which demand will rise in line with the growth in the older population is dependent on a number of factors including the extent to which increases in life expectancy” are “associated with increased time spent in good health or in illness, an issue that remains unclear.” The Association of Directors of Social Work provided figures based on three scenarios relating to whether additional years are healthy or feature chronic illness and disability. The difference in the best and worst case scenarios could be more than £1 billion annually to health and social care expenditure by 2030. Although healthy life expectancy has increased, there are large variations across the country. The Scottish Government acknowledges that “the gap between life expectancy and healthy life expectancy has, for men ... been widening.” We look forward to hearing of the actions that are being taken to bring improvements in this area. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities’ view of local government readiness is that “Local government has long been aware of the financial pressures which increased demand for services from an ageing population will bring. Even at a time when overall resources were increasing, we recognised the need to plan for this change.” The Committee will meet COSLA next week, when we will discuss the modelling that it did on the funding gap between the services that local government will need to provide and the resources that will be available. It believes that demographics and the rising number of older people will play a big part in the rising demand for services. COSLA asks whether actions being taken to close the funding gap go “far enough”. The Improvement Service, which supports a long-term shift to a preventative approach, believes that there is a: “very serious short to medium term problem of income and demand.” Our report invites the Scottish Government to detail its plans to close any funding gap—if indeed that is possible in the current economic climate—and where the shift to preventative spend would secure sufficient savings to fill the gap.

That is the nub of what our report concludes, and we will go into that in greater detail as I progress. Many of the issues that we considered overlap with work around early intervention and preventative spend, which has particular relevance when forecasting future demand for services and increasing costs. COSLA is working with the Scottish Government and community planning partnerships to “re-focus funding towards preventative approaches.” Although there was welcome evidence of that from the City of Edinburgh Council, which has developed a ten-year financial plan to identify factors that will impact on service provision and resources, the approach is not widespread across all local authorities. Some appear to be focused only on immediate three-year funding cycles. Similarly, some national health service boards referred only to short-term planning, for example within the board’s corporate plan period. Regarding the influence of short-term budget cycles on long-term planning, NHS Highland—whose work around budget integration we have previously recognised—referred to being “heavily constrained”. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth made it clear that he did not think that “anything inhibits a health board or a local authority in taking a fairly firm three-year assessment of where its budget is going and planning accordingly”, although he recognised that “Beyond a three-year period, the issue is slightly more difficult, given the perspective that the United Kingdom Government sets out.” We look forward to hearing how the Scottish Government will develop and disseminate good long-term planning practice. A key issue that emerged during the inquiry was that of unplanned hospital admissions and delayed discharges. A third of the £4.5 billion that is spent annually on health and social care for the elderly is spent on unplanned admissions. That was recognised by a number of witnesses and the cabinet secretary, who said that addressing that was “at the heart of the debate on the integration of health and social care”.—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 9 January 2013; c 2008-09, 2013.] The Scottish Government is committed to reducing the number of emergency admissions to hospital—that is a specific indicator in the national performance framework. However, the indicator’s status is shown as “Performance Worsening”. We seek an explanation of why that is the case. NHS Ayrshire and Arran stated: “if hospitals continue to admit over 75 year olds at current rates we will need twice as many hospital beds in twenty years’ time.” There is a need for better collaborative working, integration and budget pooling, which is an issue that we previously considered in the context of our work on early intervention and preventative spend. Audit Scotland said: “There are very few examples of good joint planning underpinned by a comprehensive understanding of the shared resources available.” We hope that our findings will assist the Scottish Government in developing policy for its health and social care integration bill. The Parliament and the Scottish Government must show strong leadership in building a political consensus on the need to shift the balance of care and resources, to encourage joint planning and to support more preventative approaches. An important component of the preventative agenda is the reshaping care for older people change fund. Although there is support for that fund and what it can achieve, there were concerns about the lack of evidence on whether, as Age Scotland said, it has “catalysed a shift in wider health and social care spend as hoped.” We welcome the Scottish Government’s commitment to monitor and evaluate the shift towards preventative spend. The issues of better integration, shifting the balance of care from the hospital to the home and preventative spend bring me to housing. In the housing section of our report, we focused on the demographic pressures on the housing stock, the changes in housing need, the role of housing adaptations and the new-build specialist housing. The registrar general for Scotland projects that between 2010 and 2035 the number of households will increase by 23 per cent, and that the average household size will decrease from 2.17 to 1.95 people. By 2035, the number of men and women over the age of 85 who live alone is expected to increase by 216 and 158 per cent respectively. The Joseph Rowntree Foundation stated that “our society is becoming more marked by solo living” and that that “has implications for the supply of housing stock and the need to get our act together on housing adaptations.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 11 January 2012; c 479.] A key part of the Scottish Government’s approach to delivering housing for older people is its age, home and community strategy and the adaptations working group report, which recognises that “Adaptations, at the right time, can be life changing”. A common theme was the preventative benefits that the right adaptation at the right time—which can often be made at modest cost—can achieve. For example, the social return on investment study found that, on average, each adaptation could save the health and social care system between £5.50 and £6.00 for every £1 invested. We welcome the additional funding for adaptations that the cabinet secretary announced in his budget, but there are possible limitations on the adaptations that can be made, because of the type of housing stock that we have—for example, we have a large number of tenement properties. The Scottish Federation of Housing Associations said: “we have developed a housing stock that may not be compliant with wheelchair housing needs or indeed housing for varying needs”.—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 21 November 2012; c 1875.] As we cannot reinvent our housing stock, we must work with what we have. The committee looks forward to hearing the Scottish Government’s intentions on future spending plans to support work in this area following the publication of the adaptations working group’s report. Although there is an emphasis on fitting adaptations to existing housing stock, the Scottish Government’s strategy states: “Building new, affordable and sustainable housing is a priority”. It particularly wants to see the building of homes that are of a type and size that encourage mobility, which can be called “lifetime homes”. The Chartered Institute of Housing in Scotland indicated that, without new specialist housing, some people would have to remain in their current homes, which would put pressure on the adaptations budget. Of course, some homes cannot be adapted to allow, for example, wheelchair use. The cabinet secretary spoke about the importance of addressing that issue “to ensure that we have a housing stock that is appropriate for the needs of individuals at given times in their lives.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 9 January 2013; c 2016.] Integration of health and social care services is vital. Although the Scottish Government supports shifting the balance of care and supporting people to remain at home rather than in hospital or in care, concerns were expressed about the perceived lack of attention that was paid to housing in the health and social care integration consultation and the impact that change funding is having in shifting to prevention. We look forward to learning about the Scottish Government’s health and social care integration strategy and housing’s role within that. Public pensions will be a growing source of financial pressure on budgets. Audit Scotland highlighted the widening gap between pension payouts and contributions and said that significant cost pressures have built up as a result of people living longer than forecast while long-term interest rate changes have increased pension schemes’ liabilities. Pension providers face challenges as life expectancy after retirement increases. Audit Scotland stated that “life expectancy has been systematically underestimated in actuarial assessments in recent years.” The committee also addressed labour market dynamics. Having older people in the workforce can have economic benefits—their experience, expertise and tax contributions are retained for longer—but there may be knock-on consequences for younger people starting out in the labour market, particularly at a time of relatively high unemployment. We asked the Scottish Government how an ageing society will impact on and inform the design of new pension schemes and what modelling it has carried out on the budgetary impact of increasing life expectancy on pension provision. We must prepare now for the challenge ahead. I believe that the committee took a rational and measured approach to the inquiry. The issue of demographic change and an ageing population will be with us for decades and it is crucial that it informs and influences policies and budgets. We hope that our report makes a helpful “contribution to the on-going and essential debate as to how we radically reform the way our public services are delivered in response to an ageing society”. Our report concludes that “there is a great deal of work being done both by the Scottish Government and the main public services in responding to demographic change and the impact of an ageing society”, but that there appears to be “a lack of real progress in addressing some of the main challenges and barriers which prevent the necessary cultural and structural change which is required in the way our public services are delivered. While there are a myriad of strategies and initiatives it is not clear that these are having the desired effect in terms of facilitating real change.” Our report emphasises that “while many of these strategies and initiatives are welcome they are not in themselves a solution.” We look forward to the Scottish Government’s response, and we recommend that future spending reviews include an assessment of demographic change and its impact on spending portfolios. There is a lot of detail in the report and I know that my remarks have only skimmed the surface. However, I believe that my colleagues will delve much more deeply into some of the areas that I have touched on. I will finish on a relatively optimistic note. The Association of Directors of Social Work has stated: “Increased public expenditure on the scale required to meet demographic pressures is challenging, but not necessarily ‘untenable’.” I look forward to hearing from colleagues during the debate. I move, That the Parliament notes the Finance Committee’s 2nd Report, 2013 (Session 4): Demographic change and an ageing population (SP Paper 265).

To ask the First Minister whether, in light of the fatal accident in Fairlie on 14 February, he believes that a fatal accident inquiry should take place. Also, will he ask Transport Scotland to bring forward a permanent traffic regulation order to restrict the movement of 44-tonne coal lorries through Fairlie and neighbouring communities?

I must say that I was taken aback by the Tories’ temerity in bringing to the chamber a debate on capital spending at the same time as their Westminster colleagues are cutting this Parliament’s capital budget by 26 per cent in real terms. However, without a trace of irony, Conservative members have today attacked the Scottish Government’s record on infrastructure development and capital projects. It really is quite unbelievable. Considering that the SNP is the only party in the Parliament to have recognised the importance of maintaining capital budgets in growing the economy out of recession and that it has made real efforts to boost capital spending, the Tory hypocrisy and that of their Lib Dem lapdogs is frankly staggering. Of course, while it is easy to point the finger of blame at the Tories, who, for ideological reasons, seem to enjoy cutting Government spending, we must remember that we had the misfortune to have an inept Westminster Labour Government whose chancellor promised cuts that were “deeper and tougher” than those of Margaret Thatcher. Alistair Darling, who has now been reborn as the public face of the let’s hold Scotland back campaign, and his colleagues are clearly complicit in the economic mire that the UK is in today. The irony of the Labour and Tory bitter together partners criticising the Scottish Government on capital spending will not be lost. Gavin Brown questions the success of the NPD model and rejects explanations as to why there has been some delay in delivery. However, at the Finance Committee’s meeting on 16 January, Mr Brown was offered a comprehensive explanation by both Barry White and Peter Reekie of the Scottish Futures Trust, who went into some detail on some of the difficulties that have been encountered and how things have been improved in recent months. At that meeting, Mr White explained, and I quote—

Can I at least quote Mr White first, before I give active consideration to whether or not I will take an intervention? Mr White explained: “It has always been understood that NPD financing is different in nature to capital financing and follows the progress of a project. An example is the Aberdeen western peripheral route”— about which we have heard much this afternoon— “which went through a lengthy legal process. In capital financing, if a project is held up in a legal process, the funding can be switched to and spent on other projects; however, in NPD financing, the money is allocated to a specific project and is not interchangeable in that kind of way.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 16 January 2013; c 2043.] Mr White also explained that often lengthy procurement processes—which are being significantly shortened, incidentally, to just under 18 months on average—can impact on delivery timetables. He pointed to the example that the need to renegotiate PFI contracts at the Royal hospital for sick children in Edinburgh led to significant delays.

Mr White said that procurement is being significantly shortened. Incidentally, he also said that the money to be spent through NPD would be £200 million more in the financial year 2014-15 than was originally estimated—the Tories seem to have missed that out in their deliberations. Of course, if we look at the alternative methods pursued by both the Tory and Labour Governments to supplement capital spending—Tory PFI and its rebranded new Labour twin, PPP—we see that those failed policies hung a millstone in the form of billions of pounds of debt around the necks of NHS boards, local authorities and future generations of taxpayers. In recent years, North Ayrshire Council—until last year it was under Labour control, but it is now SNP, I am pleased to say—built four secondary schools with a capital value of £83 million. However, due to the PFI/PPP model that was pursued, taxpayers will fork out £400 million over the next 30 years. That profligacy meant that last year North Ayrshire Council spent £11 million on PFI payments—a figure that will rise year on year to £16.6 million in 2037. It is the equivalent of someone buying a modest £83,000 flat and then paying a horrendously expensive rent of £1,111 a month for 30 years. I say “rent” because the property would not even be their own after those 30 years. Given their shameful records, it beggars belief that the Tories and Labour criticise the NPD model—a model in which profits are capped and surpluses are directed to the public sector. This Government has shown its commitment to boosting capital spending and has long been ahead of the curve in recognising its importance to growing the economy and creating jobs.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what progress is being made with the Cumbrae public reference group on reviewing and improving health services on the island. (S4O-01775)

Cumbrae is a particularly vulnerable community; more than 30 per cent of its 1,350 or so residents are 75 or over. Will the cabinet secretary confirm that Ayrshire and Arran NHS Board’s position is to improve and enhance Cumbrae’s health services, not least by securing a new GP practice on the island, if possible?

I congratulate the cabinet secretary on once again ensuring a balanced budget that delivers for Scotland despite extremely difficult and uncertain economic conditions and continuing real-terms reductions in the block grant from the UK Government. Managing Scotland’s finances with care and competence has been a hallmark of the Scottish Government—getting best value for taxpayers, focusing on economic growth, improving outcomes despite shrinking budgets, and moving towards sustainability through genuine efficiency and a bold pursuit of preventative spending measures. That has all been achieved while maintaining the social contract with the people of Scotland—freezing the council tax, abolishing prescription charges, and reintroducing free higher education. Today’s budget again focuses on the need to support fragile economic growth and the creation and sustaining of employment. Since 2008, the First Minister has called on Westminster to increase capital spending in order to boost economic growth. To their shame, those calls were ignored by successive Labour and coalition Governments, resulting in thousands of Scottish jobs being lost while the economy slipped into a double-dip recession. Only in recent months has the penny finally dropped in London that increased capital spending and targeted infrastructure development is the way to pull the economy out of the mire. Nick Clegg has at last admitted that the coalition got it wrong. Ed Balls, from the comfort of opposition, recently called for increased capital spending, even though we know in reality that his colleague Alistair Darling was planning cuts deeper and tougher than those of Margaret Thatcher. Even Boris Johnson has said that the UK Government must abandon its hair-shirt economic programme. For the unionist Opposition in this chamber to criticise the Scottish Government’s capital spending programme and efforts to boost the economy and create jobs frankly beggars belief and exposes their bare-faced hypocrisy. The chancellor finally recognised the need to increase capital spending and announced an additional £331 million of capital spending for Scotland. This “improves” matters to the point at which our capital budget has still suffered a 26 per cent cut over the spending period. Within a fortnight of the autumn statement, the cabinet secretary detailed how the majority of that money would be spent, including £50 million for housing, £22 million each for transport and regeneration, and £19 million for further and higher education. In his quite remarkable speech during the stage 1 debate, Ken Macintosh sprung on us that Labour’s back-of-an-envelope position was to divert the entire £331 million of consequentials to housing. Although I do not agree with Labour, I am pleased to see at least some progress and economic maturity in terms of highlighting where it would make cuts. Labour now wants £22 million diverted away from transport projects, and £22 million diverted from regeneration projects—including a £5.2 million investment in the Irvine Bay Regeneration Company, which includes £2.5 million for a new health centre in Ardrossan in my constituency, as Margaret McDougall confirmed last month.

NPD, as Mr Macintosh should know, is attached to projects. If he looked at the Scottish Futures Trust project report, which came out and was sent to his colleagues in the Finance Committee, he would know that that was the position. [Interruption.]

I am astonished that Mr Macintosh did not even mention the resource implications in his speech. Last month, he said that resources would be provided through underspend savings and efficiency and Rhoda Grant went on to say that £200 million should be spent on fuel poverty alleviation. That was not mentioned by Mr Macintosh today. I wonder whether Rhoda Grant will mention it—last month she was totally unable to say where that money could come from.

I thought that Labour might come up with some of the solutions. Labour is supposed to be providing alternatives to the Scottish Government, but it is utterly incapable of doing so. The cabinet secretary tried to engage with parties across the chamber to find common ground. Clearly he was not able to do so, but he was still able to find an extra £61 million for colleges over the next two years, an additional £40 million for the housing budget and an additional £10 million for investment in trunk roads. As for the Tories—sadly, Gavin Brown is not in the chamber—how much worse a position would we be in if we implemented the policy that Ruth Davidson, the Conservative Party’s temporary leader, announced on 6 November last year, which was to reduce personal taxation by 1p in the pound? She said: “I want us to look further to see if 1p in the pound is all we can afford.” If that change was made, what position would our spending and investment programmes be in, given that every cut of 1p would take £559 million off the Scottish budget?

Today, the cabinet secretary has announced a well-rounded and dynamic budget that will help to grow the economy, improve living standards and create and sustain jobs. There is no doubt that, while he remains hamstrung by the regressive and reactionary policies of the UK Government, which the Labour Party appears to want to run Scotland for ever, we will never reach our full potential as a nation. This Parliament desperately needs the ability to control Scotland’s resources and finances fully, to secure our future prosperity. Nevertheless, today’s commitments to increased national health service budgets, additional house-building projects, a boost in infrastructure spending and improved college funding settlements, and the continued commitment to early intervention and preventative spending measures, are most welcome and will make a positive difference to the lives of tens of thousands of Scots. The budget helps to protect Scotland’s fragile economic recovery during tough economic times, maintains the social contract with the Scottish people—which Labour has abandoned—and protects the universal services that Scots expect and deserve.

Support the budget.

Will the member give way?

The member talked about sustainability. Does he share my delight that today SSE Renewables announced a £212 million private investment to build an undersea electricity cable from Kintyre to Hunterston in my constituency?

How much of the additional money that Malcolm Chisholm would like to be spent on housing would be spent on increasing the housing association grant and how much of it would be spent on building additional units?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention? Rob Gibson rose— I appreciate Rhoda Grant taking an intervention. Given what she has said, what should the HAG level be?

1. To ask the Scottish Government whether any economic benefits will accrue to Scotland from high speed 2. (S4T-00229)

The minister clearly shares the view of the Scottish Chambers of Commerce and our municipal leaders that Scotland cannot afford to be marginalised by its exclusion from this multibillion-pound investment. If Scotland remains part of the UK, Scottish taxpayers will be expected to contribute a proportionate £3 billion-plus in construction costs. Does the minister agree that the UK Government is adding insult to injury through Scotland paying towards increasing the competitiveness of English cities at the expense of our economy? What does he think of the comments by the Tory MP Michael Fabricant yesterday on Radio 4’s “The World at One”? He said: “This is a long-term project anyway. Eventually HS2—and we do need a new line going from north to south—isn’t going to be completed right up to Scotland until 2050, 2060”.

By 2033, Manchester to London journey times will be almost halved, whereas the improvement from Glasgow might be only 12 per cent—it is not really a case of better together, is it? If HS2 is not to be extended to Scotland in the foreseeable future—like the Tories, the previous UK Government had no such plans—will the minister demand additional resources to upgrade and enhance the Scottish rail network to help to end the growing economic imbalance between the northern half of the UK and the south-east of England?

I congratulate Bruce Crawford on securing this debate on the terrible disease that is leprosy and the vital work that the Leprosy Mission Scotland is undertaking to tackle the suffering that leprosy causes across the globe. To many, leprosy is an archaic disease that they may have heard of only through its depiction in popular culture. That portrayal is, of course, completely inaccurate and helps only to entrench the common misconceptions and stigmas that surround the disease, which is sadly still prevalent in the 21st century, as we have heard. Leprosy has been with us a long time. A recent study reported the discovery of a 4,000-year-old skeleton in India with the hallmark ravages of the disease, which indicates that leprosy was present some 1,500 years further back than was once thought. It is now believed that the disease first appeared in the subcontinent and spread as urbanisation and trade routes grew. The disease was once prevalent in Scotland and, of course, our very own Robert the Bruce was afflicted by it. The disease is caused by the mycobacterium leprae bacterium, which attacks and destroys nerves, particularly in the peripheries of the body. Lesions on the skin are the main external symptom of the disease and the one with which most people associate leprosy. However, left untreated the disease can cause loss of sight, loss of feeling in the limbs and permanent disability. Although scientific understanding of the disease has improved and effective treatments have been established, the disease is, sadly, by no means a disease of the past, as we have heard. In 2010, the WHO reported that over 212,000 new cases of leprosy had been detected. Of those, it is estimated that around half of sufferers developed irreversible deformities and/or disabilities. Failure to treat the disease at an early stage has resulted in millions of people across the world living with the permanent effects of leprosy. The vast majority of those cases are in India and Brazil: two of the world’s fastest growing economies, yet countries with deep-seated poverty. Unfortunately, due to the stigma and fear that surround the disease, which Anne McTaggart highlighted, many cases go unreported and it is therefore likely that the true figures are far higher. Beyond the physical impairments that are caused by leprosy, it is clear that misinformation and superstition have created a disease that is, in effect, a taboo subject for many. In the middle ages, that led to the widespread creation of leper colonies, in which sufferers were segregated from society for fear of contamination. Although leprosy is infectious, 95 per cent of people are naturally immune and, despite misconceptions, the disease is very difficult to contract and cannot be spread by touch. Despite that, it is appalling to note that leper colonies still exist in many countries, with 1,000 estimated to remain in India alone. We hear heart-breaking stories of family members, young and old, being disowned and cast out of their communities for fear that their condition will bring shame upon the family. Tackling that ignorance and the social segregation that is suffered by those who have ended their battle with the disease is surely as important as enhancing the availability of treatment against the disease. Although the situation remains very serious, it is encouraging to note that real progress has been made in recent decades. Medical advances in the late 80s and in the 90s found effective vaccines to fight the disease and saw the establishment of multidrug therapy regimens. Those advances have been hugely effective and sufferers are no longer infectious after a matter of days and are free from the disease after a course of drugs that lasts around 12 months. As a result of international initiatives through the WHO and the United Nations, coupled with scientific advances and the hard work of charitable organisations, 108 of the 122 countries in which the disease was considered endemic in 1985 have now realised the goal of eliminating leprosy. That represents tremendous progress and it is interesting that many of the countries that Bruce Crawford mentioned are those in which conflict prevents leprosy being adequately dealt with. The work of the Leprosy Mission Scotland and its endeavours to bring about a world free from leprosy have been integral to that success. Through educating people about what leprosy is and tackling ignorance surrounding what it is not, the work of the Leprosy Mission Scotland continues to help remove the stigma attached to the disease and encourages those affected to seek treatment at the earliest possible opportunity. The Leprosy Mission Scotland’s charitable collections and its membership of the Leprosy Mission International have undoubtedly improved the availability of treatment, given that around 22,000 patients affected by leprosy have been treated at Leprosy Mission hospitals and tens of thousands more have been assisted financially. That has made a tremendous impact in combating the disease. In conclusion, although there is clearly more to be done to eliminate leprosy, I am hugely encouraged that medical advances, improved education and the dedication of charitable organisations such as the Leprosy Mission Scotland will result in leprosy being completely eliminated and consigned to the history books, where it rightly belongs.

I am no Mystic Meg but, following the entirely predictable tone that we heard in the speeches of Kenneth Macintosh and Gavin Brown, I do not need a crystal ball to know that they will vote against this budget and do exactly the same in 2014, 2015 and 2016. The Opposition should be honest and tell the chamber that there is nothing that the cabinet secretary could say or do that would persuade them to support Scottish Government budgets for the rest of this session of Parliament. However, contrary to what Mr Brown has just said, others are much more positive. On 20 September last year, Grahame Smith, the Scottish Trades Union Congress general secretary, said of the SNP Government’s budget that “the UK coalition Government’s dangerously irresponsible economic strategy has placed the Scottish Government in a very difficult position and Mr Swinney has endeavoured throughout the crisis to do what he can to stimulate the Scottish economy.” Similarly, today, Liz Cameron, the chief executive of Scottish Chambers of Commerce said: “We particularly welcome the continued focus that the Government places on the maximisation of capital spending and infrastructure investment. We believe that this will achieve both short term advantage in terms of delivering a boost to the construction sector and also benefit the Scottish economy in the longer term.” Of course, Labour’s nomenklatura are still seething at losing what they see, with their sense of entitlement, as their God-given right to lord it over Scotland indefinitely, and they bitterly resent those pesky nationalists not just for shaking them out of their complacency by defeating them narrowly in 2007 but for the humiliating disaster that Labour suffered in 2011. Labour are Scotland’s political chameleons and their U-turns on their U-turns, whether in relation to tuition fees, the council tax freeze or small business bonus scheme, are well known. However, Ken Macintosh seems unaware even of his own declared position. On 20 December, I asked Mr Macintosh whether he would retract his statement that switching £250 million from resource to capital would cost 8,333 jobs—a very precise figure that was obviously worked out lazily on the back of an envelope using the figure of £30,000 a job. I was somewhat taken aback by his response. He said: “I have no idea what Mr Gibson’s remark refers to”.—[Official Report, 20 December 2012; c 15075.] He seemed unaware of his own press release of 12 October 2012, which said that switching resource to capital would “suck further demand out of the Scottish economy.” Maybe Mr Macintosh should ask Labour’s press office to at least do him the courtesy of running past him the releases that go out in his name, before sending them out. So, what is Labour’s position on switching resource to capital? Ken Macintosh rose— On cue.

The reality is that those demands are not designed to be met. They are designed for public consumption. Mr Macintosh is deceiving the people of Scotland if he is suggesting that everything that he demands can be met. Then we have this nonsense today—this plucking figures out of thin air and seeking to deny £22 million each for transport and regeneration projects, £19 million for further and higher education, £11 million for economic development projects, £10 million for health and so on by suggesting that they be dealt with through the NPD route, which he should know has a procurement schedule of at least 18 months, whereas 93 per cent of the money that Mr Swinney announced will be spent within 15 months. In the same debate in December, Gavin Brown tried desperately to talk up the struggling UK Government. He asked Mike MacKenzie how many countries can borrow more cheaply than the UK can. Well, how about Denmark, Germany, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and Switzerland—to name a few European countries—or, further afield, Hong Kong, Japan and Singapore? Sadly, that number will grow after today’s revelation that the UK borrowed an astronomic £15.4 billion during December 2012. Today we have crocodile tears from Mr Brown, who moans about the £30 million health levy—no surprise from a party that opposed the smoking ban—and yet stays silent on the £1 billion additional VAT burden, the £2.5 billion costs to Scotland through the Welfare Reform Act 2012, the 81p a litre tax on fuel and the annual tax grab on public sector pensions and insults our intelligence by pretending that an infinitesimal cash increase in the Scottish budget somehow shows the generosity of a UK Government that has slashed this Parliament’s resource and capital budgets. As for the Scottish Futures Trust, the Tories’ stop-gap leader, Ruth Davidson, not only misquoted me at First Minister’s question time last Thursday—although unlike some sensitive souls on the Opposition benches I am not going to whine about it through a fake point of order—but was £147 million out in her figures. Mr Brown will have to get her to do her homework better than that. The reality is that the SFT represents additionality and will deliver key projects, which otherwise would not happen, in less time than would the Tory and Labour private finance initiative monstrosity and at much less cost to the public purse. The Tories’ dog-like devotion to their inept London bosses has left them marginalised in Scotland. Perhaps a willingness to stand up for Scotland might change that—but pigs will fly first.

Mr Brown has gone out of his way to avoid the fact that £300 million has been switched from the NPD programme to the regulatory asset base for the Borders rail project. He has not been quite accurate in what he has been saying on this subject. Opposition parties might criticise the budget bill and seek more spending on colleges, housing and so on, but until today they have not told us where the funding will come from. When in the previous debate I asked Malcolm Chisholm about this issue, he said: “People will make different choices”.—[Official Report, 20 December 2012; c 15095.] Until today, we have heard nothing; indeed, all we have heard this afternoon is Mr Macintosh’s airy-fairy idea about cancelling projects that are going to happen now to fund others in the future. It is just a case of moving the goalposts from Mr Macintosh and the Labour Party.

This budget bill has jobs and economic growth at its heart. Where the Scottish Government has been able to act to promote growth, it has done so time and again. We are investing in construction, skills, housing, the green economy and schools for the future. In stark contrast to Wales, where Labour remains in power and has cut NHS funding by a whopping 8 per cent—

—we have protected health spending. This bill supports low-paid workers through tough times. It supports small businesses with the small business bonus scheme and boosts capital investment—

Please support it.

What about the view of the STUC, which said that Mr Swinney was doing his best, given the financial predicament into which the UK Government has put him?

Does the member therefore believe that the £5.2 million that John Swinney has allocated to the Irvine Bay Regeneration Company should not go to it, but should instead be allocated, as Mr Macintosh suggested, to NPD projects?

Will the member give way?

Mr Brown makes a ludicrous point. We have had inflation over that period of up to 5.2 per cent a year, so it is almost like saying that, because people were carrying their wages about in wheelbarrows in the years of the Weimar republic, they were much better off because their cash income had increased. Surely it is real terms that matter.

Rhoda Grant mentioned £100 million to tackle fuel poverty. Mr Macintosh talked about underspends, savings and efficiencies. How much would be raised by those measures? What would that be spent on in its totality, other than on fuel poverty alleviation?

I apologise if I was not clear. Mr Macintosh was quite vague on resources. He said that money would be raised through underspends, savings and efficiencies. How much would be raised through those methods? What would it be spent on, other than £100 million being spent on fuel poverty alleviation?

9. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with the University of London regarding the future of the university marine biological station Millport. (S4O-01687)

I know how hard the cabinet secretary has worked to secure the best possible future for that vital marine research facility. Will he confirm that, at tomorrow morning’s stakeholders meeting and beyond, all avenues will be explored to retain an educational institution that is crucial to marine science and the Cumbrae economy?

6. To ask the Scottish Government what progress is being made on developing grassroots football. (S4O-01674)

I thank the minister for that comprehensive reply. Uruguay, which is a nation of 3.3 million people, has won two world cups, two Olympic gold medals for football and the South American championship a record 15 times, which is seven times more than Brazil. Indeed, Uruguay is the current holder. What can Scotland learn from grassroots football in successful small footballing nations such as Uruguay to raise the standard of our national game and ensure that we, too, can compete at the highest international levels?

Mr Macintosh will not be very happy this week after the child benefit changes. Is Mr Macintosh not disappointed—embarrassed, even—that, according to evidence that is presented in table 1 of the Finance Committee’s employability report, the number of 16 to 19-year-olds not in employment, education or training in Scotland was 5,000 more in 2005 than in 2011? That was pre recession, when Labour was in control at Holyrood and Westminster and in most local authorities in Scotland.

Young people being in training and education will account for many of those figures. Does the member not think that unemployment would be a lot lower in Scotland if the Tories had not imposed an extra £1 billion VAT burden, taken £100 million out of our pension pot and cut our capital budget by 26 per cent and our resource budget by 11.6 per cent, and if they were not going to impose a £2.5 billion cut in the Scottish economy to 2015 through their welfare reform proposals?

I, too, thank Jayne Baxter for a very thoughtful and considered maiden speech. I agree that she will be an asset to Parliament. The debate has focused on what everyone agrees is one of the most pressing concerns that Scotland currently faces. The Scottish Government is absolutely focused on tackling unemployment broadly, but it must be remembered that, during any economic downturn such as the current recession, young people always tend to suffer disproportionately in respect of employment opportunities. That is mainly due to the fact that in an increasingly competitive labour market, employers tend to employ those who have greater experience and skills and that, during uncertain times, many people are keen to hold on to positions that they are already in. That means less flux and fewer opportunities in the job market for young people who are looking for their first jobs. It is therefore clear that youth unemployment is not a new phenomenon. In evidence to the Finance Committee last year, the Joseph Rowntree Foundation highlighted that youth unemployment started to rise in 2004 under previous Labour Governments at Westminster and Holyrood—long before the financial crash. I touched on that in my intervention during Ken Macintosh’s speech. During the Finance Committee’s recent inquiry into employability, the National Endowment for Science, Technology and the Arts—NESTA—pointed out: “The proportion of 16-19 year old NEETs has remained static since 1996.” Official Scottish Government figures also show that the proportion of 16 to 19-year-olds not in employment, education or training was higher in 2005 than it was in 2011. As I mentioned earlier, the figure was higher by some 5,000 people. Unemployment of any kind is, of course, a societal ill, but youth unemployment must be considered to be worse. In the paper entitled “Increasing the Employability of Disadvantaged Youth”—which Siobhan McMahon and Ken Macintosh quoted from—Bell and Blanchflower made it clear that, at current levels, youth unemployment in Scotland will incur future costs to the Government of £200 million and will result in £500 million of lost economic output. However, it is clear that individuals suffer much more as a result of unemployment. There are many facets to the problems of youth unemployment that must be tackled to address the matter properly. The establishment of the United Kingdom’s first Minister for Youth Employment shows how seriously the Scottish Government views the matter. As we heard in Tuesday’s debate, employability remains an issue of huge importance. Ensuring that young people are well prepared for the world of work is almost as important as ensuring the availability of work. The Scottish Government has done much to improve matters on that front for Scotland’s young people, and I am heartened by the cross-party consensus on the issue. Our opportunities for all initiative guarantees all young people between the ages of 16 and 19 a training or education opportunity if they need one. The availability of jobs is, of course, massively important. With a 26 per cent cut to our capital budget, it is extremely difficult for the Government to create and sustain employment as we would wish through investment in major infrastructure projects. It is disingenuous of the Tories to pretend that a 26 per cent cut in capital and an 11 per cent cut in resource somehow have no impact on the ability to provide employment in Scotland. There were crocodile tears from Mary Scanlon over colleges; the Tories and their Lib Dem allies have completely eviscerated the college sector south of the border. There are, of course, great hopes for Scotland’s economy, with the investment in our renewables potential, which has helped to meet our demands and fulfil our environmental obligations, and is creating thousands of highly skilled and well-paid jobs. We have heard from Opposition members that more money should be spent here and there, such as on housing. In 2011-12, the Government spent £352 million on building 6,882 houses. That helped to create and sustain jobs in the construction sector. In the final year of the previous Labour Government, only 4,832 houses were completed for £562 million. Given the difficult financial situation, we are doing what we can to ensure that the construction sector works, that houses are built and that we succeed in our objectives. The Scottish Government is also doing a lot to incentivise recruitment by businesses. I was heartened when Kezia Dugdale said on Tuesday: “I know that the Government understands the potential that young people have to offer businesses; its own make young people your business initiative demonstrates that.”—[Official Report, 8 January 2013; c 15144.] I was also heartened by her comment that she welcomes the employment recruitment incentive. In a recent survey by the FSB, a third of respondents felt that their businesses generate enough work to need extra help, but only 28 per cent were thinking of recruiting. The £15 million of funding for the employer recruitment incentive to create up to 10,000 jobs will therefore be welcome. I was deeply disappointed by Neil Findlay’s speech—hardly a first. It was all criticism, with no solutions whatever. He should be ashamed of his comments on apprenticeships—that they are somehow worthless and meaningless. The minister will make it clear that those apprenticeships are being evaluated and that they make a significant contribution to reducing youth unemployment. Our manufacturing sector is not able to produce the number of jobs that it once did. For example, between 1997 and 2007, when Labour was in control at Westminster, the number of manufacturing jobs in Ayrshire fell from 28,000 to 13,500; more than half those manufacturing jobs were lost in only a decade. Indeed, Scotland lost more than 100,000 jobs from that sector. The Scottish Government is by no means complacent and there is much work still to be done to bring unemployment levels down further. However, it is clear that this Government remains fully committed to making sure that everyone has the opportunity to work and to play their part in society. MSPs can also do more and I am delighted that the Minister for Youth Employment is attending the Ardrossan jobs fair that I am hosting on 4 February, which has strong support and commitments from employers and from providers of education, training and volunteering opportunities. More members should look at what they can do as individuals to help combat unemployment in their areas.

If Margaret McDougall wants to explain how many jobs she is thinking of providing or whether she will provide any training or volunteering opportunities, I may consider inviting her.

I am trying to do something about that, which is why, unlike any of the Labour members in the West Scotland region, I have organised a jobs fair. Does Kezia Dugdale share my disappointment that, under the last Labour Government, 14,500 manufacturing jobs—more than half the total—were lost in Ayrshire?

In the previous parliamentary session, the Scottish Government extended the crofting counties to include the islands of Arran and Cumbrae to right an historic wrong, as it considered those islands part of the Highlands and Islands. This EU proposal runs counter to that. What benefits—if any—does the cabinet secretary believe will accrue to Arran and Cumbrae from the proposal to remove them from the Highlands and Islands, even if they remain in the Highlands and Islands Enterprise area?

On behalf of the Finance Committee, I am pleased to open this debate on improving employability. This is the second of three consecutive debates that I will open—these things come along like buses. I thank fellow committee members, past and present, for their contributions throughout the inquiry; the clerks; all the witnesses from whom we took evidence; and the participants in our workshops, who provided informed and wide-ranging contributions. The committee recognises the vital importance of improving employability, particularly for those on the margins of regular employment. A period of unemployment creates loss of income for individuals, impacts adversely on families and has a direct effect on Government through a loss of tax revenues and increased benefit payments. Research cited in our report has shown that at current levels youth unemployment will incur future costs of £2.9 billion per annum for the Exchequer and £6.3 billion in lost economic output. In Scotland, that equates to £0.2 billion and £0.5 billion respectively. In 2011, 12.2 per cent of 16 to 19-year-olds were not in employment, education or training. Scottish Government figures show that the figure ranged between 29,000 and 36,000 between 2004 and 2011, which indicates that the problem did not begin with the financial crash. The committee focused on how public spending is and should be directed to improve the employability of and create sustainable employment for the people who are furthest from the labour market. Our attention was particularly although not exclusively drawn to people between 16 and 24, given the high level of unemployment in that age group. In assessing the efficacy of initiatives that are intended to improve employability, several witnesses expressed the view that some programmes elude the reach of some disadvantaged individuals. Service users, third sector organisations and businesses said that the problem is exacerbated by the complexity of the skills and employment initiatives landscape. We recognise that the problem stems partly from the fact that various layers of government are involved in supporting employability initiatives. It is important that access to initiatives is clear and understood. A number of witnesses said that one-to-one support is crucial in assisting into work people who are furthest from employment. The committee welcomes Skills Development Scotland’s introduction of work coaching and seeks assurances that the programme will be properly funded, available to all who require it, and monitored and evaluated, to ensure that it meets the needs of the people at whom it is targeted. An issue that emerged among employers and prospective employers is the barriers that people in rural communities face. Such barriers include inadequate access to public transport, particularly for people who work unsociable hours, and the sometimes prohibitive cost of transport. Minerva People said in its submission: “In rural areas with mainly Micro/SME businesses, it is difficult finding employers willing to take young people on as some of the work is seasonal, transport difficulties arise if working unusual hours eg—hospitality and releasing staff for training.” Highlands and Islands Enterprise said: “The issue of small and microbusinesses is even more acute in rural areas, and some of those areas are challenged by underemployment. People might be employed, but the employment might not be using their skills fully. People in rural areas often have two or three part-time jobs to make up a full-time job.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 23 May 2012; c 1231.] Annual funding is another concern, which members and the Government will recall the Finance Committee raising in relation to its work on preventative spend. The committee was impressed by the efforts of third sector organisations, which provide vital training and employability support to disadvantaged individuals. However, the reliance on annual funding creates insecurity and uncertainty about the services that such organisations can provide over the medium term. Barnardo’s Scotland said: “there are complex funding arrangements for employability services. It is difficult for third sector organisations to develop, sustain and strategically build services and employability when there is no guarantee of funding beyond 12 months. A lot of creativity is involved in making funding work, but if we want strategic progress, we need better funding arrangements for services that are shown to work.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 16 May 2012; c 1185.] The issue was also raised during our external workshops. We therefore welcome the Scottish Government’s steps to encourage public sector bodies to provide funding to third sector organisations over three years and we invite ministers to consider further implementation of three-year funding, where possible. The committee sought to understand how successful interventions support disadvantaged people into sustainable employment. A key message was the need to invest time and resources in people. The International Labour Organization told the committee: “It is necessary to keep in mind that people’s needs and learning styles are very different, depending on their disadvantage ... The package of services changes slightly, but the important thing is the training part of it and how to focus it on the needs of disadvantaged people without seeing them as a homogenous group.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 26 September 2012; c 1602.] Who Cares? Scotland said: “employability cannot be viewed in isolation for those young people, the most vulnerable of whom are looked-after young people and care leavers, because they require a package of support. There must be consideration of transitions and whatever else is going on in their lives to ensure that they can engage with whatever courses or opportunities we put out there. For us, the solution is not to fit the young person to the programme but to fit the programme to the young person.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 16 May 2012; c 1157.] In keeping with the recommendations of the Christie commission on the future delivery of public services, we noted the importance of ensuring that national and local strategies provide for a co-ordinated, joined-up approach, while reflecting the need to assist individuals into work. The committee welcomes the Scottish Government’s continuing emphasis on improving co-ordination through local employability partnerships, including the co-location of services, and we welcome the Government’s commitment to a person-centred approach. Nevertheless, as those furthest from the labour market are not a homogenous group, those providing support should also consider needs such as an individual’s health, their housing situation and the family and community environment in which they live. The committee was less clear about the extent to which the individuals who are most in need of such targeted, multi-faceted, seamless and continuous support receive it in practice. We concluded that further steps should be taken to ensure that vulnerable individuals do not simply fall through the net. I referred earlier to annual funding. I want to talk more about that and about the need for long-term investment. As witnesses pointed out, “targeted programmes providing a package of support will inevitably cost money”. Such an approach would provide more support than standard learners would receive, albeit that it would be more expensive. Scotland’s Colleges said that “The challenge is that the funding methodologies exist to support the average learner. We reckon that the cost of the support that we are discussing is roughly double the cost for a normal learner. That includes staffing and the additional support that is needed.” Who Cares? Scotland agreed that “a bigger investment is required”, while a representative of Social Enterprise Scotland noted: “Regrettably, such programmes are expensive” but added: “We have to get the right resources: I emphasise that the programme should fit the individual rather than the individual being made to fit the programme.” The Scottish Trades Union Congress emphasised that the United Kingdom “spends much less on this area than the best-functioning labour markets in the world do” and that “Successful economies invest heavily over a period of time in the type of active labour market interventions that we are talking about.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 16 May 2012; c 1159, 1165, 1162, 1170.] The committee notes that the cost of supporting individuals from disadvantaged backgrounds into employment is likely to be higher than for the average learner—the cost is potentially double. However, the economic costs of inaction—the costs to the public purse, the wider economy, society and the individual—may be far greater. The committee concludes that it is crucial to consider the long-term impact of ineffective interventions as well as effective ones. Specific, targeted funding, distinct from funding for mainstream employment and employability initiatives, is necessary to support such individuals. That may require a pooling of resources from other portfolio areas, which the committee believes the Scottish Government should facilitate. We recognise that resources are finite, particularly at this time, but that makes it even more crucial that labour market initiatives, including employability and skills programmes, demonstrate value for money. Many labour market initiatives are measured by their success in assisting individuals to reach a positive destination such as education, training or employment. However, that can lead to the perception that reaching one or other of those targets is an end to the process in itself, rather than ensuring that the individual ultimately finds and remains in sustainable employment. Only by measuring that can we be satisfied that such programmes and initiatives are effective.

I have no argument with that. If we are to track the success of the initiatives that we are implementing, the more information that we have, the better. The Scottish local authorities economic development group said: “Quality, sustainable employment should be the outcome of all skills and employment measures, so we need to work back from wherever a young person starts on the journey and be more realistic about funding it. If a young person spends three weeks on this, four weeks on that and 13 weeks on something else, they will not build towards sustainable, quality employment.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 16 May 2012; c 1183.] The need to engage the private sector more was a topic that participants from the business community and the third sector commented on at committee meetings and at our employability workshops. We sought to understand how the public sector works with businesses on employability and skills initiatives and programmes and how public money is directed to support that. Comments were made about the range of initiatives and services that are available from different providers, which may be difficult to navigate for those at whom they are targeted. SMEs face particular challenges. In its written submission to the committee, Skills Development Scotland pointed out that there is a real issue for employers in knowing what is available, how they can access it and when changes have been made. For example, an employer might think that a recruitment incentive is suitable for them but when they apply for it they find that it has been withdrawn for whatever reason. The Federation of Small Businesses said in its written submission: “Small businesses are wary of national schemes as they suspect them of being overly bureaucratic, involving a high administrative burden, requiring significant compromise and cost for the business.” The committee welcomes the steps that are being taken by the Scottish Government to provide clarity of information to employers on such schemes. We also seek confirmation that regular evaluation and monitoring are carried out. We welcome the Scottish Government’s £15 million funding for SMEs to support the creation of 10,000 job opportunities, although we seek clarity on how that incentive will work in practice and on what criteria will be used for selection of SMEs, as well as on issues around age eligibility and evaluation. The private sector made clear the importance of consulting and engaging business nationally and locally when designing employability and labour market initiatives. Often, employers are approached only after initiatives have been designed, resulting in some initiatives not addressing their requirements. That disconnect could mean that initiatives may not help either the employers or the job seekers whom they are intended to support. The FSB believed that too much emphasis is placed on financial rewards for companies recruiting additional staff when they should be focused on getting the right person for a particular job. In its written submission, it referred to the then employer incentive initiative and stated, in relation to evaluation: “While we support the principle of investment to engage employers, we are not aware of any evaluation of these initiatives’ effectiveness—how much of an incentive do they really provide?” The committee took evidence from Lord Smith on the Smith group’s recommendations on youth employment. One of its recommendations was that the Scottish Government “should ensure that a strategy is in place that clearly defines expectations of and outcomes for local authorities in employer engagement. This would allow consistency in delivery across 32 local authorities. We feel strongly that the starting point for the strategy should first reflect the imperatives of the young person and employer, followed by local authorities and training providers.” Having discussed the private sector, I will briefly mention the public sector’s role in providing employment opportunities to those who are furthest from the labour market. Who Cares? Scotland said: “the fact is that the public sector, which includes the national health service and local authorities, is this country’s biggest employer and I believe that we should look at ourselves and the things we control, because we can do quite a lot in our own system to create opportunities for vulnerable young people.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 16 May 2012; c 1178.] Skills Development Scotland referred to a programme of work with the public sector on taking on more trainees. It said: “The Scottish Government, for example, has engaged with the get ready for work programme and the NHS is desperately keen to be involved in modern apprenticeships. However, there are balances to be struck and, at a time when the public sector is looking to slim down, taking on new staff will be a challenge. Of course, the public sector can address this issue not only in its recruitment practices but in its procurement practices, with contracts that promote opportunities for young people.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 30 May 2012; c 1269.] During the course of our inquiry, we wrote to all local authorities and national health service boards seeking information on the steps that they were taking to offer employment opportunities to disadvantaged people. The responses varied substantially. We recognise that the public sector is absorbing budgetary and workforce reductions. However, we recommend that each local authority and NHS board report to the Scottish Government regularly on the actions that it is taking to offer employment opportunities to those who are furthest from the labour market. I stated at the outset that the committee recognises that improving employability is vital, not only because of the benefits that can be provided to those who are furthest from the labour market, but because of the need to minimise the detrimental impact on sustainable economic growth, the public purse, individuals and communities. The committee is clear in its approval of several of the steps that have already been taken with that goal in mind, although there is a need for on-going evaluation to ensure their continuing efficacy. We are also clear on a number of recommendations that relate to the actions that are necessary to further address the barriers that are faced both by disadvantaged individuals and by the employers who we hope will offer them employment opportunities. I wish everyone the best in 2013, and I move, That the Parliament notes the conclusions and recommendations in the Finance Committee’s 8th Report, 2012 (Session 4): Improving employability (SP Paper 226).

I thank the MSPs from all parties who signed my motion to enable this debate to take place. I also thank Anne Macdonald, the Scottish Association for Mental Health, Health in Mind and colleagues from the cross-party group on adult survivors of childhood sexual abuse, who have assisted my preparation and were keen to highlight an issue never before debated in the Scottish Parliament. I am pleased that CPG members are in the gallery and that MSP CPG colleagues will take part in the debate. The Scottish Government estimate of the number of people aged 15 to 64 years old with problem drug abuse in Scotland in 2009-10 was 59,600. That may be an underestimate as it is difficult to evaluate an often hidden population. The national health service also estimates that around 9 per cent of men and 4 per cent of women show signs of alcohol dependence and with nearly one in four Scots smoking cigarettes, addiction is a chronic problem for many. Addictions can be defined as persistent, compulsive dependence towards a behaviour or substance. They are often beyond an addict’s self-control and he or she may be unable to distinguish between want of a substance and the need for it. Often addicts are portrayed as people whose bad life choices have led them into addiction and on some occasions that is indeed the case. There is a sense that problems are self-inflicted and there is a lack of sympathy towards individuals who are perceived as being responsible for their own addiction. However, addictions have many causes: biological, social or psychological. The direct cause has not yet been definitively discovered; if it had been, perhaps many in Scotland would not now face a battle against drugs, alcohol and tobacco. Biological factors such as the brain’s orbital-frontal cortex, which can differ between addict and non-addict, and predisposed genetic components are recognised. For example, seven genes have been identified as predisposing an individual to smoking, including variants in nicotine receptor genes, which also predict the success of nicotine replacement therapies. Social causes include addictive substance availability, peer and family pressure when those people have addictions, and social deprivation. Psychological and physiological dependency, leading to addiction, can take myriad forms—from gambling to drug abuse. Strong evidence supports the predisposition of adverse experiences to drug, alcohol and tobacco abuse. It is, therefore, important to acknowledge that addiction is often an experience-dependent condition rather than just substance dependent. That should underpin the treatment approach and, ultimately, improve the likelihood of recovery. Psychological causes involving the experience-dependent aspect of addictions often include traumatic adverse experiences in childhood leading to an increased likelihood of someone developing addictions in later life. A major component of such adversity is childhood sexual abuse. A study that was published in the French journal Annales Médico-psychologiques highlighted the connection between people being the victims of rape or sexual abuse in childhood and their developing addictions. The study explained that rape is a risk factor for post-traumatic stress disorders and addictive behaviours including alcohol abuse, drug use, repeated suicide attempts and eating disorders. Another study that was published in the Journal of Traumatic Stress in 2003 found victims of rape to be 13.4 times more likely to develop two or more alcohol-related problems and 26 times more likely to have two or more serious drug-related problems. Those results strengthen the connection between adverse experiences and addictive behaviours. According to the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children, nearly 18,000 sexual crimes against children under 16 were recorded in England in 2010-11, which is almost certainly an underestimate due to underreporting. There is no reason to suggest that, as a proportion of the population, Scottish figures would be very different. The NSPCC also published a report in 2011, “Child abuse and neglect in the UK today”, for which more than 6,000 children, young adults and parents were interviewed. The shocking findings were that one in six children aged 11 to 17 had experienced sexual abuse and that 34 per cent of victims did not report the abuse to anyone. The severe trauma that is suffered by survivors of childhood sexual abuse makes them vulnerable to addictions, and teenagers with alcohol and drug problems are 18 to 21 times more likely to have been sexually abused. Dean X, a survivor, said that to blot out “stuff from my past”, “Every day of my life ... I was taking drugs ... drinking every day from when I woke in the morning ... I took cocaine to work; valium to bring myself back down and I was drinking”. Gordon Y used alcohol to blank out the memory of abuse, too. He said: “I was alcoholic ... every time people asked I would run a mile, wouldn’t even speak to them. I didn’t associate it with what happened in the past. I just ... felt that I couldn’t understand the different feelings going on, telling myself I wouldn’t trust anyone else, the toll it was taking on my body”. Anger, promiscuity and dissociation from emotions such as love and empathy are also symptomatic in many addicted survivors. The links between adverse experiences and the development of addictions must be understood in order to recognise and manage effectively an addict’s condition. It is imperative to investigate the source of an individual’s addictions including, in far too many cases, sexual abuse when young—abuse that has damaged their self-esteem and self-confidence and that has led them to believe that addictive and destructive behaviour can help them to escape past nightmares. The link between childhood adversity and addiction must be acknowledged by prevention initiatives. It is important to consider the two components that are involved in the patient’s condition: the adverse experience and the addiction. Treatment should integrate the two components, as treatment for the addiction can be effective only when the underpinning experience that caused the addiction is treated. That approach will greatly improve the chance of recovery. The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, a branch of the United States Department of Health and Human Services, proposes two models to adopt in treating survivors of child abuse and neglect for their addictions. The integrated model addresses dual diagnosis whereby both substance abuse and childhood abuse are treated simultaneously within the same programme. The concurrent model involves substance abuse treatment with appropriate referrals being made to mental health services for treatment of the childhood abuse. In both models, teamwork between the counsellor who is delivering addiction support and the mental health practitioner who is supplying physiotherapy for the childhood abuse is essential for a successful outcome. Addiction and counselling services in Scotland offer a very high standard of care to patients. Nevertheless, it is important for services to recognise addictions as experience-dependent conditions and to adapt treatment appropriately. A recent audit of the addictions psychology caseload by NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde found that 49 per cent of patients who were receiving counselling had suffered childhood sexual abuse. Improved links with the British Psychological Society Scotland and psychologists working with survivors of childhood sexual abuse were made as a direct result of the study. Treatment for the survivors of childhood sexual abuse with addictions is very complex, and identifying the link is essential to ensuring appropriate treatment. Services in Scotland need to develop a more trauma-informed service, as neglecting addiction as an experience-dependent condition will impair the success of any treatment. I ask the minister, in responding to the debate, to advise the chamber what progress has been made so far and what steps will be taken to ensure that traumatic experiences are properly taken into account in the treatment of addictions.

On Tuesday morning, staff at the University Marine Biological Station at Millport in my constituency were given the kind of early Christmas present no one wants when they were told that the facility will close next year after the owners, the University of London, decided not to invest in modernising the facility, despite the fact that £1.7 million had already been raised from other sources. This internationally renowned centre supports 40 local jobs on Cumbrae, an island that Highlands and Islands Enterprise already considers to be fragile, and if closure proceeds specialist staff will be unable to find similar employment in Ayrshire—and possibly Scotland—and will have to leave Cumbrae, which will have a huge impact on the island economy. Is the First Minister able to advise the chamber on what the Scottish Government can and will do to prevent this facility from being asset-stripped of its vital research vessels and hyperbaric chamber and whether ministers and agencies will work to develop a rescue package to ensure that we retain this important educational facility?

I am pleased to open this debate on the Finance Committee’s consideration of, and report on, the Scottish Government’s draft 2013-14 budget. I thank my fellow committee members and our clerking staff, past and present, for their contribution throughout the process. I also thank our budget adviser, Professor David Bell, for his customary informed input. We agreed that our focus would be on whether the Scottish Government’s spending decisions align with its overarching purpose of increasing sustainable economic growth, building on last year’s work and our scrutiny of “Scottish Spending Review 2011 and Draft Budget 2012-13”, in which the Scottish Government stated: “decisions taken within this Budget have been shaped by the Scottish Government’s Purpose of creating a more successful country, with opportunities for all of Scotland to flourish, through increasing sustainable economic growth. Our Budget supports job creation”. As part of our wider investigation into increasing sustainable economic growth, the committee held evidence sessions on improving the employability of those individuals who are furthest from the jobs market. The committee recently published a separate report, “Improving employability”, which will be debated on 8 January. In our budget scrutiny, we asked stakeholders to what extent they considered that Scottish Government spending decisions aligned with its stated purpose and how that objective should be reflected in the draft budget. Given the Scottish Government’s strategy of bringing about long-term structural change, we also asked what spending decisions supported such change and what spending priorities should be in the budget. Full details are available on our web page, and I thank those who gave written and oral evidence. I will now focus on key aspects of our report, starting with the context for next year’s budget. The committee noted an overall cash reduction of 0.6 per cent and a real-terms reduction of 3 per cent in the departmental expenditure limit Treasury allocation, but the cabinet secretary said in a letter to the committee that, “As a result of carrying forward money from 2011-12 and 2012-13 and extracting best value from our capital programmes”—

I do not think that that is relevant, given that I am speaking about the report that the committee compiled, which, as the member knows, was published before the autumn statement. What I think about that is not of any relevance. However, I will go on to mention some more figures. We are all aware that, over the piece, we face an 11 per cent reduction in resource and a 26 per cent reduction in the capital budget. Where was I? In his letter, the cabinet secretary went on to say: “we are able to plan to spend (within the parameters of the budget exchange mechanism) on a slightly different profile from that originally allocated to us by Treasury for 2013-14.” Accordingly, as the report states, the budget now shows a 1 per cent cash increase and a real-terms reduction of 1.5 per cent. Our report highlights the economic uncertainty that the European and United Kingdom economies have continued to face since the financial crisis. The situation was put into context by a witness from the Scottish Building Federation, who, during a round-table discussion, said that there had been a £5.7 billion net reduction in the capital budget between 2009-10 and 2014-15. I am sure that Gavin Brown would accept that the autumn statement has not mitigated that. Concern was also expressed that work was not progressing quickly enough, and it was felt that there was a need “to get procurement moving.” The committee has invited the Scottish Futures Trust to give evidence on that and other matters next month, but I am sure that the chamber would welcome a response from the cabinet secretary about expediting the process of awarding and implementing public sector construction contracts. As the SBF put it, “we need to get jobs at the coalface and the shovel in the ground.” On procurement, the Scottish Chambers of Commerce said: “capital spend needs to be coupled with measures to ensure that as much of it as possible is spent here in Scotland on Scottish businesses. The Government is currently consulting on procurement legislation, which we hope will increase the chances of achieving that result. We hope that we can keep within Scotland as much as possible of the £9 billion procurement spend that exists in the public sector in Scotland to deliver the maximum benefit to Scottish businesses in the short term and to create the infrastructure that we all need in the longer term.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 26 September 2012; c 1621, 1617.] The SBF believes that the Scottish construction industry has a record that is second to none in training apprentices. The cabinet secretary might wish to touch on the creation of apprenticeships, employment and training opportunities in construction, which is a subject that we will discuss further during the employability debate. There is strong support in the business community for the Scottish Government’s emphasis on capital investment, and that is welcomed by the committee, but there is “a need for greater clarity both in terms of the exact additional investment which is being provided and the capital projects which are being supported.” In our session with the David Hume Institute, Professor Donald MacRae said: “capital spend in Scotland is low compared with what it has been. I realise that the Scottish Government is constrained by its total budget, but my argument is that we should look to increase those capital spending totals in each of the next three or four years.” Professor Jeremy Peat added: “it was the right decision to transfer money from departmental expenditure limit ... resources to DEL capital.” However, he went on to say that the Scottish Parliament information centre draft budget briefing “could not find out whether that money is being transferred, how it is being transferred, where it is coming from or where it is going to. It is critical that all of us, and particularly the committee, have consistent data so that we can monitor the changes during the financial year and between financial years in such a way that we know what is happening.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 3 October 2012; c 1676-7.] As a consequence, the cabinet secretary is aware that the committee seeks greater detail about the planned switch from the health resource to health capital budget and the resource to capital switch in the enterprise agency budgets, although he touched on some of that at our Hawick session. We also seek greater clarity about such switches in future draft budget documents. The Scottish Property Federation drew attention to the importance of generating consumer confidence. The committee highlighted the SPF’s comment that Registers of Scotland has recorded just under £1.8 billion in commercial property sales in the past 12 months, compared with the high of £6.3 billion during 2006-7. In his statement on the draft budget on 20 September, the cabinet secretary said that capital investment will have “a focus on transport, housing, digital and maintenance projects.”—[Official Report, 20 September 2012; c 11740.] I will talk about digital infrastructure and housing. The McClelland review of information and communications technology infrastructure in the public sector in Scotland identified savings of more than £1 billion over the five years from 2012-13, through improved tendering, procurement and sharing of ICT resources in the public sector. In last year’s debate on the draft budget, I said: “The committee asked for an annual progress report on savings that have been achieved, with an explanation when savings have not been achieved.”—[Official Report, 22 December 2011; c 5049.] Potential savings are significant, because the money can be reinvested in projects to support growth and create jobs. This year, the committee again asked the Scottish Government for an annual update on progress. Broadband provision came up at a number of evidence sessions and was mentioned by Professor Kay and at our workshops in Hawick. Professor Kay asked whether expansion of broadband access is an effective use of public money and said: “The cost of providing widespread very fast broadband is high, but the business benefits are not clear or substantial ... Bluntly, much of the benefit of very fast broadband is about the rapid download of movies—that is the really data-intensive thing that consumers use. To my mind, that definitely falls into the “nice to have” category.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 24 October 2012; c 1704.] At our Hawick workshops people were keen to make the case that the priority for people in the Borders—and no doubt in other rural parts of Scotland—is to get reliable access to the internet at an acceptable speed. The Scottish Chambers of Commerce expressed concern about progress in rolling out broadband in the Highlands and Islands. When I asked whether the Scottish Chambers of Commerce want expenditure to focus on giving Scotland a long-term competitive economic advantage rather than on shorter-term capital projects, our witness said: “Yes. We want to use this opportunity to create the kind of Scotland in which businesses find it easier to compete, to connect and to do business. By delivering capital projects, particularly in transport and digital technology, we can move towards achievement of those goals.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 26 September; c 1617.] The Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee said in its report on the draft budget: “rolling out digital connectivity to all rural communities and businesses is crucial to achieving sustainable economic growth.” We asked the Scottish Government for more detail on “prioritising internet access across the whole of Scotland as opposed to prioritising high speed broadband.” The Scottish Building Federation wants greater capital investment and for capital projects to get moving. Investment in housing is one option. The SBF said in its submission: “sustaining capital investment represents extremely good value for the public purse since every £1 invested in the construction sector can generate as much as £5 in benefits to the wider economy. Conversely, a failure to sustain investment in this area is likely to have a significant negative impact on the wider economy”. The SBF went on to say: “changing demographics and rising population are exacerbating an already chronic housing shortage and making the need for new homes even more acute.” The point was also made to the committee as part of our on-going demographic change and ageing population inquiry. The Scottish Federation of Housing Associations talked about the preventative spend aspect of housing. Unplanned hospital admissions cost the national health service £1.5 billion a year, and the SFHA told the committee: “If people have a home to which they can return, they do not stay in hospital as long. In fact, they do not need to be kept in hospital because the adaptations budget should allow for adaptations to be made to their home.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 31 October 2012; c 1753.] The cabinet secretary might want to comment on the adaptations budget for next year. We noted in our report that the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee focused on affordable housing and made recommendations in relation to that budget. The Finance Committee believes that consideration is given to affordable housing when additional funding becomes available, and I am sure that all members welcomed yesterday’s announcement of an additional £50 million. There is frustration about access to early-stage risk capital. Ian Ritchie, of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, said: “Basically, companies must find risk capital; they must sell some equity in the company in order to fund the development phase before they can build their business. Risk capital is potentially a big problem here in Scotland ... It is great that angel funding is very strong in Scotland, but there are some problems with the next stage. The next level of risk capital is almost impossible to achieve.” He went on to say: “Without risk capital, we will not have companies and we will not have an economic future, so we need to solve the problem of how to get substantial risk capital.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 3 October 2012; c 1671-2, 1673.] Outwith our budget scrutiny, we discussed the issue in May with Philip Grant, of Lloyds Banking Group, Professor Jim McDonald, of the University of Strathclyde, and Dr Lena Wilson of Scottish Enterprise. Philip Grant said: “The networks and frameworks are there, and there is private equity and support. Scotland also has a great professional advisory base that is available to companies to support them. The critical issue is working more closely together.” He also told us: “Companies reach a point at which significant capital is required. One option that is available at that time is to seek capital by in effect moving the business into another model through being acquired.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 9 May 2012; c 1103, 1102.] Access to funding is of pivotal importance in supporting and encouraging business growth and maximising company opportunities. In a budget debate last year, I referred to concerns that had been raised about whether the Government’s £500 million change fund was new money for new projects or substitute money for existing projects. The committee sought more detail about the make-up of that funding and about whether change funding to facilitate prevention is spent in that way or is diverted to other services. Last year, the committee said that it was essential to monitor the change funds effectively. The Scottish Government responded that monitoring processes were being developed and put in place for each of the three funds and that it would provide an update on progress in this draft budget. Some narrative has been provided, but there is little detailed assessment and, as our report states, there is no detail about how much has been allocated to the change funds and the preventative services that they support. Monitoring, the need for leadership and the importance of gathering sound data have been recurring themes in the past 18 months. We look forward to a positive response from the cabinet secretary on change fund monitoring and evaluation arrangements. Greater detail is required on allocations to national health service boards and local authorities, on what additional funding has been made available and on how any shortfall in the £500 million that arises from local authorities will be considered. The committee would welcome initial comments on that and the early provision of information. The committee is clear in concluding that the emphasis on capital investment is welcome, but it recognises the need for greater clarity about the additional investment that is being provided and the capital projects that are being supported, although some of that was provided yesterday. There is also a need for greater analysis of the linkage between spending priorities and outcomes, including a cost-benefit analysis of the contribution that spending priorities make to sustainable growth. On that and all other aspects of our report, we look forward to the cabinet secretary’s response. I have covered many issues in the time that was available. I could have gone into much more detail, which I am sure that colleagues from all parties will cover in the next couple of hours. I could also have detailed more of the evidence that was presented. I move, That the Parliament notes the Finance Committee’s 9th Report, 2012 (Session 4), Report on Draft Budget 2013-14 (SP Paper 231) and its recommendations to the Scottish Government.

Mr Macintosh criticised the Scottish Government a few weeks ago for planning to transfer £250 million from resource to capital. He said that it would cost 8,333 jobs. I wonder whether he will now retract that statement. In addition, if he believes that we should spend more money on the Glasgow to Edinburgh rail route, will he say where that capital funding should come from?

Will the member take an intervention?

Is it not the case that, when Labour was in power, it spent £562 million and completed 4,832 affordable houses, but in 2011-12, under Mr Swinney, 2,050 houses in addition to that figure were completed for much less public money? Does that not show that the Scottish Government is delivering affordable houses much more effectively and efficiently?

What are James Kelly’s expenditure choices?

Will the member give way?

I understand that Mr Chisholm thinks that more money from the £205 million that was announced yesterday should be spent on affordable housing. Which of the projects that Mr Swinney announced, 93 per cent of which should be completed within 15 months, should be cancelled so that we can put more money into affordable housing?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what the reduction has been in the number of hospital-acquired infections in the NHS Ayrshire and Arran area since May 2007. (S4O-01618)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his reply. What impact has that had on hospital mortality in Ayrshire and Arran and how many lives have potentially been saved over the past five years as a result?

I welcome the cabinet secretary’s statement, in particular the announcement of Ardrossan’s share of the £22 million and the fact that 93 per cent of the £205 million will be spent within 15 months. The chancellor’s partial U-turn still leaves Scotland—

The chancellor’s partial U-turn still leaves Scotland with a 26 per cent cut in its capital budget. Does the cabinet secretary agree that the UK Government should—as is suggested by people including Nobel laureate Joseph Stiglitz and Professor David Blanchflower—focus even more on capital investment and employment than on austerity and stagnation?

4. To ask the First Minister what impact the Scottish Government expects the additional capital resources announced in the autumn statement to have on Scottish employment. (S4F-01062)

Does the First Minister agree that the belated Treasury decision to heed Scottish Government calls to reverse capital spending cuts could and should have come much sooner? That would have made yesterday’s positive news on unemployment—which Opposition party leaders have today ignored—even better. How many more people who are currently unemployed in Scotland could be in work if the UK Government restored its full 26 per cent cut to our capital budget that it continues to impose on the Scottish Parliament?

The cabinet secretary will be aware that there have been difficulties for some years with the sewage pumping station at Largs and that promises that Scottish Water has made to local residents have been frequently broken. Given the problems of sight, noise and smell that local residents have had to put up with over the years, will she please say whether she would be prepared to speak to Scottish Water about the issue, so that a final resolution can be found?

I thank Patricia Ferguson for bringing this welcome debate to the chamber. I also apologise to Ms Ferguson and the chamber, as I will have to leave before the debate concludes, because I have a Finance Committee-related meeting with the House of Commons Welsh Affairs Committee. Cerebral palsy is the term for a group of disorders of the development of movement and posture that cause limitations of activity and which are caused by damage that occurred to the foetal or infant brain. As well as having a movement disorder, most people who are affected will suffer from disturbances of sensation, cognition, communication, perception, behaviour and/or epilepsy. People who live with cerebral palsy have little independent ability to walk, talk, write and take part in everyday activities. Patricia Ferguson pointed a poignant picture of the life of Dominic, a youngster who suffers from the condition. Cerebral palsy affects around one in 500 births in Scotland. Despite developments in maternity and paediatric care, the number of children who are born with cerebral palsy is not decreasing. Its most common cause is damage to the brain while the baby is growing in utero, which can be found in 80 per cent of children with cerebral palsy. Other factors can include genetic problems, malformations of the brain and maternal infection, such as rubella or toxoplasmosis. The Bobath Centre in Glasgow is the only one in Scotland to provide multidisciplinary specialist therapy for young children, which helps them to become more independent and improves their lives and those of their families. Bobath therapy is extremely effective because it is tailored to each individual who is cared for. Each child’s limitations and abilities are assessed and a care and therapy plan is devised by specialists. Bobath ensures that each child’s needs are met. The therapy plan is frequently reassessed in accordance with the child’s developments. As we have heard, the therapy that Bobath provides includes physiotherapy, occupational therapy and speech and language therapy, and one of its most successful treatments is neurodevelopmental treatment. Studies of children who have received Bobath NDT therapy have demonstrated improvements in motor function and self-care skills and improved walking, reaching, hand opening and hand use, which are all highly significant for children who are unable to develop at a similar pace to others. That shows that Bobath therapy vastly improves the life of the child and their family. Since April, Bobath has had an adults centre for people who live with acquired neurodisability caused by strokes, head injuries, multiple sclerosis, spinal cord injury and Parkinson’s disease, as well as those who live with cerebral palsy. The fact that Bobath goes out of its way to care for people with short-term disabilities as well as those with long-term disabilities makes it a diverse and giving charity. The treatment that is given to adults improves or, in some cases, restores function that has been impaired, and Bobath’s approach to treating adults with neurological disabilities, which was developed in the 1950s, has achieved international recognition as one of the most successful approaches to the treatment and management of people with neurological conditions. That treatment has been made possible in Scotland by a £100,000 grant from the Robertson Trust for a two-year pilot scheme to provide adult therapy. The excellent Bobath Scotland charity also provides a parent support group at its centre in Glasgow, which gives parents and carers the opportunity to meet others in similar situations and gives affected families support, advice and reassurance that they are not alone. Each group meeting is facilitated by a member of Bobath’s therapy team and meetings are held at lunch time, to make them highly accessible. There are many opportunities to fundraise for Bobath. It provides training and allows people from all over the country to take part in raising money for an excellent cause. However, as Patricia Ferguson pointed out, the charity needs more Government and health board support. Many of us attended Bobath’s excellent reception in the Scottish Parliament last Thursday, which Patricia Ferguson mentioned. Volunteers do things such as mailing out literature, data input and placing collection boxes in communities, and they organise charity events such as coffee mornings, fashion shows and quizzes. Members can assist with that. I am running out of time, so all that I will do is make a plea to the minister to support Patricia Ferguson’s view that we must not have a postcode lottery in the provision of Bobath services. In my area, NHS Ayrshire and Arran does not assist Bobath. That should change, so that people from across Scotland who need the therapy can benefit from it.

Given that, according to Experian, North Ayrshire is predicted to have the lowest level of economic growth of any of the UK’s 378 local authorities over the next five years, it would be great if we could get some renewable industries into Hunterston, which has a deep harbour and a highly skilled workforce nearby.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to boost manufacturing employment and output. (S4O-01563)

The cabinet secretary will be aware that, in the decade to 2007, Scotland lost a third of its manufacturing sector in Ayrshire and half of its manufacturing employment, and saw a corresponding decline in output. That was before the recession hit. Manufacturing remains a key component of the Scottish economy, so how are our universities and colleges addressing key skills shortages in our manufacturing sector to ensure that it flourishes during the decades to come?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I have heard you make such statements many times and it seems likely that you will make such statements many more times in the future. Would it not be better if members quoted the section of standing orders that they believe has been breached when they make a point of order? If they do not, the Presiding Officer could stop members as soon as they know that a member is not making a point of order.

I welcome the cabinet secretary’s statement. In light of Sarah Boyack’s questions, will the cabinet secretary tell us where local government would be now if, on assuming office, he had followed the advice of Labour’s Wendy Alexander and top sliced the local government budget by at least 3 per cent year on year, and where our businesses would be if the tax rate poundage remained on average 8.5 per cent above England’s, as it was for seven consecutive years under Labour and the Liberal Democrats?

3. To ask the Scottish Government whether it plans to review beta blocker prescribing recommendations following a study recently published in The Journal of the American Medical Association suggesting that beta blockers did not prolong the lives of patients. (S4O-01518)

Beta blockers were hailed as one of the great medical advances of the 20th century. Their inventor, Scotsman James Black, won the Nobel prize in medicine in 1988. The cabinet secretary will be aware that the journal’s study involved some 45,000 patients over 42 months, and it showed that beta blockers do not reduce the risk of heart attacks or strokes, or deaths from either. Given that the study was similar to another recently published in the Journal of American Geriatrics Society, does he share my concern that tens of thousands of Scots may be taking beta blockers needlessly when another form of treatment may be more appropriate?

Will Alex Johnstone give way?

I understand what Willie Rennie is saying but, at the same time, would the Scottish economy not gain from having lower or zero APD?

The number of flights from Scotland has diminished. This year we could fly to Cape Verde and to the Dominican Republic from Glasgow, but we will not be able to do that from next year. Does the member not accept that from Edinburgh it costs 0.69 tonnes of carbon per person to fly to Beijing and 0.81 to Heathrow? He is not talking about reducing the number of people who are travelling but about making them go through Heathrow. I know that he knows that because he has been to Bangkok and Cape Town in recent weeks.

There is no doubt that the issue is of importance to the growth and health of the Scottish economy. I have to say that I was a wee bit puzzled by some of Willie Rennie’s remarks because he talked about the SNP priority being shovel-ready projects and then being APD, as though somehow we could not do both at the same time. I am not really sure about the logic of that.

I was expecting Willie Rennie to leap up there—I will certainly let him in, but not just yet. I ask him to give me a wee minute. I am not even 30 seconds into my speech yet. During these very difficult times, international connectivity is key to attracting business and investment to Scotland and to the success of our tourism industry. However, in recent years, the decisions of successive UK Governments to raise air passenger duty by such a huge amount have jeopardised Scotland’s place as an internationally connected nation and continue to threaten economic growth and the future viability of many routes from Scotland. I mentioned a couple of those routes earlier in the debate, but there are many routes direct from Scotland that have been lost in recent times—to Porto, Gambia and Malta to name just three. That of course impacts—as the minister said—on employment in Scotland. The recent York Aviation report on the impact of APD shows the hugely damaging impact that the tax has had on passenger numbers, on the cost of flights for ordinary people and on international connectivity, and the knock-on effect on the wider economy. As the minister points out in his motion, APD rates for short-haul services since 2007 have increased by around 160 per cent, and by up to 360 per cent for long-haul flights. Therefore, it is no surprise that many companies are reducing the number of flights that they have from Scottish airports. APD has become a significantly higher proportion of overall fares, rising from 10 to 26 per cent of the overall cost of domestic flights and from 3 to 14 per cent of international flights. As the report makes clear, that has seen the cost of flights for a family holiday to Spain increase by £32 and, for flights to Florida, by £180. Worryingly—this may be where Mr Rennie wants to come in—the report points out that by 2016 it is estimated there will have been a loss, per year, of 2.1 million passengers to Scotland’s main airports, resulting in £210 million less being spent in Scotland every year by tourists. Of course, that impacts on Scottish employment.

Analysis has shown that cutting APD would bring another £50 million back into Scottish business tax revenues. Therefore, although we would lose money from APD, we would get money because more people would be employed, and they would pay taxes and so on. I am quite surprised by Mr Rennie’s party because in its submission to Calman it supported devolution. I suppose that this is just another U-turn following the party cuddling up to the Conservatives. Bizarrely, the UK Government appears to be unique in its dedication to this regressive tax, versions of which have been reduced or abolished across Europe. We have already heard that in the Netherlands the tax was scrapped after only one year following a dramatic 8 per cent downturn in demand at Schiphol. In Ireland, the original €10 rate was reduced to €3 after declines in passenger numbers at Ireland’s airports. In Ayrshire, where I am an MSP, Prestwick airport has already lost around 14 per cent of its traffic as a result of APD, according to recent analysis. One would have thought that the UK Government might take similar action to address concerns here in Scotland. We have heard some good speeches this afternoon, but I was disappointed with Alex Johnstone’s. I do not think that he addressed any of the key points in what was a very defensive speech. In their UK budget last year, the Tories said that they were going to review APD in Scotland but they have not done that, although they have devolved APD to Northern Ireland. The Tories need to have a coherent position on APD in Scotland, whether it is the Ruth Davidson position or the position that Alex Johnstone tried to cobble together earlier this afternoon. A paper from Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs announcing changes to APD stated that the Government’s policy objective was “stimulating and rebalancing the Northern Ireland economy.” However, it does not seem at all keen to do that here. The Scottish Government realises that a one-size-fits-all approach to APD does not work. Indeed, the York Aviation report points out that there are significant impacts on UK airports outside London, where the market is smaller and remains less resilient. Surely, if APD can be devolved to Northern Ireland, it can be devolved to Scotland. Discussions are going on about devolving it to Wales.

I am in my last minute, unfortunately. The Scottish Chambers of Commerce has stated: “If Scotland is to maintain a competitive position and attract tourism and investment to our nation, the Scottish Government will require a greater variety of policy and fiscal tools at its disposal.” It is very important that APD be devolved. With the Ryder cup and Commonwealth games coming to Scotland in the next few years, we have a unique opportunity to showcase ourselves to the world and to reap the benefits of that for many years. However, in order to do so we need to ensure that Scotland is open for business, well connected and ready to welcome people from all over. In my last 30 seconds, I will touch on a different point. We should think not just about APD but about the holiday supplement rip-off for Scottish tourists who go abroad to common destinations. In the First Choice brochure for next year, the Glasgow to Dalaman flight has a holiday supplement of an extra £200 per head. The Thomson flight from Glasgow to Majorca has a £225 per head supplement, whereas the flight from Belfast has a supplement of £165 per head. The Sky Tours flight from Glasgow to Costa Blanca has a supplement of £215 per head, and the Simply Travel flight from Edinburgh to Corfu has a supplement of £165 per head. Scots are being ripped off, and not just through APD.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to encourage the renewables industry to invest in North Ayrshire. (S4O-01486)

I thank the minister for his reply. He will be aware that, under the previous Labour Government, the United Kingdom lost 37 per cent of its manufacturing employment, which hit areas such as North Ayrshire disproportionately hard. At last night’s meeting of the Ayrshire economic partnership, concerns were expressed about when the investment will come to fruition. Can the minister give us some information as to when that investment and employment will be secured?

The bill amends five provisions in the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002. In my speech, I will focus on the royal exemption and the extension of FOl coverage. The committee’s approach is set out in our report. I thank everyone who worked with us during our evidence gathering. Clearly, the evidence impacted on the committee, given the conclusions that we reached. The committee was content with sections 2, 3, 4 and 5 of the bill. Due to time restrictions, I cannot detail those provisions now, but they are addressed in our report. A contentious section of the bill is section 1, on “Royal exemption”, which will amend section 2 of the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002. At present, if a public authority is applying the exemption for information relating to communications with Her Majesty, other members of the royal family or the royal household, the public interest in whether or not to release must be considered. The public interest test is a balance that requires the public authority to weigh arguments in favour of release against those for withholding. A limited number of exemptions—for example, for court records, national security and defence—are “absolute”, which means that the public interest need not be considered. The bill would make absolute those elements of the exemption relating to communications with Her Majesty and the heir and the second in line to the throne. The Scottish Government has stated that its purpose is to ensure consistency of approach across the UK given the “shared monarchy” and so ensure an appropriate level of confidentiality regarding such communications. The Scottish Government considers it “vital to ensure that the monarch, as well as the heir and second in line, can operate according to established constitutional conventions.” The cabinet secretary elaborated on those points in her oral evidence, as she did just a few minutes ago. However, the previous Scottish Information Commissioner held “significant concerns in relation to the proposal to introduce an absolute exemption ... Absolute exemptions are not regarded as good practice, and I consider this measure to be unnecessary.” The current Scottish Information Commissioner retains reservations. In her submission to the Finance Committee, she stated: “It is disappointing that Ministers have chosen to retain the amendment”. Unison opposes the provision and is concerned about disapplication of the public interest test. The Campaign for Freedom of Information in Scotland does not believe that the Scottish Government should copy the UK Government. On creating an absolute exemption, the SIC emphasised in oral evidence to the committee: “Making an exemption absolute further undermines and erodes rights to information. It removes from Scottish public authorities, including me and the Government, the flexibility needed to consider the public interest in relation to what can and cannot be disclosed.” She argued that an absolute exemption would be a “retrograde step”—the CFIS supports that view—and, on appropriate protections, that “there is already adequate provision for the royal family and for discussions that any public authority may need to have that are confidential, are covered by other rights or are a matter of national security.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 12 September 2012; c 1510 and 1515.] The SIC also said, in her submission, that the measure is “in direct conflict with the public interest, and for this reason I would urge Members to consider carefully whether such an amendment is desirable and appropriate before proceeding.” She considered that the exemption “would have the effect of creating Scotland’s most wide-ranging absolute exemption in terms of its scope.” On international good practice, the SIC stated that although the Scottish Government argues that the proposed amendment that the bill would bring in aims to create consistency with UK legislation, it will in practice lead to inconsistency in handling requests under Scots law. Requests for environmental information under the Environmental Information (Scotland) Regulations 2004 originate from a European Union directive and contain no specific exemptions for royal communications. Concerns were also raised that the amendment brought in at Westminster was not subject to full scrutiny. The CFIS said: “The disadvantage would be that the public would never have the right to know, whereas, at the moment, if there is a public interest, the public has a right to know. The impact would also mean that whoever is writing the correspondence need never fear that it would be made public”.—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 12 September 2012; c 1501.] The evidence submitted against the provision carries weight and authority. The cabinet secretary said she would “listen very carefully to the evidence given to the committee.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 12 September 2012; c 1532.] Depending on the committee’s report, she said that she would consider whether amendments may be appropriate at stage 2. The committee seeks removal of the royal exemption from the bill, and I am pleased that the cabinet secretary will give further consideration to that. Extending FOl coverage to public contracts with arm’s-length external organisations featured prominently in a number of submissions, such as those from the CFIS, South Lanarkshire Council, Consumer Focus Scotland, the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations, Unison Scotland and the Scottish Trades Union Congress. As we all know, the power to extend FOI coverage exists under section 5 of the 2002 act. That power allows Scottish ministers to designate public authorities, such as persons who provide a contracted service on a council’s behalf. The issue was the focus of consultations by both the previous Administration and the current Administration. However, even after those consultations, the bill does not address the issue and the Scottish Government has not stated in evidence to the Finance Committee whether—and if so, when and on what—it will introduce firm proposals. Audit Scotland’s report on how councils are utilising arm’s-length external organisations identified around 130 such bodies, and it is concerned that a consequence of using more complex delivery structures involving ALEOs is that the public may be less clear about who is responsible for services and whom to complain to if they are unhappy. In its report, Audit Scotland stated: “Maintaining transparency is a key objective in good governance.” The then Minister for Parliamentary Business and Chief Whip wrote to the committee setting out the Scottish Government’s approach to the extension of coverage. He referred to the House of Commons Justice Committee’s post-legislative scrutiny of the UK Freedom of Information Act 2000 and stated that he was “persuaded” that the UK committee’s position is the right one. That position is that “openness should follow public money when public services are outsourced” and that that “can best be achieved through clear and enforceable contract provisions rather than by designating commercial companies under the Act”. In response to a question about how the Scottish Government encourages national health service boards and local authorities to prepare such “clear and enforceable contract provisions”, the cabinet secretary said: “With regard to contracts—whether they are NHS contracts with commercial organisations, or those of local authorities or other public authorities—there is a debate to be had about how we ensure that we have the right balance between commercial confidentiality and the public’s right to access appropriate information.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 12 September 2012; c 1524.] Discussing the matter with the committee, the CFIS was “not persuaded” by the Scottish Government’s arguments. When asked whether it would “take at face value” the position of the Scottish Government that it will return to the issue of extension should the bill be passed, the CFIS said: “We are really just fed up waiting. We emphasise that it is not just the current Administration that has broken promises. We still do not understand why, when the bill was published, there could not have been a timeline and a list of specifics. However, even if specific organisations were named, that would not go far enough, because we know from the Audit Scotland report that more bodies will be created in future and that, from our reading, those might not be covered by freedom of information legislation.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 12 September 2012; c 1506.] The SIC’s view is similarly clear. She stated in oral evidence: “I understand the logic of clarifying the act before extending its coverage, but I am disappointed that the opportunity has not been taken to have a discussion about how and to where we should extend it. In not doing that at the same time, we are missing some serious and significant issues, some of which have already been raised in one form or another.” She highlighted that the focus should not be only on which bodies are brought under the 2002 act, but on extending designation “to include information about public services ... to preserve and enhance people’s right to information about how ... public services are delivered.” She also said: “The designation of some bodies might have been appropriate 10 years ago, but with a review we might find that that is no longer appropriate. The world is changing rapidly, so let us review how bodies are designated.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 12 September 2012; c 1509.] In her letter the committee following her oral evidence, the SIC set out three suggestions for amendment of section 5 of the 2002 act: a requirement for routine review of section 5; wider consultation; and consideration of the public interest. The committee’s conclusion on the issue invites the cabinet secretary to detail what action the Scottish Government will take, including stage 2 amendments. I am pleased that the cabinet secretary made it clear in her opening speech that she will reconsider the issue at stage 2. Examination of the royal exemption provision and extension-of-coverage issues formed the bulk of our stage 1 scrutiny, given the evidence that was presented to us. Those matters go to the heart of the principles of an open freedom of information regime. The committee carefully assessed and reflected on the evidence, and I look forward to hearing members’ views. The Finance Committee recommends that the general principles of the bill be agreed to.

The exemption applies not just to the monarch but to the heir to the throne and the second in line to the throne, so I do not think that there is an Irish equivalent.

Recently, ward 3F of the medical high-dependency unit at university hospital Crosshouse won the Nursing Times 2012 award for emergency and critical care; the orthopaedic rapid-recovery team at the same hospital won the top team award at the Scottish health awards 2012; and the radiographer-led reporting team for NHS Ayrshire and Arran won team of the year from the Scottish council of the Society of Radiographers. Does the cabinet secretary agree that Ayrshire and Arran health board continues to carry out outstanding work on behalf of patients?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what the level of crime in North Ayrshire was in 2007 and what it is now. (S4O-01436)

To what extent does the cabinet secretary believe that the focus on innovative community policing, which has seen the number of community officers in North Ayrshire increase from 30 to 140 under the Scottish National Party, has contributed to the impressive fall in crime, which continues to decline?

What do you mean “some”?

I congratulate Adam Ingram on bringing the debate to Parliament. We have already heard how brilliant William Murdoch was. As we have heard, he invented the steam tricycle, the steam cannon and waterproof paint. He was a man of myriad skills and talents. He invented the oscillating cylinder steam engine, the steam gun and the pneumatic tube message system, and he worked on one of the first steam passenger vessels to cross the English Channel. He also made many discoveries in chemistry. While working at Redruth in Cornwall, Murdoch dealt with many mechanical problems relating to the steam engine, which is why he was able to come up with so many practical improvements to the basic steam engine designs. There is evidence that, as early as 1782, Murdoch discussed and collaborated with James Watt on a number of inventions and improvements. However, one of his most significant inventions was the sun-and-planet gear, which allowed steam power to be used “to produce a continued rotative or circular motion round an axis or centre, and thereby to give motion to the wheels of mills or other machines.” Murdoch was also the first person to demonstrate a steam carriage, which he did in Rivers’s great room at the King’s Head hotel, Truro—the first public demonstration in Britain of such steam locomotion. Murdoch also experimented with chemistry. In 1784, he discovered iron cement, which was made from sal ammoniac—or ammonium chloride—and iron filings. In 1795, Murdoch developed a replacement for isinglass, a precipitate that was made from sturgeon that was used to clarify beer to remove impurities. There was very little limit to the man’s incredible genius. The North River Steamboat, the first steamboat to run on the Hudson River, was to a large extent designed by Murdoch, who built the engine and agreed the technical details. In 1815, he designed and installed the first gravity-fed piped hot-water system since classical times at Leamington Spa baths. At the celebration of the centenary of gas lighting in 1892, a bust of Murdoch was unveiled by Lord Kelvin—who, of course, had a house in Largs, in my constituency—in the Wallace monument in Stirling. There is also a bust of Murdoch by Sir Francis Legatt Chantrey at St Mary’s church. The town of Redruth celebrates Murdoch day every year in June. The 2007 event included a parade of schoolchildren with banners on the theme of earth, wind, fire and water and the first public journey of a full-size working reproduction of Murdoch’s steam carriage. Truly, Murdoch was an incredible Scot. We have heard about many other great Scots. I recommend the book “How the Scots Invented the Modern World: The True Story of How Western Europe’s Poorest Nation Created Our World & Everything in It”—or “The Scottish Enlightenment: the Scots’ Invention of the Modern World”—by Dr Arthur Herman, who is the co-ordinator of the western civilization programme at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington DC. I will mention some other great Scots from the wonderful county of Ayrshire. There is of course Henry Faulds from Beith in my constituency—the Scottish physician, missionary and scientist who developed fingerprinting. There is John Boyd Orr, who was the first person to make the link between poverty and nutrition. We also have Thomas Brisbane, the Largs astronomer, and Alexander Fleming, the biologist and pharmacologist. John Kerr from Ardrossan in my constituency discovered the quadratic electro-optic effect, which is a change in the refractive index of a material in response to an electric field—now known as the Kerr effect, as I am sure members will know. There have been many other great Scots, such as William Dunlop Brackenridge, Robert Simson, John Loudon McAdam and John Morton Boyd CBE. It is important that Scots are encouraged to learn about the famous Scots from their small towns and communities. I mentioned Dr Henry Faulds from Beith in Ayrshire. The Rev Witherspoon, who wrote the American declaration of independence and founded Princeton University, was the minister in Beith, yet many people in the town probably do not realise that. We should give people some pride in their towns and counties by telling them about what Scotland has contributed in the past. That would be an inspiration to our young people and would allow many more of them to become the best that they can be. Perhaps in future years and generations, we will produce people of the genius of William Murdoch.

I thank the 43 members, many of whom will speak this afternoon, who signed the motion that has brought the debate to the chamber. I also thank the British Medical Association for its comprehensive briefing; Kim Karam for her well-researched book, “Donation: Transplantation: Conversation”; and The Sunday Times and the Evening Times for their on-going campaigns. I look forward to a constructive debate and I hope that we will make progress today to save lives and reduce suffering for hundreds of Scots each year. Every year, about 600 to 700 people in Scotland require an organ transplant. Last year, 550 patients received a transplant, and 197 had their sight restored by a cornea transplant. People are encouraged to sign up as organ donors but, although 90 per cent of Scots support organ donation, only 30 per cent are registered donors. Further, as has been pointed out through the on-going respect my dying wish campaign, the potential for 15 per cent of organs to be donated is lost because some families—usually while they are, understandably, very distressed—do not uphold the wishes of deceased relatives who were registered organ donors. Many families subsequently regret that, often only a day or two later. Every death is a tragedy yet, through organ donation, one deceased person could give a new lease of life to a dozen or more people. The lungs, liver, heart, pancreas and kidneys are some of the organs that can be successfully transplanted. Despite rising numbers of donors, it is a sad fact that Scotland lags behind much of Europe, and demand for organs rises year on year. It is encouraging that the organ donation rate in Scotland increased from 9.8 deceased donors per million population five years ago to 13 donors per million last year, but that pales in comparison with France, where there are 23 donors per million, or Spain, which has 35 donors per million. Tragically, as a result of organ shortages, 43 Scots died last year because an organ was unavailable. The situation is most acute for patients who await a liver transplant, and one patient in five dies while waiting. Parliament must tackle the problem. As many members know, introducing presumed consent was debated in the Parliament most recently in January 2008. Many United Kingdom Government and Scottish Government drives have been made to increase the number of donors, but it is now time to take more effective action. I fully agree with the statement of Sheila Bird and John Harris in the BMJ, who argued: “Twenty years after the UK’s first confidential audit, we continue to jeopardise substantial quality adjusted life years ... for those awaiting transplantation by chasing a holy grail of enhanced consent by means other than presumption.” The previous UK Government set up the organ donation task force, which looked into the possibility of establishing an opt-out system. Controversially, the task force recommended no change to current policy and argued for a renewed effort to increase the number of donors who opt in. The task force suggested that that might be achieved through the establishment of a UK-wide team of hospital-based organ champions. I will return to that point later. It would perhaps be convenient to leave the argument at that and simply defer to the final recommendations of the task force, which Parliament debated in March 2008. However, the task force had commissioned research on the impact of presumed consent on donation rates, which it appeared to contradict directly. For example, the assessment team found that presumed consent policies generally lead to increases of about 25 per cent in the number of donated organs. It concluded: “Presumed consent is associated with increased organ donation rates, even when other factors are accounted for.” It is clear from myriad studies that there is growing public support for a shift towards presumed consent—support is reported to be as high as 70-plus per cent. Presumed consent also enjoys the support of the British Medical Association, the Scotland Patients Association, the British Heart Foundation, the Royal College of Surgeons, the Cystic Fibrosis Trust, the Scottish Kidney Federation and the National Kidney Federation, among others. Of course, organ donation is a sensitive issue, and it is important that patient autonomy remains. We could move to a policy of soft presumed consent, which makes the wishes of patients and families paramount and protects children and people who do not have the capacity to decide. The preferred soft opt-out policy that the British Medical Association has put forward would safeguard such rights. A soft opt-out allows people who do not want their organs to be donated to sign up to a database, which would make it explicitly clear that donation is against their wishes. That would be complemented by an additional safeguard whereby, if an individual had not opted out, family members would be consulted to ascertain whether they knew of any objections. Furthermore, all relatives would be advised before organ removal, which would not proceed if it caused distress to relatives, such as those with certain deeply held religious convictions. Before such a system was introduced, a high-profile information campaign to make the public aware of it would be essential. I understand that, in 2011-12 alone, the Scottish Government spent £0.5 million on raising awareness of and encouraging organ donor registration, and a new campaign was launched only three days ago. There is no reason why such funding could not be used to inform people of the change; media coverage would undoubtedly help, too. Across Europe, 24 countries have a form of presumed consent. As has been demonstrated in Spain, Belgium and France, soft opt-out has a number of benefits: not only does it respect the rights of patients and families but the donation rates are much higher than they are here or, indeed, in countries such as Austria, where hard opt-out policies in which relatives have no say are pursued. Although this is of secondary importance, it is worth noting that maintaining an opt-out database could be less costly than maintaining the current one, especially when one considers that fewer people would be likely to opt out of organ donation than those who currently opt in. The Spanish model of organ donation and transplantation is regarded as among the most successful in the world. Spain has the highest rate of organ donation ever reported across an entire population, and—crucially—it has maintained that success for many years. It has overseen discernible increases in organ donation and transplant activities since its overarching and consistent framework was established in 1989. That framework incorporates a network of highly motivated hospital doctors who personally take charge of the donation process—a task that involves opening up an empathetic dialogue with relatives of the deceased at the earliest possible opportunity. That role could be fulfilled by the organ champions that the organ donation task force called for a few years ago. The donation rate in Spain has risen from 14.3 per million in 1989 to 35 per million now with the implementation of that model, and other countries have endeavoured to set up similar systems. In Italy, for example, organ donations per million in Tuscany quadrupled in a decade after the establishment of a similar programme. After many years of discussion and debate, it is time for the Scottish Government and the Parliament to take decisive action to improve the life chances and quality of life and to reduce the needless suffering of hundreds of Scots. The soft opt-out option would save dozens of lives every single year. I know that the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing backed such a policy in a previous life, and I hope that the minister will do so today.

The population would be the database and there would be lots of publicity to enable people to opt out if they so wished. There would also be a failsafe with regard to the relatives of any deceased individual.

The point that I made in my opening speech was that the task force, in looking at all the different aspects of opt-out policies across Europe, came to the conclusion that, all else being equal, soft opt-out increases the number of organs available for donation by 25 to 30 per cent, which would therefore save lives.

I hope that by outlining the concerns echoed by agencies, employers, the third sector and prospective employees in my constituency, and some of the ideas that they offered to tackle the issue of employability, some consensus can be reached on action to ensure that people on the margins increase their chances of getting a job, staying in that job and further progressing in employment.

I apologise, Presiding Officer.

I am sorry. I am being heckled by the deputy convener of the Finance Committee—not for the first time. This year, the Finance Committee has held a series of oral evidence sessions on the necessity of enriching employability prospects for those on the margins of employment, which culminated in one-day workshops last Friday in three regions with high levels of unemployment, including Ardrossan in my constituency of Cunninghame North. The central objective of the workshops was to engage with representatives from the public, private and third sectors and individuals who have been through the system to gain a better understanding of the employability landscape. I believe that it is worth exploring the evidence. One of the main challenges is the lack of cohesion between employers and public sector agencies in relation to getting the type of person that employers need, although there was a general feeling that engagement with employers is better now than it was in the past. Chief among the concerns were arguably the complex employability landscape and the competition between bodies at UK, Scottish and local government level. Funding is heavily target driven and thus an examination of funding models is essential to re-engage with prospective employers and employees on what is best for them. When people were asked whether public sector employers were doing enough to help vulnerable individuals enter the labour market, it was clear that more could be done. For example, many NHS staff work fewer than 15 hours a week and therefore do not qualify for tax credits—that is a direct impediment to work. Private sector businesses express concern about the poor quality of some candidates, with the main barrier cited being a lack of basic capabilities: the three Rs and soft skills. Employment agencies should refocus on quality rather than quantity when it comes to referring applicants for jobs. In short, employers believe that there is too much emphasis on financial reward for companies who recruit additional staff rather than ensuring that the right person is put forward. Co-operation between business and education is needed to ensure that the right attitudes to work are ingrained as early as possible. For example, they should be ingrained at primary school level rather than in the fourth year of secondary school, when opinions to the contrary may already be ingrained in some individuals. In a more positive light, mentoring and work placements were praised as an effective means of developing the right attitude—partnerships between employers and local schools were a prominent example. Placements are largely seen as being effective in developing the necessary soft skills, such as workplace discipline and organisation. However, it was noted that the DWP is not enthusiastic about endorsing longer-term placements as its emphasis is on getting individuals into paid employment as quickly as possible. This Government understands the importance of engaging with private sector employers to raise awareness of employment options, for example engagement with the British Hospitality Association to improve young people’s understanding of the industry’s prospects and with the Scottish Retail Consortium to highlight the extent to which employees’ skills are constantly upgraded through on-the-job training. It is interesting that evidence from the third sector echoed the sentiments expressed by the private sector in as much as third sector organisations agree that it is imperative to build the confidence and self-esteem of pupils at school. They fully endorse the requirement for employability and entrepreneurial programmes in the school system. There was further overlap in that voluntary organisations believe that employability programmes should concentrate on achieving quality and not targets. It is clear that the third sector wants there to be a move away from short-term, reactive measures in favour of the long term. At the very beginning of the Finance Committee’s inquiry, that sentiment was echoed by the Scottish Trades Union Congress, which pointed out that labour market interventions are stronger in most European countries than they are in the UK and, indeed, Scotland, and that such interventions work even when employment is high. Perhaps most important are the views of service users themselves. Although their experience of employability programmes was in many ways positive, the programmes were seen to focus too much on a specific age group, which often left older individuals feeling excluded. Training programmes are often viewed as mass produced and not suitable for individual needs. Many told of negative experiences when engaging with Jobcentre Plus and the DWP, citing a lack of flexibility and an unwelcoming and intimidating atmosphere. The SNP Government takes employability matters very seriously and has done much within limited powers to help to improve the overall situation. For example, it has introduced ambitious pilot schemes to incentivise small businesses to take on graduates in permanent posts and, as we have heard, it has delivered fully on our commitment to offer 25,000 new apprenticeship opportunities in 2011-12, as that target has been exceeded. Opportunities for all is an explicit commitment to a place in education or training for all 16 to 19-year-olds who are not already in education or employment. We have also developed a regional approach for colleges to make the sector more efficient and receptive, in line with students’ needs. Those obligations are reflective of many practical strategies recommended by the International Labour Organization in its 2011 policy brief, primarily delaying the exit of young people from formal education and strengthening the link between education and training systems and the world of work. Lessons can be learned from the experiences of other European countries. For example, the Netherlands introduced a scheme in 2009 whereby municipalities must offer those aged 18 to 27 who apply for social assistance either a job, some form of schooling or training, or a combination of both. The Investing in Young People Act has undoubtedly contributed to the Netherlands finding itself at the bottom of the pile in terms of levels of youth unemployment rates in Europe. Denmark’s latest youth plan categorises employment strategies into age brackets. For example, all school pupils aged 15 to 17 years old have to prepare an education plan with their parents, their school and the youth guidance centre.

The plan leads to further education or identifies what the pupil will otherwise do, whether it is training or something else. Those examples are consistent with conjoining education and training and with discouraging an early exit from formal education. We need to do more for older people and for women, but progress is being made. I hope that the issues that the Finance Committee is deliberating on will be recognised and looked at closely by Scottish ministers.

We in the SNP believe that access to education should not be based on the ability to pay, and we believe that healthcare should be free at the point of need. We believe in protecting hard-pressed family budgets in a time of recession, and we believe that older people should be treated with dignity and respect and be able to enjoy an independent old age. Sadly, Labour no longer appears to believe the same. Murdo Fraser summed it up last week, when he said that it was “Good to see Johann warming to Tory ideas.” In two years, Scots will not only have the choice to vote in a referendum to re-establish Scotland as an independent nation, but will face a stark choice regarding the kind of society that they wish to see. I am therefore pleased that we have had a chance to explore that today and am grateful to the Labour Party for lodging its motion—even if I find it ironic that its members wish to debate the long-term future of our nation when those political chameleons seem to be incapable of maintaining a policy position on anything for more than a few short months. The comments that were made by Johann Lamont, which I presume bounced her party—certainly, the Scottish Trades Union Congress knew nothing about it—were nothing short of remarkable. They show a Labour Party that is long bereft of any policies or ideas. I understand that this summer its members went round to the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations to ask whether it had any.

I will let Mr Gray in at some point. The only policy that Labour had at the last election was to steal popular SNP policies—it had opposed them, then it pinched them at the election, and then it discarded them. The Labour Party is now taking a huge leap to the right by seeking to remove popular, effective, idealistic and fair universal benefits from the people of Scotland during the harshest economic recession in living memory. It beggars belief, to be frank. Labour and the Conservatives seem to have ruled out economic growth as a potential route out of the mire that we are currently in, which shows that they are utterly bereft of policies. Cut, cut, cut is all they have to offer. It appears that 13 years of Blair and Brown followed by a recent bed-in with the Tories has transformed an increasingly opportunistic and posturing Labour Party beyond recognition. Our record of delivering equality, opportunity, independent living, dignity and respect to the people of Scotland speaks for itself. We are proud to defend our record on the provision of universal benefits.

It will not be long until I let in members—although not Mr Findlay, after his embarrassing contribution earlier. Instead of seeking to protect benefits such as the free bus pass, free higher education, free personal care for the elderly, free prescriptions and the council tax freeze, Johann Lamont and her party want to limit access or scrap them altogether. How many of the 1.24 million people who have free bus passes will lose them? The Labour Party says that we have to look at reality—of course we have to look at reality. However, it is funny that reality did not seem to come into the equation when we discussed budgets last year when—as my colleague Mark McDonald pointed out—every single Labour front bencher called for money for every single portfolio. We knew that Alistair Darling said that cuts under Labour would have to be “deeper and tougher” than they were under Margaret Thatcher. Only this week, Ed Balls, a kind of crown prince in waiting, said on behalf of Johann’s master, Ed Miliband, that Labour would have to be “ruthless” with cuts.

I will take an intervention from Mr Gray in a second or two, because he was first to try to intervene. I am just over halfway through my speech. The apparent confusion of Labour knows no bounds. Yesterday, Ed Miliband simply rehashed the 1995 Tony Blair speech on one nation—it was plagiarised, as members will see if they read today’s Independent. I will take an intervention from Mr Gray, who was up after 30 seconds.

That is preposterous. The workforce has not shrunk by 30,000 and jobs have gone through wastage, not through compulsory redundancies—unlike the situation in some Labour councils. Councillor Gordon Matheson bragged that Labour-controlled Glasgow City Council was the first to introduce a council tax freeze. He featured a five-year council tax freeze as his number 1 priority. However, Johann Lamont says that that is not affordable. Hugh Henry said, “Oh, but the SNP would force us to do it.” I am sorry, Mr Henry, but the Scottish Government’s remit extends only to 2016, whereas Gordon Matheson’s runs until 2017. Either Labour thinks that we will win again in 2016 in an independent Scottish Parliament or it is being cynical, as it has been in recent months. Labour MSPs stood on a manifesto that told us that concessionary bus passes and police numbers would be protected.

The majority of Labour MSPs, and the party nationally, signed a pledge against that. I am talking about people like Jenny Marra, Iain Gray and Johann Lamont. That is a betrayal of Labour’s manifesto commitments.

You have already been told that I am in my final minute, Michael, so sit down. It is ironic that—as John Mason will remember—Labour, as part of its usual “Do anything to get elected, including frightening old people” by-election misinformation campaign four years ago in Glasgow East, claimed that the SNP would abolish pensioners’ bus passes. Now we hear from Labour that “nothing is off the table”. Labour no longer seems to understand what it stands for. Johann Lamont has been praised, mainly by the Daily Record and the Daily Mail, for being brave in making her announcement, but there is no bravery in refusing to tell people which benefits would be removed and who would suffer if Labour took office, and there is no bravery in picking on the weakest people in our society. I support the amendment in the cabinet secretary’s name.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. That was a deliberate misrepresentation. I said that jobs had gone because of wastage. People retire and leave—Sarah Boyack knows that fine well.

I warmly welcome the cabinet secretary’s statement. Once again he has produced a measured, innovative and positive budget for Scotland in challenging economic circumstances. He mentioned the need to focus capital investment on shovel-ready projects. Can he elaborate on how he will accelerate capital projects and what they will deliver for Scotland in employment, improved connectivity and growth? Will he tell members how much more he could achieve for Scotland and its people if this Parliament had the economic powers of an independent sovereign nation?

Like Nigel Don, I was impressed by the Polish words spoken by Christine Grahame and others but I, too, will not attempt to replicate them. I wish to thank Christine Grahame and congratulate her on bringing the debate to the chamber. I congratulate everyone involved in Mapa Scotland’s restoration work and, of course, General Maczek and Jan Tomasik for working so hard on developing the 1,200m² map of Scotland. As others have done, I want to touch on Scotland’s wider links with Poland. There are links to Poland in my constituency—every year, we celebrate the Largs Viking festival to commemorate the 1263 victory of Scotland over the Vikings. Walomin, in Poland, has a Viking festival every year, too, so links are being established between Ayrshire and Poland as a result of the shared history in that area. In the early modern period or the later middle ages, there was a tremendous emigration of Scots to Poland. We think about the 60,000-plus Poles who now live in Scotland, but think about bygone days—between 1600 and 1650, some 50,000 Scots emigrated to Poland at a time when Scotland had a population of fewer than 1 million people. Most of those emigrants came from Aberdeenshire, Dundee and the east coast of Scotland. They had a tremendous impact on Polish culture and society. Of course, in 1610, when the Poles captured Moscow, there were many Scottish mercenaries in the Polish forces. In 1683, when King John Sobieski of Poland defeated the Turks outside Vienna, once again Scots participated. The Sobieski Stuarts are, as we know, a pretender family to the throne of the United Kingdom. We also think that Poland has often had a tragic history. A century ago, there was no Poland as we now know it—it was divided between the emperors of Russia, Austria-Hungary and Germany. Yet, in being divided among those three empires, the Polish nation was reborn at the end of the first world war, even managing to resist a Soviet invasion led by General Tukhachevsky in 1920. I understand that Ed Miliband’s great-grandfather took part, on the Soviet side, in that invasion. In the second world war, many thousands of Poles came to Scotland and fought to defend Scotland and the UK. They hoped, at some time, to go home, but because of the Stalinist rule of Poland, it was not safe for many of them to do so. Many Poles settled in Scotland, married Scottish people and became very much a part of our culture. Growing up, I had Polish friends and friends who had one Polish parent. Polish people have certainly made a great contribution. Poles are famous for their hard work and determination to look after their families, make a success of life and make the best of what Scotland has to offer. One famous Scot who went to Poland was Alexander Chalmers, who was four times elected mayor of Warsaw in the 17th century. A tombstone for him, with a lengthy Latin inscription, was erected in 1703 in the cathedral of St John. The cathedral was utterly destroyed during the heroic Warsaw rising of 1944 when the Poles rose up against the Nazis, failed to get any help from their erstwhile Soviet allies and were crushed as a result. There is much to celebrate in the cultures of Scotland and Poland and their friendship and shared history. While Poland is no longer the America of the day that it was to Scots in the 17th century, there is still tremendous sympathy for Poland among many Scottish people. I have no doubt that many Poles in Scotland today have ancestors from Scotland who settled in Poland all those centuries ago.

I welcome the minister’s statement. Can he confirm that the Scottish Government will actively consider removing from NPF3 any possibility of a coal-fired power station being built at Hunterston? He will be aware that an application to build one generated 21,000 objections—more than any other application in Scottish planning history—and was subsequently withdrawn. Does he appreciate that while another application is unlikely, the possibility greatly concerns many of my constituents and a host of environmental groups across Scotland who fought against the previous unwanted proposal?

It is indeed good to be back. I notice that the speaker before last, Ruth Davidson, talked about the need to elevate the debate, but she accused the First Minister of telling a lie and then made assertions on capital funding that she could not back up. Sunday’s editorial in The Sunday Times said of the UK Government: “It has aggressively cut measures that might improve this country, such as spending on infrastructure, and it has raised taxes ... Any serious government would now reaffirm its determination to get the economy under control ... Mr Clegg, perhaps, has done us all a service. He has reminded us that this is not a serious government. Its lasting contribution to politics could be to allow an undeserving Labour party back into power at the next election.” The reality is that, as the First Minister said, capital funding is £3 billion lower than it was in 2009. I want to pick up on something that the leader of the Labour Party said. She talked about council housing and denounced the SNP’s spending on housing, but 1,011 council homes were built in the 2011-12 financial year. Perhaps she could remind us under which housing minister the lowest number of affordable houses were built under devolution. Which party built only six houses over a four-year period?

The forthcoming parliamentary year will surely be one of the busiest. The financial memoranda of every one of the 15 bills will come before the Finance Committee for scrutiny. My colleagues and I on the committee look forward to that challenge. In addition, we will be the lead committee for consideration of the Freedom of Information (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill. I am sure that the Scottish Government’s programme of legislation will help to create a better, fairer Scotland for all. Of course, progressive policies and a desire to make Scotland a better place to live and work have been a hallmark of the SNP’s time in government.

Of course, I do not support the continuation of devolution beyond the referendum, as the member knows. I support independence for Scotland. As we have heard, our older people are entitled to free personal care, free prescriptions and free bus travel, and their NHS has been safeguarded from Westminster cuts. Scotland’s streets are safer than ever, with crime at its lowest level since 1975 and an extra 1,139 police officers. With that record, it is clear why the SNP overwhelmingly won the trust of the Scottish people last year; it is also why Scotland’s economy has proved to be more resilient than the economies of other areas of the UK, thanks to a shorter and shallower downturn. The forthcoming legislative programme intends to build on those achievements and to reward the trust that the people of Scotland have placed in this Government. As we have heard, the programme will be varied and wide-ranging. We will build on the progress that has been made in sustaining jobs in the Scottish economy, but the most important bill, which many people have discussed over recent weeks and months, will be the one that will seek to re-establish Scotland as an independent nation. According to Sir Winston Churchill, “Of all the small nations of this earth, perhaps only the ancient Greeks surpass the Scots in their contribution to mankind.” It is astonishing to me that anyone can lack faith in the ability of such a talented people to deliver a thriving, fairer and dynamic future through independence. The word “ambition” has been used, but I take issue with the leader of the Labour Party, who seems to think that it is ambitious to want her country to be run from Westminster, but that it is not ambitious to want Scotland to run its own affairs. In my view, that is a warped way of looking at things. It is now abundantly clear that Scotland can no longer afford to remain part of the union. We need only look at the success of other smaller nations that do not have a fraction of our resources, such as Switzerland, Singapore and Luxembourg, to name but a few. The GERS figures show that Scotland is more prosperous than other parts of the UK and contributes more to it—or would, under independence—than those other parts. While our Norwegian neighbours benefit from a $600 billion oil fund, the UK is saddled with a debt of £1 trillion. If Scotland were to benefit from its natural resources our fiscal position would be far healthier than that of the UK, and Scotland ranks sixth among the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development nations in terms of gross domestic product per capita. Far from being a distraction from the difficult task of economic recovery, as some would paint it, the full powers of independence would provide us with the necessary tools to do this job properly. Instead of borrowing money for vanity projects and white elephants such as Trident, an independent Scotland could invest in key industries, such as renewables, to create jobs, grow our economy and tackle climate change. Instead of hammering the poor and disabled while rewarding the super-rich, we could create a tax and benefit system that is fair and progressive for Scotland’s needs. As we conduct this great debate, I am sure that the powers, opportunities and security that independence will bring are things that the people of Scotland will find irresistible. I am delighted that the debate will begin in earnest during the Scottish Government’s legislative programme. With the powers of independence such as taxation powers, we could capitalise on our strengths in life sciences, take responsibility for welfare, join up benefits, education and employment services, and provide fair and decent support for those who need it. We need the full range of policy levers. This legislative programme is important, but think how much more we could do for the people of Scotland with independence.

The First Minister will be aware of the recent announcement that may result in 50 job losses at the DSM Nutritional Products (UK) manufacturing facility in Dalry, in my constituency, where 370 people are employed and which is the only site outside China at which vitamin C is manufactured. What discussions has the Scottish Government had with DSM about potential job losses? What action will the Scottish Government take to mitigate to the greatest possible extent the consequences of any job losses?

The latest figures show that Scotland has the highest employment rate in the UK. Also, Scotland is top of Ernst & Young’s UK attractiveness survey. Does the cabinet secretary agree that that proves that Scottish Government efforts to boost the economy are far more successful than the cuts agenda pursued by the UK Government and that it disproves the lie of the Scotland is not good enough to make its own decisions campaign that the independence referendum is deterring inward investment?

I thank Nanette Milne for raising an important issue that, such is the scale of substance misuse in our nation, is—I am sorry to say—relevant to every member in the chamber. Given that substance abuse can impact severely on individuals and families and that the family can play a huge role in helping those who are struggling with an addiction, it is important that we support the small family-led groups that help not only those suffering from substance misuse but people living with someone who abuses drugs or alcohol. It is startling to note research from 2000 that estimated that between 40,000 and 60,000—or 1 in 20—Scottish children were affected by the drug problem of one or more parent. Sadly, such situations have a negative impact on the subsequent health, employability and educational attainment of those children and put them at greater risk of emotional or physical abuse. In an ideal world, we would not have to confront such issues, and we must always do everything within our power to prevent people from falling into the grasp of addiction. Of course, such preventative work has many facets, including seizing drugs before they enter the country; effective policing to prevent distribution; and providing effective education to alert young people in particular to the dangers of drug and alcohol abuse. I am pleased that, since 2006, illegal drug use in the general adult population has declined by more than a fifth. However, as the minister has made clear, we still have a long, long way to go. I am also confident that minimum pricing will have a positive impact on Scotland’s dangerous relationship with alcohol and the harm that it causes. However, it is an unfortunate reality that people will continue to fall victim to substance misuse and that many will form addictions, harming themselves and others around them. It is therefore the Government’s moral responsibility to offer support to help people break the cycle of addiction, to allow sufferers to regain control of their lives, lessen the impact on wider society—I refer to costs relating to the national health service and law and order—and reduce the emotional torment of people who live with them. Therefore, I am proud that this Government has invested 20 per cent more in front-line care, treatment and recovery since 2007 and that it has launched the road to recovery strategy, which firmly recognises the importance of the family unit in addressing these matters. It is due to the strategy and the continued investment in tackling addiction that family support organisations, such as the Grampian Family Support Forum, which Nanette Milne cited, are growing in number and importance. Tackling Scotland’s drink and drug problem requires a multi-agency approach that employs a variety of tactics, treatments and support mechanisms. As members will know, drug treatment, including opiate substitutes such as methadone, often removes only the criminal element of addiction. Although such treatments have a role to play, it is far more difficult for someone to kick the habit without the support and encouragement of friends and family. It is important that family members have the correct advice and information at their disposal, in order to recognise the signs of substance misuse and to help people through difficult times. That is why the Scottish Government increased core funding this year for Scottish Families Affected by Drugs, which supports a network of local family support groups and individual families through training, information provision and a dedicated helpline. Through that work, the SFAD gives family members not only the confidence to intervene when their relative’s drug or alcohol use becomes problematic, but the knowledge and ability to offer them support and help. The scourge of alcohol and drug misuse in Scotland remains a persistent threat to the establishment of a safe, healthy and prosperous society. Many of my constituents—particularly in Saltcoats, where we discussed this very issue on Tuesday night—have great concern that not enough is being done and that more should be done to reduce long-term methadone dependency, in particular. Although the figures that I cited show that we are moving in the right direction, communities on the ground do not see progress happening as fast as they would like it to happen. I believe that the Parliament and the Government will continue to rise to the challenge, through ground-breaking legislation such as the smoking ban and minimum pricing for alcohol but also through our continued commitment—despite tough financial times—to support individuals and families who have fallen victim to drug or alcohol abuse.

10. To ask the Scottish Government what message it has for the public and competitors from Scotland with regard to the forthcoming Olympic and Paralympic games. (S4O-01168)

How will the Scottish Government capitalise on the opportunities presented by the Olympic and Paralympic games to ensure that the Scottish public are aware of the benefits of participation in sport to their personal health and wellbeing?

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

The member talks about a reduction in the number of apprenticeships but, in 2005-06, there were 20,196 modern apprenticeships in Scotland whereas, the following year, under Labour, there were 15,869, which is a fall of 21 per cent. Surely, before the member criticises the SNP he should criticise the Labour Administration that was in power at that time.

I welcome the debate and thank the Minister for Youth Employment for bringing it to the chamber. The debate ties in with much of what the Finance Committee is doing in looking at employability, which Mark McDonald touched on. Youth unemployment and economic inactivity continue to be a major problem that the Parliament must do all that it can to address. Margaret McCulloch made a thoughtful and positive speech. In particular, her comments on aggregate demand were well put. We can talk about apprenticeships and other measures as much as we like but, as Stephen Boyd of the STUC told the Finance Committee, we need demand in the economy if we are to turn Scotland’s economy around and provide jobs not just for young people but for everyone who is without work. However, Mr Gray’s view seems to be that if only he had been elected First Minister, everything in the garden would be rosy. In the ultimate political tautology, numbers seem to count only when it suits Labour. He castigated the SNP for apparently falling numbers of apprentices in the first couple of years that it was in government but, apparently, when Labour was in power, it was okay to have a 21 per cent reduction in the number of apprentices. I do not see how he can square that circle. In its submission to the Finance Committee, the National Endowment for Science, Technology and the Arts pointed out that Scotland has consistently had one of the highest proportions of young people not in education, employment or training in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, throughout the period going all the way back to 1996. The reality is all the more disconcerting given that much of that period, leading up to the economic crash in 2008, is considered to have been a time of relative economic prosperity for the UK as a whole, albeit much of it fuelled by debt. Clearly, Scotland’s young people did not reap the benefits of that so-called prosperity or union dividend. In fact, in my North Ayrshire constituency of Cunninghame North, youth unemployment increased during that period, which was presided over by Labour Governments in London and Edinburgh, as well as by a Labour administration at North Ayrshire Council. Thus I welcome the policy and direction that the SNP Government has ushered in since coming to power. Recently, we have created the opportunities for all programme, guaranteeing that all 16 to 19-year-olds not already in learning or employment will be offered a suitable training or education placement to combat the long-standing problem of a large proportion of that age group being inactive. Despite stringent budget constraints, we have found additional funding to assist local authorities in areas where youth unemployment is particularly rampant, including £828,000 for North Ayrshire. Work readiness was mentioned in the press recently, and my colleague Mark McDonald referred to the evidence from Arnold Clark’s GTG Training. However, if we look at the figures at all levels—school leavers, those who have completed time at college and those who have graduated from university—the proportion of people who are work ready in Scotland exceeds the proportion in Wales, Northern Ireland and England. Our young people deserve credit for that. Unfortunately, the Labour Party has spent much of the past week attacking the SNP Government’s highly successful modern apprenticeship scheme. Apparently, Labour has only just found out that all apprentices in Scotland are employed before they begin an apprenticeship programme, which was also the case when the Labour Party was in power at Holyrood. It has already been pointed out that the scheme is run in the same way as it was when Labour was in office. Politically chameleon-like—when I mentioned that to Mike Russell he said “comedian-like”, although I do not find it amusing—Kezia Dugdale tried to say that the situation is different now in Scotland so we need a different way to address the situation. It is almost like criticising one’s own political party.

I would have done if the member had taken one from me. She took interventions before and after mine. In this Parliament, we make and concede to interventions in the same way.

I am happy to take one from Mr Gray, who took one from me.

Thunderous applause from Kezia Dugdale alone on the Labour benches there. I dispute the suggestion that it is not working. It is not just that there are more people in apprenticeships; we have doubled the number of people in training. When we talk about whether it is working, we have to take into account the overall economic situation, to which the member’s colleague Margaret McCulloch appropriately referred. We are in a difficult economic situation, and I find it astonishing that Labour members have not taken that on board. The truth is that Labour’s are shameful attacks. I quote Labour’s own house journal, the Daily Record, which said on Monday: “When the Labour Party created modern apprenticeships, it was a way of creating opportunities for young people. The SNP have made modern apprenticeships a way for politicians to lie to the public.” We wonder why the First Minister responded in the way in which he did, with passion but not with anger, as Labour members appear to have indicated. Labour members have also repeatedly called on the Scottish Government to increase funding for colleges but, by 2014-15, the Government will have invested £4.7 billion in colleges since 2007—40 per cent more than the previous Labour-Lib Dem Administration invested during its two terms in office. Mr McArthur might want to look at what the Tory-Lib Dem coalition is doing south of the border. Indeed, Ms Dugdale’s former employer, NUS Scotland, has welcomed the Government’s commitment to maintaining college places and student support budgets at their current level. I support the motion.

Will the cabinet secretary confirm that the Scottish Government has no plans to dump at Hunterston nuclear waste that originates from elsewhere in Scotland?

The cabinet secretary might be aware that I met Ayrshire and Arran NHS Board and discussed the matter only last Friday. I have been involved with this issue and the island’s community for three years. Is the cabinet secretary aware that the health board is now fully committed to ensuring that a new GP practice will be established on the island, and that all the health resources that are currently underused will be fully used to ensure that the predominantly elderly community has the service that it deserves?

13. To ask the Scottish Government what degrees it considers will be in greatest demand by employers by 2020 and how will it encourage more people to study for them. (S4O-01081)

The minister will be aware of the great opportunities that are ahead for Scotland, particularly in the fields of science, medicine and engineering. However, shortages of such skills are becoming manifest. How can the Scottish Government ensure that we do not end up with skills shortages combined with structural unemployment?

After that speech, I speak more in sorrow than in anger. What we hear from the unionist parties is condemnation of Scotland and a use of language that deliberately tries to undermine Scots’ belief in their own country.

The unionists talk about separation. We in the SNP do not want to separate; we want to participate in the United Nations, in the European Union and in the institutions of the world. No one talks about their separation day; they talk about their independence day. How many members have talked about working in partnership? We want to work in partnership with the rest of the United Kingdom. Why cannot we do that as an independent country? We are not an equal part but a subsidiary part of the United Kingdom and we want to change that. In recent weeks we have watched a Labour Tweedledum and a Tory Tweedledee lead their parties into a shotgun marriage, along with their wholly-owned Liberal Democrat subsidiary, which is dedicated to holding Scotland back.

At the very first door I chapped in 2006, after being selected—

I will give way in time, but not at this point, and I will decide whom I give way to. When I was selected as candidate for Cunninghame North, an elderly gentleman told me that he would not vote SNP because Scotland was “Too poor, too wee and too stupid.” He used those very words. Given Scotland’s phenomenal contribution to every field of human endeavour, from the Scottish enlightenment to science, medicine, engineering and so on, only a deliberate and determined effort over decades by the north British parties could have led Scots to have such an appalling view of their own country. Indeed, I recall that in the 13 years I spent at school, from primary to highers, not a single Scottish achievement was lauded. Nevertheless, Scots have become increasingly irked by the “No you can’t” position of unionist politicians. The situation has morphed into one whereby even the most desperate of unionists no longer try to compare a future independent Scotland to Albania, Bangladesh or Sudan, as once was the case, or to say that we could not visit our grannies in England or watch “Coronation Street” post-independence. We have had all those suggestions thrown at us over the years. However, a few of those who are off-message have made daft comments, which range from the suggestion that England might have to bomb Scotland’s airports to prevent a terrorist takeover, to the claim that there will be no national health service post independence to the more subtle suggestion that, of course, Scotland could be viable, but London knows best. Senior politicians from all three London parties, including our old Etonian Prime Minister, have had to admit in recent years that Scotland has the ability to stand on its own two feet and would be a viable independent nation, while at the same time trying to sow self-doubt and to be scaremongers. The next two years will be an exciting time for Scotland. I am confident that the debate will capture people’s attention and imagination. Indeed, the eyes of the world will be on us; they already are. The Finance Committee took evidence from a representative of Lloyds Bank in Scotland who said that more people are interested in Scotland than ever before, partly because of this debate. The yes camp will win and Scotland will re-emerge as an independent sovereign nation. Why? It is because we will set out our positive vision for a nation that will regain power, confidence, prosperity, opportunity, a voice on the world stage and a sense of aspiration, while unionists will fight tooth and nail to undermine our national self-belief and self-confidence. Our message of hope and ambition will trump the unionists. Of course, although unionists claim on occasion that Scotland may be financially sound, they believe that it should be governed elsewhere. According to the Prime Minister, Scotland is “stronger, safer, richer and fairer” in the UK. Even cursory analysis shows that to be nonsense. Is it stronger and safer? We have Trident. Is it richer? It is so rich that the UK has a national debt of well over £1 trillion, is in a double-dip recession, has an annual deficit of £126 billion and is ranked 19th among the G20 countries in growth over the past year. We now know, and the Labour members who are so desperate to hold Scotland back should appreciate, that the Institute for Fiscal Studies has made it clear that 88 per cent of the cuts will come after 2015, if Scotland is still part of the union, thanks to the work of Labour here and its Tory allies to destroy Scotland’s ambition. With our wealth of natural resources, our educated and talented workforce, strong research and development base, export markets, tourism and world-leading educational institutions, we will prosper beyond that gloomy picture. I apologise to Mr Smith. I should have let him in earlier.

The difference is that we will put forward a positive vision. We will copy Obama by saying, “Yes you can.” Labour will say, “No you can’t.” We are the people who believe in Scotland. Labour are the people who try to decry Scotland. That is the difference. That is why we will say that Scotland can be a better place and an egalitarian place. We will say that Scotland can make a contribution to the world. We will put Scotland on a progressive path, tackle our social ills and raise our standard of living. We will not talk about cutting taxes for millionaires while the poor struggle. We will take on child poverty and deal with it. As for the Blairites—they should be sitting on the other side of the chamber with the Tories. That is where they belong.

6. To ask the Scottish Government what it considers the most significant improvements have been to patient care in the Ayrshire and Arran national health service board area since 2007. (S4O-01034)

Will the cabinet secretary confirm that NHS Ayrshire and Arran has launched a pre-planning consultation to build a new 206-bed hospital in North Ayrshire to provide state-of-the-art care and rehabilitation for adult mental health patients? Can she inform members what the impact of that will be in improving the delivery of mental health care in Ayrshire and Arran in the years ahead?

4. To ask the First Minister what impact the continuing uncertainty in the euro zone is having on the Scottish economy. (S4F-00690)

The UK coalition Government, which controls macroeconomic policy, has now matched the previous Labour Government by leading the UK back into recession. Although continuing euro zone uncertainty has impacted on Scotland and the UK, does the First Minister agree that the fact that the UK is in double-dip recession and has the worst economic performance since the recession of any G20 country excluding Italy is clear evidence of the negative impact of UK economic policies? Will the First Minister again call on the coalition Government to abandon its austerity-at-all-costs approach, lest its actions continue to jeopardise Scottish economic recovery, and does he agree with former Bank of England officials, Howard Davies and Marian Bell, who said: “The markets recognize that if the economy turns out weaker than expected and you try to compensate for that by tightening even further, then that way madness lies”?

I have to say that I do not agree with the cabinet secretary because I do not think that Labour’s pitiful opposition to the bill is a fig leaf so much as it is a tea leaf. Last year, caffeine was the smokescreen; now—suddenly—Labour members are all really worried that supermarkets are going to have plenty of money. We have now heard from Mr Pearson that it is really electoralism that is at the heart of the opposition, given his comments on the poll in The Scotsman. I take it that he meant 93 per cent rather than 93 respondents out of 15,000. Today we have heard from the Labour Party curmudgeonly and desperate speeches that were mainly unenthusiastic, and I doubt that many Labour back-benchers are tripping over themselves to press their buttons against the bill tonight. The reality is that there is opposition for this bill because it has been promoted by the Scottish National Party. That is what SNP members believe and, I think, that is what other members in this chamber believe. That really appears to be it. Richard Simpson and Graeme Pearson will not be very popular with their former colleagues—in the national health service and in the police respectively—because the people who are on the front line—those who have to deal with Scotland’s alcohol problem—are not only the families of people who misuse alcohol, not only their friends and their workmates, but are the police officers who have to face the problem day in and day out and the NHS professionals who have to deal with it. The bill is overwhelmingly supported by groups including the churches, the British Medical Association, the police, and charities here, there and everywhere because it is the right thing to do for the people of Scotland. As Jackson Carlaw pointed out on the nonsense about supermarkets, if the bill is successful income to supermarkets will decline markedly. We have to look at what the bill is ultimately trying to do. I studied economics at university; a rule of economics is that as price goes up, consumption goes down. Harmful drinkers will have fewer instances of ill health as a result of that drop in consumption. That is what the study says. My colleague Bob Doris hit the nail on the head: the bill is really about saving lives, saving people from illness, saving families from domestic breakup, and saving people from losing their jobs. That is why we are doing it. I am pleased that when the Labour Party in North Ayrshire controlled the council, which it did up until 3 May—I am glad to say that it is now an SNP council—it had the courage to support the SNP Government on the bill. Perhaps that was because the number of alcohol-related deaths in North Ayrshire—the area that my constituency of Cunninghame North is in—is 91 per cent higher than the Scottish average. The problem is particularly acute there. The more that people drink, the greater the risk of health and social problems. That impacts directly on healthcare services, on the criminal justice system and on our wider economy. Let us appreciate what we are trying to do. As the cabinet secretary said, the framework for action contains 40 measures in addition to minimum pricing. Minimum pricing has for our party never been the sole way forward—we can do so many other things for the people of Scotland in this area and we are doing them. However, minimum pricing is a keystone—it is fundamental to the bill. Many years from now, it will be like the Smoking, Health and Social Care (Scotland) Act 2005. The Conservatives opposed it at the time, but I believe that they realise on reflection that perhaps they should not have opposed it. Our passing the bill will make today a great day for the Scottish Parliament. The bill will take Scotland forward socially and it will help to change the culture that so many members have spoken about. I welcome the bill and I am pleased that it will be supported by an overwhelming majority of members of Parliament and of organisations that have to deal with the scourge of alcohol on a day-to-day basis.

I am pleased that my motion was selected for debate, and I thank MSPs of all parties who have signed it and made the debate possible in this epilepsy awareness week. The past decade has witnessed rapid advances in identifying and understanding the contribution of genetic factors in causing epilepsy. I am delighted that Scotland plays a pivotal role as a world leader in this important field of research. Genetic testing for epilepsy can inform patients of the cause of their condition and provide an accurate and definitive diagnosis while avoiding unnecessary tests and lead to effective drug management and control. Epilepsy is the world's most common neurological condition. It affects more than 50 million people worldwide including tens of thousands in Scotland. There are many epilepsy syndromes, categorised by seizure types and cause. However, the majority of epilepsies are characterised by recurring episodes of seizures in which a disruption in the electrical current and activity of the brain occurs. There are two main categories of epilepsy: symptomatic epilepsies, in which the cause of the condition is known—for example, a lesion in the brain—and idiopathic epilepsies, in which the direct cause is unknown. It is thought that genetic factors make a greater contribution to, and have greater influence on, idiopathic epilepsies. Research has demonstrated the influence of genetic factors in epilepsy and the existence of mutant genes, including studies of cases in which similar types of epilepsies were prevalent in identical twins. However, only in the past decade has epilepsy genetic research become more advanced. Genetic mutations and variations can determine the cause of the epilepsy, as well as—to varying degrees—factors such as susceptibility, mechanisms, syndrome, treatment response and prognosis. The genetics of idiopathic epilepsies can be complex where an interaction exists between two or more genes. The relationship between genetics and juvenile myoclonic epilepsy has been known for some time. That type of epilepsy occurs during adolescence, and is estimated to affect 10 per cent of epileptic patients. It is characterized by myoclonic jerks—the contraction of muscle groups—and tonic-clonic seizures, which are grand mal seizures that involve muscle contraction and loss of consciousness. Mutations of the GABRA1 gene are associated with the cause. That gene encodes for a GABA—gamma-aminobutyric acid—receptor protein that inhibits and regulates nerve transmission in the brain, and those mutations can therefore lead to excitatory neurotransmission and can cause seizures. The extent and understanding of the relationship of genetics with, and its influence on, other syndromes of epilepsy is an area in which Scotland is at the forefront of research. The Glasgow epilepsy genetics service is the primary genetic testing centre for the United Kingdom and Ireland, and it performs tests for Australia, New Zealand and other countries worldwide. Requests from doctors in less-developed countries are exceptional. However, one-off ad hoc tests have been performed, based on clinical judgement and in close consultation. The service was established in 2005 and is partly funded by the Muir Maxwell Trust. It currently tests for six genes that are associated with epilepsy and carries out free tests for Scottish hospitals. Tests for more than 2,500 patients have been undertaken, which have given them definitive diagnoses. The service and the health workers involved are recognised as world leaders in modern genetic research. The service’s on-site consultant paediatric neurologist, Dr Sameer Zuberi, gave an insightful presentation to the cross-party group on epilepsy in which he explained how new genetic research in Scotland is benefiting epileptic patients. His work and that of his colleagues is responsible for maintaining the service’s esteemed reputation. Dr Zuberi specialises in epilepsies that begin in infancy, which are thought to make up 10 per cent of all epilepsies. The service focuses on the genes that are responsible for those epilepsies, including the SLC2A1 and the STXBP1 genes. Mutations of the SLC2A1 gene are associated with early-onset absence epilepsy in young children. Those mutations lead to difficulties in the normal transportation of glucose in the brain, which is deprived of energy with the resulting effect of recurrent seizures. The discovery of that mutation has allowed clinicians to prescribe a specific treatment: the ketogenic diet. Dr Zuberi illustrated the effect of that treatment by showing a video of an epileptic child to the cross-party group. The child transformed from being unable to maintain balance while walking to being able to walk in a straight line without aid. That highlights the life-changing practical benefits of genetic testing, which include giving accurate diagnoses and allowing the correct treatment, thereby preventing potential side effects from inappropriate medication. Epilepsy sufferers often find themselves in a spiral of taboos, misconceptions and unanswered questions. Genetic testing can offer relief by providing a scientific cause for their condition and a definitive diagnosis. It is estimated that 23 per cent of all epileptic patients in Scotland have been misdiagnosed, with all the consequences that that brings, such as inappropriately prescribed medication and false hope. The epilepsy genetics service assesses genetic mutations and changes in genes that are associated with the onset of specific epilepsy syndromes, and determines the patient’s risk of developing epilepsy. It aids in the diagnosis of epilepsy, in combination with the patient’s history and an electroencephalogram. The service also operates a genetic counselling service for patients with an identified mutated gene. Genetic counselling assesses the patient’s risk and their family’s risk of developing epilepsy and offers guidance, support and confidence to patients who wish to have children. A survey that was performed by the service highlighted that 80 per cent of patients who were surveyed agreed that a genetic diagnosis is beneficial. The impact of genetic testing on epilepsy is only just being explored, but it is clear that Scotland is pioneering future research. The epilepsy genetic service aims to carry out a Scottish paediatric epilepsy origins and outcomes study, which will relate genetic factors to epilepsy types, socioeconomic factors and outcomes in all new epilepsy cases. The relationship between pharmacogenetics and drug resistance, which addresses the effects of genetic variation on drug response and adverse effects, is an area that is showing promising signs and in which there are possibilities for future expansion. Common variation in gene SCN1A has been proven to limit the maximum dose of the anti-epileptic drugs phenytoin and carbamazepine. Implementation of pharmacogenetics will support the clinician and improve drug management, where drugs that complement the patient’s phenotype and epilepsy syndrome can be prescribed. A dense framework of supportive staff supports the success of the Glasgow epilepsy genetics service. However, the lack of neurologist nurses has been raised numerous times, and many health boards do not have the supportive staff whom they require. The deficiency in the number of neurological specialists prevents health boards from giving some patients necessary care and support, and is an issue to be resolved. I understand that there are currently only 17 epilepsy nurse specialists in Scotland, including two in NHS Ayrshire and Arran, which covers my Cunninghame North constituency. The success and excellent reputation of the Glasgow epilepsy genetics service is a testament to the hard work and intellect of Scotland's healthcare professionals and researchers in making Scotland a leader in ground-breaking modern genetic testing that will help epileptics and their families, not just in Scotland, but throughout Europe and the world.

It is a privilege to take part in a debate that I believe will be regarded as the beginning of the greatest change to Scotland’s emergency services in generations, as Graeme Pearson suggested in his excellent and thought-provoking speech. The financial benefits of the reforms are obvious, but I am certain that the structure will also allow us to maintain world-class services of which Scots can be proud and which other nations will continue to envy. We must also recognise the fantastic scope to create modern and dynamic services that are more suited to the constantly changing demands that are placed on them in the modern age. Stephen House, the chief Constable of Strathclyde Police shares that view. He has stated: “I believe that we should have one, single national police force for Scotland ... not because” it is “the cheapest option—but because it is the right option.” Scotland’s police force has witnessed dramatic change in the past and has continued to evolve and improve. In 1973, just before the last restructuring, Scotland had 20 chief constables and 11,000 officers. Today, we have eight chief constables and more than 17,000 officers. I believe that the reforms are another example of a progressive shift away from a top-heavy structure to a focus on the front-line provision of community safety and law enforcement. Of course, the fact that we are restructuring our police service is not an admission that something is drastically wrong and that a radical shift is required. In fact, the opposite is true. In the past 10 years, Scotland’s fire and rescue services have performed remarkably well, with deaths from fire reducing by almost 50 per cent. The success of the police force has been similarly impressive. As the cabinet secretary indicated, crime is at a 35-year low, detection rates have improved and there are record levels of public satisfaction with the service that is provided. Very often, that is down to the commitment and excellence of individual police officers, on which we should congratulate them. Following last year’s riots in England, Professor Stephen Reicher from the University of St Andrews and Dr Clifford Stott from the University of Liverpool concluded in their paper, “Mad Mobs and Englishmen? Myths and Realities of the 2011 Riots”, that the riots were caused largely by insensitive policing. They made it clear that there were no riots in Scotland because different policing attitudes prevail, with officers in Scotland being much more engaged and willing to talk to the public than those south of the border. Anecdotal evidence from Scottish police officers who were drafted into England to help subdue the riots confirmed that that was accurate; a number of such anecdotes were discussed at last night’s police and fire reception, which I and a number of colleagues attended. It was pointed out that many rioters and young people in London and Manchester were shocked when Scottish officers struck up a friendly conversation with them. That approach is extremely important. In view of that, it is essential that we maintain the effective approach of policing by consent that Jenny Marra mentioned, and that we retain the current number of front-line officers, so that such policing can be delivered. However, it has become apparent that, to achieve that, we—in line with every other western European country—must reform the police to gain maximum efficiency and to protect services. In essence, if we want things to stay the same, things will have to change. The Finance Committee took evidence from a variety of key stakeholders, including the Fire Brigades Union, the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland, the Scottish Police Federation, COSLA and a number of regional police and fire and rescue services. Following those evidence sessions, the economic case for reform of the police and fire services was compelling. The outline business cases for police and fire reform show that, together, the single services will deliver estimated efficiency savings of £1.7 billion over 15 years. I understand that Mr McLetchie has concerns about that figure, but the bill team gave robust responses to questions on the issue from members of the Finance Committee. As we have heard, it is anticipated that, from 2016-17, annual recurring cash savings of £130 million will be made across police and fire and rescue services. The majority of those savings will undoubtedly come from a reduction in duplication, improved procurement and the sharing of resources. For the police service alone, it currently costs £30 million to run the chief officers association, the eight police boards, the eight command teams of chief officers and the eight different corporate development systems, while £5 million is spent on the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland, £10 million on different information and communications technology systems and £1.7 million on procurement, because of the difference in specifications between forces. There is no doubt that, with a single service, significant efficiencies can be made in those areas, which could be reinvested in front-line services. However, as I have made clear, the reforms will also help to create more dynamic police and fire services that are responsive to different challenges. Following reform, police and fire resources will be deployed more flexibly—some of that flexibility has already been introduced—and shared across the country, which will improve access to specialist services and assets, including firearms units, riot teams and specialised vehicles and equipment. That will help officers to tackle threats and to address needs that cross regional boundaries, and it will be particularly important when it comes to addressing the menace of organised crime and terrorism. It is important to address fears that the new arrangements will disenfranchise local communities and will lead to a reduction in the quality of localised community policing, which I spoke so warmly of earlier. The bill strives to protect and, in fact, enhance the accountability of the police and fire services to local communities, and individual community requirements will continue to be prioritised. The bill will ensure the creation of new independent bodies to hold the chief constable and the chief fire officer to account, while local area commanders will be given power and significant autonomy to make plans for their own areas; it will not be the case that such direction comes from the centre. In addition, the bill makes it clear that, under a single fire service, more responsibility will be devolved to front-line managers, who will work with locally elected officials and community planning partnerships to deliver locally focused and accountable services. Through their councillors, local communities will have a far greater say in how policing is delivered. In my local authority area, two councillors out of 30 are on a joint police board of 34. It is estimated that, under the reforms, that will change to 12 councillors, who will have a direct and formal say in policing in the area. I am proud that the SNP Government is taking this bold step to reform our police and fire services, and I am pleased that the two main Opposition parties are supportive of the direction that we are going in. It is important that we continue to provide high-quality services. In the face of unprecedented cuts from Westminster—cuts that David McLetchie tried to deny earlier—this approach to our emergency services is far more progressive than the policies of the coalition Government, which will slash police numbers by 16,000. Had this Parliament not been established, no doubt we would suffer the same cuts. Once again, the SNP Government is leading the way and demonstrating an ambitious and positive way forward.

2. To ask the Scottish Government when it next plans to meet North Ayrshire Council and what will be discussed. (S4O-00970)

Does the minister agree that it is important for the Scottish National Party Government to work closely with North Ayrshire Council to ensure the delivery of joint objectives, such as tackling unemployment, boosting the local economy and improving service delivery? Will he congratulate Councillor Willie Gibson on becoming the probable leader of North Ayrshire Council after the SNP took seats from Labour, the Tories, the Liberal Democrats and independents to become the biggest party on North Ayrshire Council last week?

Wonderful. Thank you, Presiding Officer. I thank the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth for bringing this debate to the chamber. As many Scottish households continue to struggle during these difficult times, I can think of nothing more important than discussing the Scottish Government’s strategy to promote economic recovery and accelerate growth in Scotland. As convener of the Finance Committee, I have had the opportunity to listen to a variety of experts and key stakeholders in Scotland, including representatives from a diverse array of organisations. As colleagues have mentioned, one of the people who gave evidence to us yesterday was Dr Lena Wilson, chief executive of Scottish Enterprise. A piece in The Scotsman on 10 April quotes her as saying: “You’d all say the economy is the number one objective. Well, when you looked at what everyone was doing, it didn’t always look like that. There has been an absolute sea change in the last few years.” The Scotsman goes on to say: “Leadership from the top helps—she is full of praise for finance secretary John Swinney who, without much public fuss, has firmly directed all public bodies onto the priority of economic development. A good example, she says, came recently with salmon. A massive disease in Chile, one of Scotland’s biggest salmon competitors, had wiped out much of their stock. There was therefore a huge chance to upscale salmon production and clean up. The problem was planning. ‘We went straight to John Swinney and within a matter of weeks we had a salmon planning summit where he had every single head of planning for every local authority and salmon federation and salmon producers and made it clear about the intention.’ The planning issue got cleared.” Professor Jim McDonald, Strathclyde University’s principal, also gave evidence to the committee. I quote from a piece about him in The Scotsman on 11 April: “It’s understandable ... that companies have headed east in search of lower costs. But now, those same firms are realising that they need the expertise, research base and talent to be found in Scotland”. The Scotsman goes on to say that, in March, “Strathclyde won the competition to become the home of the UK government’s grandly titled ‘Offshore Renewable Energy Catapult’, another £50 million project to fund academics to bridge the gap between paper dreams and money-making energy projects. The way Scotland’s universities work together on all this gives the country an edge. ‘Our research pooling is the envy of Europe.’” The piece also says that, according to Professor McDonald, “Scotland also punches well above its weight in its top-quality research ... borne out by new figures showing that higher education research and development spending in Scotland is now 13.6 per cent of the UK’s, well ahead of its population share. ‘We have a scientific and engineering and technology research base that is among the very best in the world. It’s not us saying that, it is the statistics around academic performance—patents, publications, at the top end.’” Professor McDonald says: “A real key piece in this is leadership ... we hear the strong messages from the Scottish Government about partnership and focus.” We have already heard about Philip Grant, who also gave evidence to the Finance Committee, and the optimistic messages from business. Mr Grant talks about 14 months of slow but steady economic growth in Scotland under the leadership of the SNP Government. Having listened to that broad cross-section of opinion, I believe that the SNP Government is doing all that it can under the terms of the current constitutional settlement to achieve its stated goals of accelerating recovery, supporting long-term sustainable economic growth and boosting employment. Yesterday, Mr Justin King, chief executive of Sainsbury’s, lambasted the Tory-Lib Dem coalition Government in London for fuelling uncertainty among already cash-strapped consumers, arguing that greater consistency in key Westminster policy areas would bolster consumer confidence. Mr King summed up the situation by saying: “Unfortunately, what we have seen over the last couple of years is something that could not be described as a consistent pursuit of a clear policy that the consumer at large understands, whether that is a consistent tax environment, or a consistent rates environment.”

In a minute, Mr Brown. The Scottish Government has protected universal services, kept university education free, frozen the council tax and worked with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to set aside £40 million to help 567,000 low-income Scots. Those measures have not only contributed to the development of a fairer society in Scotland, but boosted consumer confidence by providing greater certainty and stability at a time when household budgets are already stretched thin. I have not forgotten Mr Brown—I will let him in in a second. The Conservative plan to put 3p a litre plus VAT on fuel this autumn will only damage economic recovery. As for Gavin Brown’s concern at £95 million being redistributed within Scotland through the health levy, he seems remarkably unconcerned at the £3 billion that will leave Scotland in increased VAT payments over the same period—money going straight to the Treasury—not to mention money from fuel duty increases and public sector pension grabs and so on.

We must take everything in context. I have pointed out that the retail levy amounts to 3 per cent of the money that Gavin Brown’s Government in London is taking straight from the Scottish economy and giving to the Treasury. That does not include other things that have been mentioned. Also, the money from the retail levy is recirculated within the Scottish economy. Mr Brown must admit that his argument on the retail levy is a bit of a fig leaf. It is important to remember that we have delivered those measures during difficult economic times and have secured £700 million in efficiency savings over three years. We also have an impressive record of legislative competence. In December last year, when the Parliament responded to the chancellor’s autumn statement, I highlighted an OECD report that had been released that week, which warned that the UK was on course to slip back into recession. In March, the First Minister wrote to the UK Government reiterating our calls for increased capital spending. As per the Prime Minister’s request, he also provided a list of specific shovel-ready projects. However, with the UK in double-dip recession, still no ground has been broken on any of those projects because the UK has not provided funding, despite the fact that it is a matter of urgency. We heard yesterday from Mr Swinney that, if Labour had been in power, the cut to capital spending would have been £4 billion more than the one that the UK Government imposed. Scotland suffers from a Tweedledee, Tweedledum approach from the UK parties. The members of this Parliament, all of whom are accountable solely to the Scottish people, are best placed to address the problems that Scotland currently faces, including the continuing need to bolster economic growth and recovery. As we look to the problems that may arise in future—whether the need for economic growth and recovery, the need to address demographic change in Scotland or other issues that are related to fiscal sustainability—it becomes ever clearer with each passing day that the Parliament needs the real powers that come with independence if we are to address effectively the challenges that Scotland will face and ensure prosperity for our people.

I am pleased to open this debate on fiscal sustainability on behalf of the Finance Committee. I refer members to our summary of the written evidence and the paper by our adviser, Professor David Bell, and record our thanks for the work that the David Hume Institute has done in the course of our evidence taking on demographic changes, inequalities and socioeconomic deprivation, universal services and additional funding models. We took evidence from many individuals and organisations and we are grateful for their input and stimulating contributions. I also record my thanks to the committee clerks for their support, hard work and professionalism. Recent years have seen a severe deterioration in the fiscal position of Governments worldwide. The financial crisis and recession have contributed to the largest United Kingdom peacetime budget deficit and a huge increase in the national debt. The UK macroeconomic situation clearly has implications for the discretionary element of the Scottish budget. Given that context, the committee identified the four issues that I mentioned as key elements within the fiscal sustainability theme. There are many aspects to this, and we have only begun to scratch the surface, but our discussions were important in identifying key issues to pursue in more detail. In my speech before Christmas on the draft budget, I said: “Not everything can be a priority. The challenge of how to allocate funding is acute.”—[Official Report, 22 December 2011; c 5046.] That is an important point to again highlight. Members will recall that the committee re-emphasised its focus on preventative spending, given the clear links between that and fiscal sustainability. General projections are that the Scottish population aged 65 and over will increase by 21 per cent between 2006 and 2016 and will be 62 per cent bigger by 2031. The population aged 85 and over will rise by 38 per cent by 2016 and 144 per cent by 2031. The implications of that are obvious in a number of areas, such as the provision of universal services. Consideration must be given and action must be taken now, across the whole public sector, to prevent or limit adverse impacts. The Office for Budget Responsibility produces an annual fiscal sustainability report, which principally focuses on the costs associated with population ageing, including health and social care, and the sustainability of tax revenues. I highlight the importance of pension sustainability. The OBR looks at the fiscal impact of public sector activity—as reflected in the assets and liabilities that the public sector has accumulated on its balance sheet—and the potential impact of future activity, by examining how spending and revenues may evolve over the next 50 years and the impact that that would have on such assets and liabilities. Broadly speaking, the fiscal position is unsustainable if the public sector absorbs an ever-increasing share of national income simply to pay debt interest. The International Monetary Fund, in a 2009 report on the international financial crisis, stated: “In spite of the large fiscal costs of the crisis, the major threat to long-term fiscal solvency is still represented, at least in advanced countries, by unfavorable demographic trends.” The OBR agreed, and said: “policymakers and would-be policymakers should ... think carefully about the long-term consequences of any policies they introduce or propose” to introduce “in the short term.” The 2010 report of the independent budget review recognised the influence that demographic shifts will have on our public finances, while Audit Scotland, in its report, “Scotland’s public finance: addressing the challenges”, said: “There will be a significant change in the demographic profile of Scotland’s population over the next 25 years, which will increase demand for public services in many areas.” Our budget adviser stated in his paper: “Demographic change is one of the main prospective pressures on the Scottish budget.” To outline some of the numbers, from 1951 to 2009 the life expectancy of Scots males increased from 64.4 years to 75.8 years, while that of females increased from 68.7 years to 80.3 years. In 1980, male life expectancy was 69.1 years and female life expectancy was 75.3 years. Males who retired at 65 in 1980 could expect to live only a further 4.1 years, and females who retired at 60 could expect to live for 15.3 years. In 2009, males could expect to live for 10.8 years after retirement, while women could expect to live for 20.3 years. The increase in the average number of years spent in retirement has obvious pension and other costs. In evidence to the session 3 Finance Committee’s inquiry on preventative spending, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities stated: “when we look at the structural problems that we face around health and social care, we often examine the issue in budgetary terms, because it is well known that ... there will be a diminishing amount of public finance available in Scotland. However, that is not the major problem. It is demographic change that will create the primary challenges in the health and social care networks throughout Scotland.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 16 November 2010; c 2736.] Audit Scotland stated in its report: “Demand for health and social care ... is particularly high among older people, particularly those aged 75 and over. An increasing older population is likely to lead to more people living longer with health problems such as diabetes and chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder requiring ongoing care. At the same time, the public’s expectations of services delivered by the NHS have risen. For example, it may be difficult to maintain recent improvements in waiting times for treatment when there is significantly higher demand for these services.” That issue is not wholly within the cabinet secretary’s portfolio, but I would welcome his comments on any projections that the Scottish Government has made on the impact of the increase in non-healthy older people on future budgets and its strategy for addressing that impact. The committee agreed to take forward an inquiry on demography and the ageing population, and health and social care will feature in that. An issue that was highlighted in oral and written evidence was the provision of housing and, in particular, the number and type of properties that are provided. The Joseph Rowntree Foundation identified the trend whereby our society has more people living in single-person households. In all likelihood, more of us than ever will arrive in old age living alone. The Scottish Government has published “Age, Home and Community: A Strategy for Housing for Scotland’s Older People: 2012-2021”, which looks at the implications for housing and what might be done to ensure that the right type of housing is available in future years. I am sure that the chamber would welcome any update that the cabinet secretary can provide on the projections that the Scottish Government has made on the volume, type and quality of housing that will be required to meet the demands of an increasingly older population. I want to flag up some points that were made about the impacts on the labour market. Scotland’s working-age population is projected to increase by 7 per cent between 2010 and 2035. Releasing the talents and energies of the over-65s is important, because many people have the abilities and the will to keep on working. That is no bad thing, but we must reflect on the impact that more over-65s in the labour market might have on younger people. The inability of a young person to get into the labour market and to start paying into his or her pension could cause long-term financial burdens. Small pensions are a root cause of poverty among older people, while large pensions create funding difficulties for national Governments. It would be interesting to hear from the cabinet secretary how the Scottish Government balances the provision of encouragement and support to older people who wish to remain in employment—which has associated positive health and other benefits—and who make a contribution through paying taxes and creating growth and wealth, against the creation of opportunities for younger people to enter the job market. Further to that, it would be interesting to find out what assessment the Scottish Government has made of the extent to which the current economic climate is causing older people to remain in employment for longer. I turn to inequality and socioeconomic deprivation. Our focus was on improving the employability of individuals who are experiencing high levels of multiple deprivation. The Joseph Rowntree Foundation emphasised the need for “an almost obsessive focus” on employability. We recently took evidence on the Smith group recommendations on youth unemployment, and we will shortly hold a series of round-table discussions on employability. On preventative spend, the Christie commission said: “The greatest challenge facing public services is to combat the negative outcomes for individuals and communities arising from deep-rooted inequalities.” In our budget report, we asked the Scottish Government what plans it had to introduce a new set of statutory powers and duties, common to all public service bodies, that were focused on improving outcomes and which included a presumption in favour of preventative action and tackling inequalities. In its response, the Government said that it had not yet reached a firm view on whether there was value to be gained from introducing such additional powers and duties over and above those that already exist. An update from the cabinet secretary on that would be appreciated. The value of employment in reducing inequalities was a common theme. The Improvement Service stated: “If you look at all the data across every community in Scotland, you see that people in employment enjoy far better outcomes in terms of health, wellbeing, safety and so on than people who are not in employment”, and that “even if you are on a low income, it is better to be in employment than not to be in employment.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 18 January 2012; c 521-2.] Its report, “Making Better Places, Making Places Better: The Distribution of Negative and Positive Outcomes in Scotland”, highlights the fact that the gap between the top 20 per cent and the bottom 20 per cent is the widest in developed Europe, with the bottom 20 per cent at age 15 performing as if they have had five years less schooling than the top 20 per cent. A similar point was made in evidence on the initial findings from the growing up in Scotland study, which show that the gap found between the cognitive abilities of children from more advantaged social backgrounds and those of children from less advantaged social backgrounds at the age of three persists at the age of five and beyond. The largest differences in ability are between children whose parents have higher educational qualifications and those who have lower ones. There are clear links between that and how we prepare individuals for later life and their opportunities for securing employment. The issue will feature in our employability evidence sessions, the findings from which will inform our focus on sustainable economic growth as we scrutinise the draft budget 2013-14 in the autumn. I turn to the provision and funding of universal services, by which I mean concessionary travel, free personal and nursing care, prescription charges, eye examinations, school meals and tuition fees. Audit Scotland has estimated the combined annual cost of free personal and nursing care, concessionary travel, eye tests and prescription charges to be £870 million. Given that we have a rising and ageing population, such costs are likely to increase substantially. Our discussion was not about deciding whether a particular service should remain free, but we must be open to considering the costs of such provision. The Scottish Government has committed to maintaining universal services over the course of the spending review, but we must consider funding that sustainably. One option may be to evaluate each service to determine who benefits and whether more criteria should be attached to each service, for example by changing the admissibility rules. There is a need for sound and relevant data on that, and we will hold an evidence session next month on data collection. As the IBR said in its report, “the issue is not one of desirability but of affordability”. There are legitimate questions to be asked around provision and entitlement. However, any such consideration must be balanced against any increased cost in administering such schemes. Saving money by limiting or removing an entitlement but spending a similar amount on means testing makes no sense. It would be useful to hear from the cabinet secretary on the sustainability of universal services in the wider context of an ageing population. The final issue was additional funding methods. For the Government, social impact bonds can remove the financial risk of services that prove to be ineffective at addressing social needs and improving outcomes. For investors, they offer a mission-aligned investment opportunity, as well as a potential return on investment. For service providers, they provide up-front funding. Finally, for the public and service users, they pay for services that fill a gap in existing provision. The use of social impact bonds is in its infancy, as is the concept of payment by results, but there is a growing consensus that past mechanisms for investing in deprived communities have not worked. Sound evaluation is required of their use, outcomes and whether they bring greater success, and there is also a need to consider the scalability of such funding methods. Pilots that are being run in England are being monitored by the Scottish Government. Perhaps the cabinet secretary can advise the Parliament of any initial thoughts that he has on social impact bonds and the scope for roll-out in Scotland. The committee looks forward to delving deeper into some of the issues that have been mentioned. I hope that the committee’s work will inform the contributions of members this afternoon and in the future. I move, That the Parliament notes the summary of evidence of the Finance Committee’s series of roundtable discussions on fiscal sustainability.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with North Ayrshire Council regarding the proposed changes to council tax benefit by the United Kingdom Government. (S4O-00949)

The minister will be aware that the measures in the Welfare Reform Bill, if enacted, will drain up to £2.5 billion from the Scottish economy by 2015. Will he advise us of the impact on North Ayrshire, where deprivation is high, and of what the Scottish National Party Government’s action in covering the impending council tax benefit cut will mean for constituents on council tax benefit and the wider North Ayrshire economy?

Is the cabinet secretary aware that the local Labour MP opposed enterprise status in my constituency, as did some Labour local authority candidates? It is clear that Labour’s approach is not consistent.

Does the cabinet secretary agree that the Labour Party’s position in West Dunbartonshire is at odds with its position elsewhere in Scotland?

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

Jackson Carlaw’s comments were interesting. My colleague Paul Wheelhouse used indeed to be a member of the Conservative Party. Margaret McCulloch MSP, too, was a Conservative candidate as recently as 2007. What does that say about the Conservative Party? People are desperate to leave it. Of course, the only Conservative MP in Scotland, David Mundell, was a Social Democratic Party councillor—something of which I am more than happy to remind him whenever I see him, although for some reason it makes him blush. Let us look at the Tory record on localism and local government. Did not the Tories abolish Strathclyde Regional Council and the other regions? Did they not abolish the Greater London Council? Did they not abolish town and borough councils, back in the 1970s—a move that many older people rue to this day? Someone mentioned gerrymandering. I remember a local by-election in Renfrewshire, many moons ago, in which the Tories were trounced by the Liberal Democrats—those were the days, Tavish—because they wanted to move Ralston into East Renfrewshire, in a gerrymandering exercise that failed when the people of the area realised that if that happened they would no longer be able to send their children to Paisley grammar school. When the Tories drew up the local authority boundaries they put together little enclaves, such as South Ayrshire and East Renfrewshire—Eastwood, as it was then—with the exclusive intention of winning local government seats. The Tories took that approach not because it was the best one or because it made strategic sense but for narrow political ends. If the Tories had any interest in local communities, they would not be insulting communities and showing them contempt, for example by becoming directly involved in candidate selection. We know that because one of them told the Press Association that they were asked to stand to make up the numbers. An 87-year-old Conservative candidate in the North, West and Central Sutherland ward of Highland Council told the PA on 13 April: “Someone in Edinburgh at the top of the party phoned me up and asked if I would like to help them out. I emphasised I would—but only if they could guarantee that I would not win.” The ambition is astonishing. He continued: “I did offer to go up to North, West and Central Sutherland but the party bosses said there was no need to. They told me to do nothing ... All they wanted was my name on the ballot paper. ... That’s why people like me have been asked to stand, not because we have any hope of winning but to split the vote and reduce the chance of the SNP getting in.” How pathetic. I understand that the 87-year-old candidate was nominated by the young Conservatives, of which he apparently still qualifies as a member. The Conservative Party is stagnant. Who said that they are “not going to turn that around overnight”? It was Ruth Davidson, the Conservatives’ new leader, who until recently was hiding up the back of the chamber somewhere. Ms Davidson’s knowledge of local government is not too great—it is about as good as her knowledge of the Welfare Reform Bill. On 3 April, she said: “We think that there are areas in which local councils can make a difference, for example in Stirling we are part of the administration.” Sorry, but the Tories are not part of the administration there. The Conservatives’ line is nonsense. With their “big society”, they are flogging a dead horse. People are wise to it. The Tories are desperately looking for an idea. The Scotsman branded their phrase “local devolution” as “clumsy” and questioned its lack of detail. Let us look at Labour, though. We have heard all this nonsense from John Pentland and, before that, Sarah Boyack about cuts to local government. I have some figures that show that if we exclude national health service spend, local government’s share of the Scottish budget has increased from 64 per cent to 69 per cent since the SNP came to power. Let us look at what Labour said when the SNP came to power. Wendy Alexander said, in her legendary hungry caterpillar speech: “More tellingly, the height of Mr Swinney’s ambitions is a target that ... is less than half that set for the rest of the United Kingdom. That is even though we in Scotland start from a larger public sector base ... Although we had warm words from Mr Swinney, we ... start fatter than the rest of the UK, continue to slim more slowly ... and have a higher target weight at the end of the day when it comes to getting best value for Scottish taxpayers.” She went on to say that she had “not laid out what we would do in the next spending review. However, it is not ambitious to suggest a target that is half that of the UK’s and only to match what was done for the past three years.”—[Official Report, 24 May 2007; c 139-140.] Labour was calling for double the efficiency savings introduced by the SNP and, unlike the SNP’s, they would be top sliced. On 25 June 2008, I asked about that and was advised by Don Peebles that “the only logical consequence” of that Labour policy would be a £310 million reduction every year for local government. Let us not have any crocodile tears from Labour. If Wendy Alexander, who, three months later, was unopposed as Labour leader, had been in, there would have been a £1.5 billion cut from budgets. Of the 348 Labour councillors elected in 2007, 32 are now standing against Labour. In December, when Johann Lamont was elected Labour leader, there were nine Labour councillors in her Pollok constituency. Only four months later, six of those councillors are standing against the Labour Party, showing the chronic lack of confidence in the Labour Party, and indeed in Ms Lamont’s leadership, among her own councillors. We have abolished ring fencing. On council tax, I was interested to hear Sarah Boyack say that all local areas are putting up their own manifestos. That includes her own area of Edinburgh, where they are attacking the SNP for giving too much money to Glasgow. On the council tax freeze, Anas Sarwar said: “I don’t think that’s credible. I don’t think that’s progressive.” Of course, Labour’s manifesto for Edinburgh does not even mention it. After rubbishing the council tax freeze, Labour is now proposing a five-year council tax freeze in Glasgow. It is a party desperate not to win but to survive in local government next week. It will be in for a real drubbing, just like the Conservatives. As for the Liberals, with 84 fewer candidates, that is about as much of a mention as they need to be given.

Do you not accept that we have a limited and declining budget and that the share of money that is now going to local government is now higher than it was when the SNP came to power? If you think that local government should get additional funding, can you please tell us where that funding should come from?

Perhaps the member can explain why the Liberal Democrats have 84 fewer candidates in the election. It is no wonder that he is trying to take us on to a side issue: his party is on the verge of total collapse. In North Ayrshire, where I am an MSP, the Liberal Democrats came sixth in the list behind the pensioners and the Greens last year. They have four fewer candidates than the Socialist Labour Party. Will the member tell us why the Lib Dems have 84 fewer candidates, as this is a debate about local government?

The member has nae answer.

I am pleased that the Parliamentary Bureau selected my motion for debate and I thank MSPs of all parties who signed the motion and made that possible. Everyone has the right to live in an environment that benefits their health and wellbeing. That is crucial if people are to keep healthy and illness is to be prevented, and it can also be important in the management of or during recovery from mental or physical illness. If we are to improve the health and wellbeing of the nation, we must emphasise the importance of having a decent quality of life. Good health is not all about doctors and nurses. There are a variety of environmental projects in which individuals and communities can become involved. For example, the British Trust for Conservation Volunteers runs the green gym, which offers people of all ages and backgrounds the opportunity to improve their fitness by getting involved in practical environmental activities, such as tree and hedge planting and creating and maintaining community allotments. Green gyms help to improve people’s cardiovascular fitness, as well as providing the added benefits of fresh air, an improved local environment and social interaction. All green gym sessions involve trained leaders, who support volunteers. Sessions begin with warm-up exercises, demonstrations of how to use the tools that are provided and a briefing on the task ahead, and they end with cool-down exercises and a tidy up. People—young and old—are shown how to get to grips with digging holes, stone walling and planting, to improve fitness and the local environment. They can also be given hints and tips on how to grow food in their gardens. I well recall the launch of the green gym at Bridgend community centre, in Kilbirnie in my constituency, on 21 January 2010. The Scottish Government has provided £300,000 to support the expansion of BTCV green gyms across Scotland by 2012—this year. Research shows that working in the fresh air reduces stress levels, depression and the risk of heart disease and stroke. Such activities also improve muscular strength and help people to lead more independent lives while they meet new people and make friends. In addition, the opportunity is presented for people to conserve wildlife habitats and other aspects of the natural environment and to grow their own food and vegetables in a sustainable manner. Growing food helps to promote healthy eating, and community food-growing initiatives provide a source of fresh fruit and vegetables. There are the added advantages of physical activity and gaining valuable new skills and knowledge. The let’s make Scotland more active national physical activity strategy includes the target that, by 2022, half of all adults and 80 per cent of children should meet the current recommended levels of physical activity. Adults should do 30 minutes of moderate intensity activity five days a week, and children should do one hour of moderate intensity activity every day. In 2009, the Scottish Government Minister for Public Health and Sport stated: “It only takes” half an hour “a day of physical activity, at least five days a week, to gain enormous health benefits and help prevent many serious diseases like heart disease, cancer and stroke.” Soon after I was elected in 2007, I put forward to North Ayrshire Council the idea of establishing new allotments. At first, the idea was not welcomed by the Labour executive. After many discussions and much lobbying, Scottish National Party councillors Craig Taylor—who is, sadly, now deceased—and Joan Sturgeon formally proposed the idea of establishing allotments in the Gamock valley. Councillor Anthea Dickson and I strongly supported the group of people who subsequently formed the Garnock valley allotment association, and Councillor Dickson started work with the estates department to identify suitable areas for the GVAA. As the council did not have local land ownership maps on computer, Councillor Dickson did a lot of work to identify a possible location, determine who owned it and have it surveyed for suitability. Members of the group in Kilbirnie spent months raising money and trying to secure a site, and their determination paid off. They won the Scottish learning partnership award for health at adult learners week in May 2010. A derelict patch of ground was transformed into a community sensory garden at Bridgend community centre, and the GVAA has done a great job of turning it into a successfully regenerated green space. The group now has around 70 plots and it continues to grow its membership. Nearly all the plots that are currently available are taken up. Further work on the site is taking place to create proper paths, increase security and develop social areas. Frustrations remain with the continuous need to apply for funding. Kilbirnie green gym is funded by NHS Ayrshire and Arran, but individual projects, sites and gardens do not have any funding behind them. If we want to encourage people to take more regular physical activity—this ties in with the Scottish Government’s preventative spend agenda—allotments and their advocates will require additional funding and support. The key point is that councils may not set up and provide allotments, but would facilitate groups that sought to create allotments. A further example of the growing success of allotments is described by the allotments regeneration initiative, which has stated: “There are more than 500 community, therapeutic and allotment gardens throughout Scotland which involves more than 12,500 people every year. These projects range from small communal gardens in urban tenements, to large established rural community farms, to specialised units in prisons and hospitals.” Evidence from the BTCV suggests that people who live in areas with high levels of green space are 40 per cent less likely to be overweight or obese and that exercise in green space can significantly reduce depression. Working with local councils to further develop green gym schemes and other allotment initiatives would benefit communities by improving areas that may have fallen into disrepair. We need to build on the BTCV’s capacity to work with local partners, including local authorities, health boards and community groups, to establish more green gyms. There is no doubt that there is demand for more local allotment sites, that they bring people together, that home-grown food tastes better and is cheaper, and that the health and social benefits of being outdoors are excellent. Allotments are a win-win scenario. I understand from speaking to Brian Adam that, only yesterday, he opened an allotment in Cullen, which is in the minister’s constituency. It was partially funded to the tune of £29,000 from the climate challenge fund. Therefore, I have no doubt that the minister will show enthusiasm for the expansion of allotments in Scotland. I urge the Scottish Government to support communities to help them to establish allotments and green gyms so that they can become more sustainable and active while they work to help people to help themselves.

5. To ask the Scottish Government whether, in its response to the BBC trust consultation, “Delivering Quality First”, it raised the issue of the share of licence fee income that is spent on Scottish programming. (S4O-00893)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that “A smaller and radically reshaped BBC”, as envisaged by the consultation document, should allow for a relatively higher share of BBC licence fees raised in Scotland to stay in Scotland? Does she also agree that Scotland should therefore no longer contribute more than £200 million net to the BBC in London each year and that most of the money should, in fact, be invested in boosting programme quality, output and employment at BBC Scotland?

Willie Rennie said that the SNP Government was not financially responsible, which makes me wonder why he supported our budget only a few weeks ago. I welcome the opportunity to participate in a debate in which the dismissal of Scotland and its interests in last week’s regressive UK budget can be exposed. The Tory budget failed to provide a fair balance of economic security to families and opportunity for growth in Scotland. The fact is that the Tories in the Parliament are themselves not very impressed by the budget, as shown by the fact that only two of them have bothered to turn up for the debate, compared with 55 SNP members. The announcements of enhanced capital allowances for enterprise zones in Dundee, Irvine and Nigg, the tax credit for the video games industry and the new field allowance for North Sea oil extraction west of Shetland are positive achievements, although the latter simply makes up for the ham-fisted attack on the oil industry last year. I also welcome the raising of personal tax thresholds.

We must look at the budget in the round. If Mr Rennie listens to the rest of my speech, he might hear that. The chancellor’s decision to reduce the top rate of tax to 45p and his inability to recognise the growth potential and needs of Scotland mitigate against the announcements that I welcomed. The Labour Party’s appalling and cowardly response in Monday’s vote to abolish the 50p tax rate highlights its inability to respect its promises and obligations. Despite the fact that Ed Balls enthusiastically assured us that Labour would “vote against the higher rate tax cut”, the party abstained simply because the vote was forced by the SNP and Plaid Cymru, which was a clear case of focusing on the singer rather than the song and destroys Labour’s credibility. Of course, Labour’s incompetence when in power in announcing the 50p tax rate months before its implementation allowed some of those affected by the tax to arrange to dodge it, as Robert Chote—the chair of the Office for Budget Responsibility—made clear only this morning in evidence to the Finance Committee. I point out to Mr Rennie that the tax rate drop benefits only 15,000 people in Scotland, whereas the decision to freeze and remove the age-related personal allowance on pensioner incomes will affect more than 327,000 Scottish pensioners. Mr Hepburn has already pointed out that the 20 per cent poorest people in our society will be the most adversely affected by the budget.

It will affect people who depend on the post, and not only small businesses that cannot always get the best contracts, but pensioners who, for example, may not be online. The most socially excluded people in our society are the ones who will be most adversely affected by that regressive move. The chancellor promised to deliver a just budget to benefit families, yet tax credits will no longer be available to more than 84,000 Scottish households and 119,000 children will be adversely affected. The chancellor has not considered the impact of his severe cuts on the people of Scotland. The Institute of Fiscal Studies estimated that the UK Government policy will cost households an average of £790 a year. As we have heard already, he does not seem interested in improving the UK’s sluggish growth rate by putting in place measures to stimulate it. The chancellor failed to resource 36 shovel-ready projects in Scotland with £302 million of capital investment to begin projects, including the construction of a new centre of virology research in Glasgow, two projects at Hunterston and the A737 in my constituency. Those would have generated more than 4,200 jobs.

I am really sorry, Gavin, but I have taken two interventions and I am running out of time. Investing in our infrastructure is essential to generate jobs and boost economic growth but the chancellor deemed that unimportant through his willingness to delay the projects. The chancellor’s lack of concern for small businesses has created many concerns and reduced business confidence in the UK Government. He has not considered the combined effect of rising fuel duty and VAT on small businesses. John Walker, the national chairman of the Federation of Small Businesses, stated that the increase in fuel duty—when VAT is added—by 3.63p in August “will still hit businesses and households hard and so we need to see a long term solution to address high and volatile fuel prices.” That solution was promised by the Tories and Liberals before the 2010 election, but it was not delivered. Scots will continue to pay high levels of fuel duty and that will undermine competitiveness, reduce the money in people’s pockets and cost jobs. Worries about the high levels of VAT were emphasised by Brian Berry, chief executive of the Federation of Master Builders, who said: “The chancellor also missed an opportunity when streamlining VAT to include a lower rate of VAT for Green Deal , which would be a useful incentive.” The FMB estimates that 2,103 new Scottish construction jobs would have been created by such a cut in VAT.

Thank you, Presiding Officer.

Will the member take an intervention?

The UK Government indicated that borrowing is £11 billion less at this stage than was expected: it has dropped from £137 billion to £126 billion. Would it be so wrong to put half of that £11 billion, which was not expected, into shovel-ready projects? That £5.5 billion would create 77,000 jobs and would provide a stimulus. In contrast to what Mr Brown claimed, the IFS said that that would not harm economic prospects at this time, and would help the unemployed people who could take the jobs.

Given Margaret McCulloch’s concerns about that route, can she tell me why the Labour Party abolished the service in 2001?

When the RET was first rolled out in the Western Isles, the Labour Party in North Ayrshire, where I am an MSP, denounced the SNP Government for subsidising the Western Isles with the taxes of the people of North Ayrshire. In Edinburgh recently, leaflets have been sent out that talk about the SNP subsidising Glasgow, to Edinburgh’s detriment. This is another opportunistic debate from the Labour Party. We still have no answers on how it would fund the services. Despite what Margaret McCulloch said, it should show joined-up thinking on how it will address the issue. Ferry services and the implications of the ferries review are important to my constituents in Arran and Cumbrae.

I will let Elaine Murray in once I have made some progress. The RET will be rolled out to the Clyde islands and there will be £14.5 million of investment in the Brodick services. The proposed Lochboisdale to Mallaig ferry service was not prioritised in the draft—I emphasise the word “draft”—ferries review because the Lochmaddy to Uig service is even shorter than Elaine Murray’s suggested service. That shorter and more easily accessible service is the principal one that islanders use. The survey of Uist households that has been referred to demonstrates that there is demand for a Lochboisdale to Mallaig service. However, although 42 per cent of Uist residents were not satisfied with having Oban as their mainland port, 52 per cent were satisfied and around 6 per cent claimed that the mainland destination port was of no concern to them.

I will let Elaine Murray in because she asked first. Perhaps she can explain where Labour would find the £4 million a year that would be needed to run the Lochboisdale to Mallaig service and the cost of the new ferry if such a service were to be introduced.

That service is already funded through the capital infrastructure plan. Elaine Murray’s suggestion is that we take money from existing projects and transfer it. I will be glad to tell my constituents in Arran that the Labour Party does not want the £14.5 million investment to go ahead. I am sure that they will be delighted to know that. As the December 2011 ferry services plan explains: “The larger communities in the Northern and Western Isles do not show a personal dependency as a key dependency” for an improved ferry service to the islands. As the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change said in 2007, the Scottish transport appraisal guidance appraisal of 2005 “noted that a large proportion of the increase in economic activities in South Uist and Mallaig would be the result of displacement from communities served by existing ferry services ... while there would be some demand for such a service the vast majority of demand would be displaced from existing services with little net increase”.—[Official Report, Written Answers, 3 December 2007; S3W-06718.]

I am really sorry, but I do not have time to take another intervention in a four-minute speech. If that displacement were to happen, we would have to switch resources from other islands that, perhaps, have only one route, which may be a lifeline service. In many parts of Scotland, the draft plan will have a tremendously positive impact. In Arran and Cumbrae, we will have earlier and later services, which will have a great impact on the economy of the Clyde islands. It has also been suggested that the existing Ardrossan to Brodick vessel may be replaced with two, more fuel-efficient vessels, which would decrease running costs and allow people to come for business travel and personal reasons, and would allow folk to commute to the islands. That would help to bring about a renaissance on Arran and Cumbrae. I fully understand the concerns that members have about the Western Isles, but the Scottish Government must consider ferry services in the round. If we suggest additional services from one part of Scotland to another, it is important that we consider the impact on the rest of the network and how people would be affected. I have 20 seconds. Can I take an intervention from Jamie McGrigor, Presiding Officer?

I am sorry. I did not realise that I had rattled through, as I have. I add my support for the amendment. The SNP Government is doing a great job on ferries. Long may it continue.

So what happened?

What a pleasure it is to speak in a debate on legislation that I am confident will be a major step towards creating a Scotland that is better able to address its deadly relationship with alcohol, which will result in a far safer, healthier and happier society. To address Kezia Dugdale’s point about education, I say that I am afraid that the World Health Organization disagrees with her and says that education is less effective than legislation. To their credit, the Liberal Democrats and the Conservatives now realise the merits of the proposed legislation, but I am saddened to see that the Labour Party obstinately refuses to accept the overwhelming weight of evidence from the medical profession, the police, alcohol addiction services, and religious institutions. Richard Simpson is becoming the King Canute of Scottish politics with this issue; he is trying to hold back the waves of evidence that are being presented. If Labour members possessed a shred of humility, they would be ashamed of themselves and admit that they have got it wrong. A “Mea culpa” in politics is sometimes appropriate, and the Conservatives and Liberals will suffer no harm by accepting that the proposed legislation should proceed. Of course, the vote is not until 5 pm, so I ask members, rather than just staying in the trenches, to think carefully and to listen to the arguments that are being made this afternoon before pressing their buttons this evening. The evidence about the impact of minimum pricing is compelling, and I do not want to go over again what colleagues have said about Professor Stockwell. However, NHS Scotland showed that setting a unit price of 45p would have an almost immediate impact and a growing effect over the years. A minimum price of 50p would be even more effective. In the first year of a 45p minimum price, we will see 50 fewer deaths and 1,200 fewer hospital admissions. In year 10, those figures will have risen to 225 fewer deaths and 4,200 fewer hospital admissions per annum. Of course, it must be remembered that it is not only the health and wellbeing of drink misusers that will improve. Jon Stoddart of the Association of Chief Police Officers said: “Research shows that as price has decreased, consumption has increased—the average person is drinking more than 11 litres of alcohol a year, more than twice the average consumption in the 1950s. The introduction of a minimum price per unit of alcohol would make alcohol less affordable thus reducing consumption and in turn the associated harm.” The police know about the effect of alcohol misuse and they strongly support minimum pricing to reduce crime. We are talking not just about crimes of domestic violence and disorder but about serious crimes such as murder, which often have alcohol as a contributing component. Earlier today, leaders of nine major children’s charities signed a letter calling on Parliament to back minimum pricing, pointing out how important it will be in reducing violence against children at home, and in tackling “the physical, emotional and developmental scars of alcohol misuse during pregnancy”.

We are working in a range of areas to deal with the issue. The problem with the Labour Party is that it will consider everything but minimum pricing, which is why it is condemned in the debate. What serious person can look anyone in the face and argue that the legislation will not tackle one of the greatest challenges to our society? The Finance Committee, of which I am the convener, took evidence from the Scotch Whisky Association, the Scottish Grocers Federation and the team behind the bill. Paragraph 23 of the financial memorandum states: “Alcohol misuse acts as a brake on Scotland’s social and economic growth, costing an estimated £3.56 billion each year ... For the mid-point estimate, this includes £866 million in lost productivity, a cost of £269 million to the NHS and £727 million in crime costs.” That affects real people and real lives, and we are trying to do something about it. The SWA said that a minimum price of 50p per unit of alcohol would impact negatively on global sales of Scotch whisky to the tune of 14.5 per cent. That would, however, require that dozens of countries create illegal trade barriers, as the bill team pointed out. The Scotch whisky industry is booming not because whisky is cheap to export, but because it is a highly sought after, high-quality luxury project. The SGF claimed that minimum unit pricing is a regressive policy that would affect low-income families and individuals. It should be remembered, however, that the alcohol-related death rate in the most deprived 20 per cent of our population is five times higher than it is in that of the least deprived. Legislation to reduce alcohol consumption must be tried in order to help the most deprived section of the population, because they are most likely to suffer harm as a result of alcohol. The claims of the SWA and the SGF do not stand up to scrutiny. The economic health benefits of the policy are clear and far outweigh any supposed adverse impacts. I, for one, am proud that this Government is taking action to tackle Scotland’s dangerous relationship with the bottle. The overwhelming majority in this Parliament will vote to create a safer, healthier, more prosperous and happier Scotland. Labour’s feeble attempt to try to distract people from the bill with a members’ bill of its own, which will include just about anything but minimum pricing, will be seen for the desperate spoiling tactic that it is. I say that more in sorrow than in anger. Alan Cochrane is not a man whom I quote very often, but in today’s Daily Telegraph he wrote that Labour’s stance is not “so much a policy as a smokescreen designed to mask the party’s stupidity in allowing itself to be outflanked and ultimately isolated on this crucial aspect of social strategy.” With regard to the nonsense about profits for supermarkets, Labour voted against the health supplement, which will bring in £95 million over three years from large retailers that supply alcohol. Let us forget Labour’s nonsense—it is against minimum pricing because the SNP has introduced it, and will be embarrassed when it is a success. I am astonished by the position that is being taken by Dr Richard Simpson—a member of the medical profession—on the issue.

4. To ask the First Minister what the implications are of the findings in the Scottish Government’s recently published “State of the Economy” report. (S4F-00530)

Does the First Minister share my concern that UK Government cuts and revised inflation forecasts will cause the Scottish Government’s spending power to fall in real terms by 18 per cent over seven years, meaning that the cumulative loss to the Scottish budget over the period could be £51 billion—£10,000 for every man, woman and child in Scotland? Does he agree that, as figures in the report “Government Expenditure and Revenue Scotland” revealed yesterday, an independent Scotland would be in a stronger fiscal position than the UK as a whole, with a lower per capita debt, and would therefore be better able to stimulate investment, generate growth, create jobs, raise living standards and improve the quality of life of everyone living in Scotland?

The word “pernicious” originates from the Latin term “perniciosus”, which means destructive and ruinous. Pernicious anaemia is insidious in nature and, if left untreated, can cause severe neurological deterioration, which affects the patient in everyday tasks and leaves them feeling helpless. The disease can be successfully managed and controlled, and even halted or reversed, with effective treatment and early diagnosis. However, many patients find treatment unreachable and inaccessible, especially if the diagnostic tests that are used are inadequate in identifying the condition. That is a major issue that we face. The unreliable and restricted nature of the test often leads to misdiagnosis and uncertainty among patients. A negative result might not necessarily exclude pernicious anaemia, as the patient might not produce antibodies, because of the absence of the intrinsic factor, and so give a false negative result. That occurs in up to 40 per cent of patients who suffer from PA, which means that too great a proportion of patients are left battling the deteriorative condition without appropriate medical intervention. New alternative diagnostic methods that offer a more reliable diagnosis are being developed and used. The parietal cell antibody method tests for antibodies that are produced by parietal cells, which manufacture the intrinsic factor. As we have heard, the test is positive in 90 per cent of PA cases. It directly examines the cells that are responsible for the absorbency of vitamin B12 in the small intestine. The new active B12 test provides a specific spectrum of results that directly co-relate with the action of vitamin B12 and which are impossible to obtain with the current test. The new test distinguishes between active B12, which plays a pivotal role in forming healthy red blood cells, and inactive B12. In response to the petition, NHS Highland described the active B12 test as “an interesting diagnostic test” that “ideally should be the subject of a Health Technology Appraisal.” The current test requires an overhaul, and more reliable and adequate techniques must be evaluated and considered by health boards and doctors. The unwillingness of some doctors to test for PA often causes delay and complications in detecting the disease. Last year, there was an increase of 13 per cent in the number of patients who were diagnosed with the condition. As we have heard, patients may present with a series of common symptoms associated with PA, which are often misdiagnosed. The Pernicious Anaemia Society’s survey showed that some 18 per cent of patients were misdiagnosed with depression and that 11 per cent were misdiagnosed with irritable bowel syndrome. John Wilson has revealed that his wife was also misdiagnosed. Delayed diagnosis damages patient-doctor relationships, undermining confidence in health professionals. The recommended regime is 1mg of hydroxocobalamin administered every three months by intramuscular injections performed by a nurse. Health professionals are advised to adhere to that guideline; however, treatment varies from patient to patient, and general guidelines often do not meet individual needs. Many patients require more frequent injections, but some doctors are reluctant to vary the regime and, as a result, patients are resorting to other measures to obtain alternative treatment. Those include buying injections from the internet and purchasing online other sources of the medication, including sublingual lozenges, nasal sprays and ointments. Individually designed treatment courses would help to discourage patients from making harmful online purchases and would restore confidence in health professionals where it is lacking. One of my constituents was recently diagnosed with PA and is concerned about his prognosis. After caring for his sick wife, who had the condition, he was unexpectedly struck down. It is our responsibility and duty to offer him, his wife and all other PA sufferers appropriate care and treatment that will be continually available. I welcome this very important debate being brought to the chamber and congratulate the Public Petitions Committee on doing so.

The cabinet secretary’s announcement of additional investment in North Ayrshire is extremely welcome. Is he aware that Ms McDougall said on her website: “This £10 million is of course a welcome investment, and it’s also an achievement following my continued lobbying since joining the Scottish Parliament last year”? Will the cabinet secretary confirm that Ms McDougall had no influence on the decision to build the Dalry bypass? Does he agree that she has a bit of a cheek to try to claim credit for the decision to construct the bypass when she voted against it in this chamber on 8 February, despite it being the policy of the ruling Labour administration in North Ayrshire, where she remains one of the party’s 12 councillors?

5. To ask the Scottish Government whether it plans to raise the Antarctic, and Scotland’s role there, with the United Kingdom Government as part of any future discussions on devolution or an independence settlement. (S4O-00753)

I thank the cabinet secretary for her response. However, does she agree that we should not just hand the responsibility back, and that any agreement on Antarctica should be part of discussions to help return the 15,000 square kilometres of Scottish waters that were agreed in the Continental Shelf (Jurisdiction) Order 1968, but which were transferred unilaterally from Scottish to UK jurisdiction under the Scottish Adjacent Waters Boundaries Order 1999 just weeks before the Scottish Parliament came into being? The 1999 order was subsequently endorsed by unionist MSPs acting in London’s interest, thus denying an independent Scotland the rights to oil, gas and minerals below the sea bed of the waters concerned?

I welcome the opportunity to speak on an important issue, in a debate that my colleague Dennis Robertson must have found all too painful to lead with his very moving and humbling speech. Eating disorders can dictate an individual’s attitude to health and wellbeing, depleting self-esteem and control and plunging families into despair. Often promoted—if inadvertently—by media images, this severe mental health condition is often misunderstood, and its harsh realities and consequences may initially remain hidden. Eating disorders, including anorexia nervosa, affect thousands of Scots, and the majority of sufferers are young females. The symptoms include weight loss, but that can hide significant mental health problems and recovery can be a lifelong commitment. Treatment relies on the effectiveness and assertiveness of primary care and strong community-based support, but that is often limited or unavailable. Improving specialist care and raising awareness of the condition is essential to provide sufferers and families with a solid foundation of care and support on which the recovery depends, along with removing the social taboos that are associated with the disorder. The treatment and care of those with eating disorders is carried out by a multidisciplinary team that often includes a general practitioner, a psychiatrist, a nurse and a dietician. Early diagnosis can be an essential element in a successful recovery, as the condition can be caught before the oppressive nature of the disease takes hold. First contact with the patient and the role of the GP are therefore pivotal. As an individual who also lost a daughter said on BBC television this morning, it is important to treat the condition as early as possible, not when weight is critically low. Prior to my members’ business on the issue four years ago, constituents came to me and said that a deep frustration that they had encountered was that their general practitioner said that their daughter, whose weight had slipped below 6 stones, was simply not light enough to get treatment. Of course, by then the disease had a severe grip on her. The fundamental contact with primary care can be unsatisfactory, and families do not always receive adequate information or literature concerning the condition. A majority of people with family members who suffer from the condition believe that their doctor was not well informed. The result is a patchy service and inadequate treatment of sufferers. Improvements in primary care are a necessity, and greater education and training for health professionals so that they can give a quicker diagnosis and appropriate referrals are essential to provide families with the best possible care available. Inadequate care undermines treatment, and the lack of specialised services inhibits accessibility, which creates a barrier to successful and much-needed care. Specialised services to treat eating disorders remain deficient and are dispersed across the country. The lack of service universality prevents admission to specialised care and therefore to effective treatment in some cases. However, barriers have fallen in recent years—as Nanette Milne pointed out—as a result of the development of new services such as Skye house, which is a Glasgow-based facility that is dedicated to treating young people who are suffering from mental illnesses, including eating disorders. The facility has 22 beds, including two short-stay beds, and it cares for young people across the west of Scotland. St John’s hospital in Livingston has witnessed the development of a new 12-bedroom adult unit, which opened in January this year; the south-east Scotland regional eating disorders unit offers specialised care to patients from NHS Lothian, NHS Borders, NHS Fife and NHS Forth Valley. Those additional services provide essential care to many patients, but barriers remain. Specialised services and more trained specialists to create universal treatment provision will promote successful recovery. Many forms of treatment and therapy for eating disorders exist, but they can be very complex and must in many cases be unique to individuals. Greater availability of evidence-based treatment is essential. The therapies that are employed vary, and effective treatments include cognitive behavioural therapy, family therapy and nutritional education. For example, Skye house offers each patient a tailored timetable, which allows young people to go to school while attending therapy groups and family and individual sessions. A school-hospital education service allows patients to integrate back into normal life through the training of teachers, who assess and teach about the condition, thereby aiding the removal of the social stigma that is attached to the disorder. Eating disorders are often hidden away from society. Greater education will provide stronger community support for understanding and dealing with the disorders. The greatest prevalence of eating disorders occurs in young adults, so targeting schools to create greater awareness of the condition will help to remove misconceived ideas and concerns. Promoting body image classes and internet safety courses will improve knowledge of the condition and help to counter some of the insidious pro-ana websites that Dennis Robertson mentioned, which actually encourage anorexia and other eating disorders. Once again, I thank Dennis Robertson for bringing the debate to the chamber.

The member talks about alleged SNP cuts. How much more money would Labour put into local government and from where would it find the money in the Scottish block?

Given her concern about Glasgow’s funding, is the member dismayed that, when Labour was in power, it cut Glasgow’s aggregate external finance from 15.6 to 14.4 per cent of the Scottish total? That cost Glasgow in excess of £130 million in revenue support a year.

I think that James Kelly needs to talk to his colleagues in local government. Thirteen days ago, I met the leader of North Ayrshire Council, David O’Neill, who castigated the Scottish Government for not allowing local authorities to get rid of more teachers so that they could free up additional money. Perhaps the Labour Party should co-ordinate itself not only from east to west but from MSP level to local authority level. If we were to listen to Labour Party representatives today—although only four were here at the beginning of the debate, which shows the party’s interest in local government—we would think that everything is so bad in local government that everyone is turning to the Labour Party. Is that right? In that case, maybe Anne McTaggart can tell us why one of her colleagues in Glasgow defected to the SNP last week, why one of them chucked the party yesterday, accusing the Labour Party of bullying and control freakery, and why another Labour councillor joined the SNP in Clackmannanshire earlier this year. The Labour Party in Glasgow is so confident of its record that, although it had 45 councillors in 2007, it is putting up only 42 candidates in 2012. Clearly, it knows that momentum for change lies with the SNP, because we have a positive vision for Scotland at all levels. I say to Labour members—including Anne McTaggart, who did not seem to understand the point that I made about aggregate external finance—that the figures for the distribution of funds to local authorities for the period when Labour was in charge show that the safer a Labour council area was, the less additional funding it got. Glasgow got the worst settlement and Inverclyde, North Lanarkshire, South Lanarkshire and North Ayrshire all suffered because Labour put the money into winning marginal council areas and betrayed its own supporters who had traditionally voted for it over many years. As we know, local government’s share of the Scottish budget will be 38 per cent next year. That is a higher share than in any year when Labour was in office and compares with the share of 37.1 per cent when we came to power. Thus any difficulties that are being experienced by councils can clearly be attributed to reductions in the funding of local authorities due to Westminster cuts to our budgets which, if we listen to Ed Balls and Mr Miliband, Labour bosses in London have no intention of reversing.

The SNP has had to do its best with the money that has been available. Unless Labour members can come up with alternatives, they have a non-argument. They cannot just say, “Do you agree with this?” or, “Do you agree with that?” when they have put forward no proposals other than a bed tax, which I am sure Scotland’s tourism industry will be less than amused to hear about. How dare Labour attack us on cuts? Not only did Labour wreck the economy but, as members may recall, Wendy Alexander, in her “hungry caterpillar” speech in the previous session, advocated that we at least match the 3 per cent year-on-year top-sliced efficiency savings that were then being imposed in England. Her colleagues, including Sarah Boyack, who was an MSP at the time, must have agreed with that, because Wendy Alexander was elected unopposed as Scottish Labour leader only a few weeks later. “The hard facts are that Scottish Local Government is under-funded and the Executive is resorting to bully-boy scare tactics because it is losing the reasoned and evidenced argument.” So said Labour councillor and COSLA president Pat Watters on 7 February 2006. Local government is better off under the SNP because we abolished ring-fencing and top-slicing of budgets. As my colleague George Adam said, we work with local government; we do not dictate to it. That is why all parties signed up to the concordat in the previous session. The order targets what can be achieved in the current economic climate, and the COSLA agreement, which is supported by all 32 local authorities, aids and supports councils in achieving their priorities and providing a quality service to communities. I cannot let the Tories off after Margaret Mitchell’s remarks. It is laughable to say that the £30 million-odd retail levy is having a terrible impact on retail. Asda did not seem to take that view just over two weeks ago when it announced new stores and new jobs in Scotland. Are the Tories really saying that retail will be crippled by a levy of £30 million a year for the very biggest stores given that that is less than 0.1 per cent of their turnover; that the chief executives of the four biggest retailers earn £34 million a year; and that the Tories introduced a VAT increase that will cost Scottish retail £1 billion a year, which is more than 30 times the impact of this necessary retail levy?

Yes, that is exactly my view. I do not believe that it will have any impact and have seen no evidence to suggest otherwise. Scottish retail is healthy at that level. It is well known, for example, that the burden of rates is significantly greater on medium-sized stores than it is on the larger stores. This will help to balance retailing in Scotland, as well as providing much-needed money. Like Labour, the Tories have failed to come up with any suggestions as to where the £95 million would otherwise come from. As we have heard, the small business bonus scheme, which Labour opposed, helps small businesses. The Federation of Small Businesses has pointed out that, without the scheme, one in eight of Scotland’s 160,000 small businesses would have gone to the wall. There would be 20,000 fewer businesses if Labour members had had their way. So much for Labour focusing on jobs and growing the Scottish economy. Given the strictures that have been imposed on Scottish local government by the UK parties, we have done the best possible job. Scottish Government is better off under the SNP than under anyone else, and that will be proved in May when we win more councils than we have ever won before.

Does John Mason recall that Glasgow City Council under Labour withdrew from COSLA because it felt that the then Labour Administration in Holyrood was giving it such a bad deal?

I congratulate the cabinet secretary on once again, under exceptionally difficult circumstances, delivering a budget that will deliver jobs, growth and opportunity while protecting the vital front-line services that are essential to the people of Scotland. Gavin “Crocodile Tears” Brown, who is worried about colleges and housing, will notice that in England—where the Tories are in power—the cut to college budgets is more than 33 per cent and the cut to the housing budget is 60.1 per cent. It is a good job that his party does not have much influence in Scotland. The cabinet secretary must be commended for his real attempts to achieve consensus on the budget across the parties, despite Rhoda Grant’s comment a fortnight ago that the budget was beyond repair. Despite a 7 per cent real-terms cut in Scotland’s budget, throughout the budget process we have heard cries from the Opposition for increased spending on education, health, transport, local government, justice, the NHS, ferries and housing, without anyone once identifying where cuts would be made to finance those commitments. Gavin Brown rose— I would be happy to let Mr Brown in to answer the question that he failed to answer for Mr Swinney: where would he make the cuts?

The overall cut in the Scottish budget is 12.3 per cent in resource and 32 per cent in capital. The Scottish Government has been working extremely hard to ensure that our shrinking budget goes further. Perhaps the most significant example is the commitment to preventative spending. The three change funds to deliver older people’s services, support early years intervention and reduce reoffending will provide £500 million of investment over the spending review period. They will bring together new and existing expenditure, provide better outcomes and, ultimately, improve Scotland’s quality of life while reducing demand on hard-pressed services. The budget addresses youth unemployment. Our opportunities for all initiative will ensure that all 16 to 19-year-olds in Scotland who are not already in work, education or training will be offered a learning or training opportunity. We will fulfil our manifesto commitment to provide 125,000 modern apprenticeships over this session of the Parliament and will provide 14,500 training places this year through the training for work and get ready for work programmes. There will also be an additional 7,000 flexible training opportunities. We will maintain the number of university and college places at a time when Opposition parties again seek to distance themselves from the Scottish tradition of free education that is based on the ability to learn, not the ability to earn. I express my delight that the A737 Dalry bypass in my Cunninghame North constituency will be built. That infrastructure project will have a huge economic benefit for North Ayrshire. Members of the Labour Party will also be delighted. In a recent press release on her website, Margaret McDougall stated: “People in North Ayrshire want to benefit from an upgraded A737 which will give them a fast and safe route into Glasgow and beyond it would also open up employment opportunities and increase their life chances. I will certainly be doing everything I can to have the A737 upgraded to benefit the residents of North Ayrshire and I am willing to work with Mr Gibson to that effect.” I therefore look forward to Ms McDougall supporting the budget. The Dalry bypass has been a hot topic in North Ayrshire for many years, and North Ayrshire Council, of which Ms McDougall is a member, has long declared it to be the key infrastructure project for opening up towns such as Ardrossan, Saltcoats and Stevenston to inward investment and economic development, and one that is essential in helping to bring jobs to some of the most deprived communities not just in Scotland, but in the UK. Debate and discussion surrounding a bypass have reached fever pitch in recent years, with a host of Labour MSPs, MPs, councils and council leaders demanding that it be built. “Labour have made provision for the upgrading of the A737 in their next capital budget but the SNP are spending the money elsewhere.” That is what Katy Clark said in her 2010 election leaflet. Not to be outdone, in a leaflet for last year’s Scottish Parliament election, Labour’s Allan Wilson added: “The SNP have shelved Labour’s plans for a Dalry by-pass, damaging the prospects for new jobs and investment in the area. A vote for Allan will ensure this project is put back on the agenda.” Despite the fact that in its wish list—sorry, manifesto—Labour listed improvements to the M8, the M73, M74, A82, A1, A9, A77, A75, A95 and A96, as well as the Forth replacement bridge, the Dalry bypass did not warrant a mention. In fact, the Scottish transport appraisal guidance report of 17 March 2006 said that an opening date of late 2015 would be achievable. That was when Labour was in power, which was, of course, before recession struck and we had to face the massive cuts to our capital budget. I am glad that the project will be progressed. The Dalry bypass will add significantly to the positive impact of the Irvine enterprise zone, on which Labour is hopelessly confused. Following last month’s announcement of the Irvine life sciences enterprise zone, David Pulman, president of global manufacturing supply at GlaxoSmithKline, said: “The announcement of designated Enterprise Areas focused on life sciences demonstrates the commitment of the Scottish Government to support growth in this vibrant and important sector. GSK welcomes the announcement today that Irvine is among these designated areas. As a major employer for almost four decades, this move supports our ongoing operations as well as helping to attract other life science companies to invest.” Margaret McDougall added: “This is good news for Irvine and will hopefully attract new jobs and new opportunities to North Ayrshire and the surrounding regions. This should also have widespread educational benefits, while boosting the Scientific Economy in North Ayrshire.” Sadly, Margaret’s welcome comments were countered by those of her Labour colleague, prospective North Ayrshire Council candidate Allan Wilson, who, on 25 January, said about enterprise zones: “The worry must be that they won’t work now and areas and existing businesses outside the zone lose out on new jobs and investment opportunities.” The ability to spin a positive story into one of doom and misery is a real art, and the former MSP is a master at it.

In the same article, he called for the restoration of the Glasgow airport rail link, on which Labour has been strangely silent recently, and funding for the Beith bypass. That will be the Beith bypass that was built in 1933, which was one of Ramsay MacDonald’s more notable achievements.

We might have the money to replace the £30 million cut that Rhoda Grant talks about if public-private partnership payments were not having to increase from £903 million this year to £951 million next year. Labour’s PPP payments are rising year on year, taking money from the Scottish economy.

You cannae count.

Disband!

Does Mr Brown accept that, when the SNP drew up its manifesto, we did not anticipate an inflation rate of 5.2 per cent? He talks about cash terms, but the real impact on the Scottish budget is much more severe than was anticipated.

On Gavin Brown’s last point, I did not see the proposed retail levy having any impact on Asda’s announcement of 5,000 jobs across the UK, of which about 500 will be in Scotland; that includes the rebuilding of Asda’s depot to serve Northern Ireland and Scotland. On 26 December, we debated the Finance Committee’s report on the Scottish spending review 2011 and the draft budget 2012-13. In that report, which was the most robust since devolution, we set more than 90 questions for the cabinet secretary, all of which were answered in detail on 18 January; I thank the cabinet secretary for that. Indeed, I welcome the Scottish Government’s Budget (Scotland) Bill for 2012-13. Since 2007, the SNP Government has repeatedly demonstrated that it will always put Scotland first. This budget illustrates our party’s continuing commitment to helping Scotland’s people in difficult times and bolstering our economy. Within the budget, we will continue to prioritise capital investment in key infrastructure projects to create jobs and we will do that in part by shifting the revenue spending to support capital investment in order to make up for the 32 per cent real-terms cut that the Westminster Government is imposing on Scotland, even after George Osborne’s autumn statement. So, let us get rid of the kidology that extra money is coming through the Barnett consequentials. That does not go anywhere near making up for the cut that is being imposed.

Clearly, there is a cash-terms increase but, with inflation, that is a real-terms decrease. That is the world that we have to operate in at the moment. We are looking at further means of preventative spending, such as minimum unit pricing for alcohol, which will provide economic benefits such as reducing the estimated 40,000 annual hospital admissions related to alcohol misuse and cutting the cost of crime in our society. Preventative spend is a big part of this budget. Of course, many have commended the SNP Government for being so bold as to support such a strategy with £500 million over three years, at a time of severe financial constraint. Further, we will keep the council tax frozen, which will save the average household £1,136 to 2016, while maintaining free university tuition, which will save families money through difficult times and provide people with the opportunity to pursue higher education on the basis of the ability to learn, not earn. The SNP Government has demonstrated its ability to look after this country’s finances effectively since it came to power. That is another reason why we got such a resounding vote of confidence at the election last year. We will continue to use all the levers that we have at our disposal to create jobs and nurture growth in the Scottish economy. Meanwhile, we have so far heard nothing from Labour in terms of a positive way forward. In fact, I do not believe that Labour has any economic credibility whatsoever. As was the case when this issue was debated in September, I expect to hear from Labour back benchers a litany of demands for money here, there and everywhere—the national health service, justice, local government and so on. Of course, it is doubtful whether we will hear where that money will come from. Just on cue, Mr Macintosh wishes to intervene.

The SNP is doing all that it can with the powers that are available to it. Of course, if the Labour Government had not denied Scotland borrowing powers, despite giving £2.5 billion to Northern Ireland, a province with a third of our population, we would have significantly more to invest in capital projects—£7.5 billion, on a per capita basis. I ask Mr Macintosh how many jobs that could create in Scotland. Of course, London holds the purse strings and it is clear that Labour MSPs would rather that the Tories ran Scotland from London than Scotland had control over its economy, such is their distrust of and lack of faith in the Scottish people. Earlier, we heard about Mrs Thatcher. If Scotland had voted for independence in the 1970s, we would not have had to endure 18 years of Mrs Thatcher and her successor, John Major. Of course, we still do not have control over our destiny and, as we have already heard, the UK is continuing to take us nearer to recession. We have called repeatedly for further capital investment and we are delivering the capital investment that we can. Improving access to finance to help businesses to recover and grow would be a major step forward. We want to reverse the VAT increase to increase consumer confidence. Unfortunately, following recent revelations from Ed Balls, it is clear that Labour is now in 100 per cent agreement with the Tory-Lib Dem coalition on more than just the no campaign. Indeed, following the admission of Mr Balls that he would not reverse any of the coalition cuts, one can only presume that the 12.3 per cent cut to our resource grant and the 32 per cent capital cut would also stand. That position has angered many of the trade unions, including those that helped to elect Ed Miliband and Johann Lamont as Labour leaders. Perhaps instead of changing its policy in a desperate attempt to lure back English voters who flocked to the Tories at the last UK election, the Labour Party might consider practising what it once preached. I was interested to learn this week that the former UK Labour Prime Minister, Tony Blair, wrote off £7.8 million of his income as “unexplained administrative expenses” and paid only £312,000 in tax. Of course, in a past life, Mr Blair claimed that he wanted to “tackle abuse of the tax system”. Perhaps if former Labour Prime Ministers were not making their own tax cuts there would be more money left in the public sector for essential services such as education and health. Of course, Ed Miliband and his motley crew now stand hand in hand with the Tories in support of the cuts and, as a result, it is clear that Labour no longer flies the red flag but the white one. As for Labour in Scotland, only yesterday, Margaret Curran, the shadow secretary of state, seemed to indicate that Labour wants to take away free university tuition in Scotland, after Labour previously pledged, following a spectacular U-turn during the Holyrood election campaign, to protect free university tuition.

Johann Lamont and Ken Macintosh have spoken out against the council tax freeze and, once again, we are going to have a U-turn. I am confused. Labour seems to oppose everything, at all costs, while it is in opposition and when it finds at election time that its policies do not work, it copies SNP policy. No wonder that Tom Harris said that his party was unfit for government in Scotland and has a less than 50 per cent chance of survival. In case anyone has forgotten, I remind the chamber that he was a Labour leadership contender in Scotland only a month ago.

Alistair Darling said that he would have raised VAT to 20 per cent if he had been re-elected chancellor. Did he not raise national insurance? Labour was in power for 13 years at Westminster but did not introduce a 5 per cent VAT rate for home improvements. Does the member agree that it is all a lot of hot air from the Labour Party, which had 13 years in which to do those things but didnae do them?

4. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the House of Lords having an influence in determining the franchise for the proposed independence referendum. (S4O-00572)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that it is a negation of democracy for Baroness Taylor of Bolton, a member of an unelected body, to attempt to interfere in the independence referendum franchise, given that that body lacks accountability to the Scottish Parliament or anyone else and is stuffed full of Labour and Tory appointees, hereditary peers and 26 Church of England bishops? I am heartened that he agrees that it is this Parliament, which is elected by the people of Scotland, that should determine the franchise.

Although I do not agree with what Elaine Murray proposes, I congratulate her on securing the debate. She was right to say that the independence referendum will be a final decision. No nation that democratically gains its independence ever gives that up voluntarily, which shows the success of independence. In the previous speeches, we heard a strong argument against the union. Where is the union dividend, when we keep hearing that people’s relatives—brothers, sisters and so on—have grown up expecting to have to leave their country to fulfil their potential? My twin sister lives in Toronto. I do not think that people who grow up in Stockholm, Copenhagen and Oslo necessarily think that they must take the same path. I confess that part of me thinks that it would be exciting to campaign for Scottish independence in Scunthorpe, Southampton and Swansea, rather than in Saltcoats, Shiskine and Skelmorlie, in my constituency. Why stop there? Why not open things up further and let native Scots in other parts of the world vote? Why not include Scots in the Seychelles, Singapore or the much more exotic South Africa?

The motion is all over the place. We only just heard from Elaine Murray about an apparent 15-year cut-off. Why not 14 years or 16 years? I do not understand.

The cut-off is still arbitrary, is it not? Can anyone say that Scots-born people who live in the Seychelles, Singapore or South Africa are less Scottish than people who live in the UK towns that I mentioned? Of course, if we extended the right to vote in the referendum to people across the world, I would have an opportunity to visit my sister, after leading street work on behalf of the yes campaign in Toronto. It goes without saying that making arrangements for such a campaign would be administratively difficult. It is wrong that Dr Murray thinks that her sister in England but not my sister in Canada should get a vote. As Joe FitzPatrick said, the issue is not and never has been identity. The Scottish National Party supports independence for Scotland because we think that it is the best way of developing a fairer and more prosperous Scotland. If it was about identity, why would the SNP have so many members, from the Cabinet to the grass roots, who were born outside Scotland? I know many people in my constituency who were born in England or other countries, who have made a life here and call Scotland home, and who think that independence is the best way forward for their adopted country. The corollary of Dr Murray’s approach is that we take away such people’s votes because they were not born here. The United States has struggled on reasonably successfully since gaining independence from London. During the American revolution, the cry was, “No taxation without representation!” Labour now seems to want representation without taxation. From Malta to Montenegro, there is no precedent for Dr Murray’s suggestion. Even when the Baltic states secured independence from the Soviet Union—which Labour no doubt opposed—only the people in each Baltic state could vote. I acknowledge that it is not only Elaine Murray who thinks that Scots who live outwith Scotland should be able to vote in the independence referendum. As of noon today, 155 people had signed Mr Wallace’s petition. I understand that Labour chief whip Baroness Taylor of Bolton agrees with it. I disagree with her, but I accept that she is a proud Scot, and I accept that many Scots who have made their lives on both sides of the border identify themselves as Scots or British or both. The wider debate on Scotland’s constitutional future is and should continue to be about the path that offers the best prospect for a fairer and more prosperous Scottish society. The SNP believes that that path is independence. People who live in Scotland, whether they are Scottish, Pakistani, Indian or Chinese, or indeed English, Welsh or Northern Irish, by birth—the people who pay Scotland’s taxes, who elect the members of the Scottish Parliament and who have chosen to make a life for themselves here—are the most important stakeholders in the wider debate. They must decide Scotland’s future.

I thank my colleague, Margaret Burgess, for introducing this debate about a rapidly growing concern. I have taken an interest in the matter for some time; indeed, on 29 March 2010 I lodged a motion on it. During this time of high unemployment, increased taxes, inflated food and energy prices, and—for many people—a reduction in working and real-terms wages, there can be no doubt that people are finding it increasingly difficult to make ends meet. The solutions to the problems are a source of continual heated debate across the chamber, but I am sure that we have very little disagreement about trying to assist those who are most in need. Many people find themselves sucked into a debt spiral from which they find it almost impossible to escape. In manageable form, debt can be perfectly acceptable. I am sure that thousands of people throughout the country—and perhaps not a few in this chamber—spent more than could be afforded on gifts for loved ones at Christmas. However, it is a sad fact that many people face hardship that forces them to borrow in order to pay not for Christmas goodies but for basic necessities. That quandary has led to a boom in the establishment of high street pay day loan companies, many of which no doubt recognise the market that exists to be exploited—and exploitation it most certainly is. We have already heard about how such companies exploit people who are among the most poorly paid in our society and cannot access credit through mainstream sources. During the recession, according to Citizens Advice Scotland, debt levels in Scotland have increased by some 50 per cent. The expansion of the pay day loan market has been quite remarkable. In 2006, before the recession, the industry in the UK was valued at £350 million. Last year that figure had increased to an estimated £1.9 billion. The tactics and practices of such companies have been called into question on numerous occasions. For example, in 2008, the debt charity Credit Action made a complaint to the Office of Fair Trading regarding the use of Facebook by pay day loan companies to advertise their services. That was viewed as a deliberate attempt by pay day lenders to target young people, and many of the adverts contravened UK credit advertising rules by failing to give details of interest rates. That is perhaps unsurprising, if we consider that the annual percentage rate from pay day lenders can be as high as an astonishing 4,214 per cent. Hundreds of members of Parliament have backed a series of early day motions that have described the practice as “legal loan sharking”. As members will know from the briefing paper by Citizens Advice Scotland, there are tragic instances of people who have taken pay day loans and who are simply unable to find a way out of rising debt. It is a spiral that can lead to family breakdown, homelessness, and in not a few instances, suicide. It is surely sensible to impose a cap on the exorbitant rates of interest that pay day loan companies charge. Some countries in Europe, including France and Austria, have interest rate caps. Sadly, the Scottish Parliament—for the moment, at least—does not have the power to impose such a cap and it is for Westminster to legislate on such matters. In July last year, the House of Commons voted against proposals to impose a cap on interest rates that are charged by pay day loan companies, despite considerable and wide-ranging support for the proposals. That is deeply disappointing, given the impact that loan defaults have on some of the poorest and most vulnerable people and communities in Scotland and throughout the UK. The UK Government should follow the idea of Australian legislators, who imposed a maximum APR for loans of 48 per cent. In Canada, interest above 60 per cent per annum is illegal. As Margaret Burgess pointed out, that is why American companies are moving over here. Opportunistic companies who seek to exploit the less well-off should not be allowed to continue to charge exorbitant interest rates that trap people in the debt cycle. Westminster must act now to prevent more people from finding themselves in that awful situation. If it does not act, we certainly will, once we have won the independence referendum.

It is with pleasure that I open this Finance Committee debate on its consideration of, and report on, the Scottish Government’s draft budget for 2012-13 and the 2011 spending review. This is the committee’s first chamber debate in this session. It is also the final chamber debate this year, so the Parliamentary Bureau has saved the best until last. I thank my fellow committee members past and present for their contributions and consideration throughout the process; our budget adviser, Professor David Bell, for his informed input; and the committee clerks for their hard work, support and professionalism. The budget process works to a tight and at times demanding timetable, and things have been no different this year. Our scrutiny began two months before the draft budget document was published. We agreed to take forward the previous committee’s work and consider the extent to which the Scottish Government is encouraging a more preventative approach to public spending and how that is being implemented and shared across key agencies such as community planning partnerships, national health service boards and local authorities. There is now strong recognition that spending to prevent negative social outcomes arising or to eliminate or lessen the impact of such outcomes is a better, more effective and efficient way of spending public money than reacting to the problem. We are grateful to each organisation that responded to our call for evidence. The Scottish Government highlights a 12.3 per cent real-terms reduction in the budget to 2014-15, with a 7 per cent fall in this financial year and the remaining 5.3 per cent falling over the next three years. The latter figure may not appear to be as dramatic, but it will be increasingly difficult to find savings as we progress. Difficult spending decisions have been made and will continue to be made, and continuing to produce a balanced budget is a significant challenge. I invite the cabinet secretary to respond to the point on efficiency savings that is made in our report and to say whether the Scottish Government will give an assurance that public bodies will still be required to provide published evidence of their reported efficiencies. He may also wish to indicate whether such efficiencies will be retained by those bodies. In addition to the resource reduction, the draft budget highlights a 36.7 per cent cut in the capital budget—now 32 per cent because of consequentials. The Scottish Government is responding by transferring £200 million each year from the resource to the capital budget, which will amount to more than £750 million by 2014-15. Such expenditure on capital projects is welcome, but it is unclear how that transfer will be implemented. I ask the cabinet secretary to provide clarity on that. I also raise the point that has been made in our report and by the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee about the provision of detailed information on the resource-to-capital transfer plans. It is clear that it would be beneficial to Parliament if such details are provided as part of the draft budget document in future years to aid the scrutiny process. The importance of capital project prioritisation was discussed with the David Hume Institute and is mentioned in the report of the independent budget review. We need better cost modelling and forecasting of individual capital project usage to inform long-term cost and need. There is a discussion to be had about that. The committee, and many of those with whom we engaged, would be keen to be involved in it. The Scottish Futures Trust, the Auditor General for Scotland and others highlighted the importance of maintaining our existing capital assets. We must not lose sight of the need to identify and make better use of the assets that we already have, particularly when that is less expensive than building something new. We must also keep our capital assets in good repair. Audit Scotland identified the significant cost of removing backlog maintenance in council-owned property to be around £1.4 billion, £376 million of which was described as urgently required. Almost one third of the NHS estate requires major upgrading, and more than £500 million is needed to tackle outstanding maintenance issues. The cost of eliminating all road defects is estimated at £2.25 billion. The evidence clearly supports a preventative-spend approach. It is encouraging that public bodies recognise not only the clear financial advantages of such an approach but its social, economic, employment, educational and environmental benefits. A shift is taking place across the public sector. However, concerns were raised as to whether the £500 million in the change funds is new money for new projects or substitute funding for existing projects. The Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations identified that only £260 million will come from the Scottish Government. We seek more detail about the make-up of the £500 million. Concerns were also expressed about whether change funding to facilitate a preventative approach was being spent that way or diverted to other services. The Christie commission emphasised that change funding must be monitored and, in the light of the evidence, we re-emphasise that point. Our preventative spend focus was on implementation. The benefits of the approach are recognised and accepted; the key is how it is implemented and embedded effectively across the public sector and how the Scottish Government delivers that decisive shift. We discussed four key themes: resource prioritisation, collaborative working, financial challenges and leadership. The evidence shows voices demanding leadership to assist and encourage a greater move to a preventative approach, particularly in early years. The Scottish Government must provide clarity to key agencies such as councils, NHS boards, community planning partnerships and organisations in the third sector. There must be understanding of what preventative spend is and what it will achieve if done effectively and with commitment. The change funds will provide welcome financial encouragement. Financial leadership will help to decide where disinvestment can take place to shift money to prevention. The Scottish Government must clarify its strategy and approach. There may not be a one-size-fits-all policy, but consistency is essential in how preventative strategies are rolled out, implemented, monitored and measured. We heard references to a silo mentality in parts of the public sector. That must be tackled or we will have inefficiencies, with some agencies ignoring preventative policies and strategies and failing to optimise benefits. There is a role for the Scottish Government not only in encouraging those who have not yet embraced a preventative spend approach to do so but in encouraging those who have embraced it and promoting the beneficial work that they do. Not everything can be a priority. The challenge of how to allocate funding is acute. A number of bodies called for leadership from the Scottish Government on how resources are prioritised. Many decisions are rightly made locally, but there must be a clear national steer on the priorities for NHS boards and local government in particular, as they may compete against each other. Budgets must achieve the maximum benefit. In some instances, a preventative approach will not achieve benefits for a generation or longer. However, we also heard about many immediate benefits and budget savings that can be secured quickly, easily and with little financial outlay. Competing requirements are placed on local agencies—the national performance framework, single outcome agreements and health improvement, efficiency, access and treatment targets, for example. The financial priorities of a local authority differ from those of an NHS board. How do those requirements foster a shared vision and approach? We must untangle some of the demands that are placed on local agencies so that they can shift more readily to preventative spend. There are many examples of successful local projects that demonstrate the sharing of time, money, people and belief to deliver positive outcomes. There was less evidence of collaborative working between councils and NHS boards, which have larger budgets to play with and where there is greater potential for effective preventative spending, budget savings and positive outcomes. There can be cultural and structural difficulties. Competing statutory demands and expectations can be placed on different agencies, which may also have different budget cycles. Coterminosity may also be an issue. There may also be a lack of a shared vision of what preventative spend is and what it can achieve if the right mechanism and support exist. We need a national evidence base that can share examples of best practice and roll them out across Scotland. Joint working exists, but not on the scale that we want or need. Highland Council referred to the “tortuous” nature of moving to joint working, while the Dartington Social Research Unit referred to “tribal” elements. Encouraging and facilitating shared working may be the most difficult challenge for local agencies that move to a more preventative approach but, when it happens, other issues—such as the prioritisation of resources—should be easier to resolve. We look forward to seeing the actions that the Scottish Government will take to facilitate the cultural and attitudinal change that is needed. The fourth theme focused on the financial challenges that key local agencies face in moving meaningfully to preventative spend. A number of consistent themes emerged. Short-term budget allocations hindered effective long-term budget planning and project support. Pooling budgets to assist in encouraging a more collaborative approach appeared complex, which occasionally discouraged bodies from even attempting it. We recognise that there is a role not just for the Scottish Government but for the Parliament and others, such as the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. Parliamentary committees can monitor performance and the change to preventative spend outwith the annual budget process. A committee could ask the Scottish Government to demonstrate how a bill that it has introduced will support preventative spend. The completion of our budget scrutiny and the publication of our report are not the end of the committee’s involvement. We recognise that preventative spend will inform our work programme throughout the parliamentary session. We support the previous Finance Committee’s recommendation that draft budget documents should provide an assessment in each budget portfolio of the progress that is being made in shifting to preventative spend. That was not provided this year, but we are keen to hear from the cabinet secretary how the Scottish Government will deliver that. We will hold a series of round-table discussions in early 2012 on demographics, inequalities and social deprivation, the provision and funding of universal services and additional funding sources. Those discussions will seek to build on accepted published evidence. We will build on the evidence that we heard from early years proponents such as Graham Allen MP, the Netherlands Youth Institute and the Dartington Social Research Unit. The committee will work with the Scottish Government as it takes forward policies that emerge from or are influenced by our on-going work. In our report, we drew attention to the national performance framework, which provides a link or common alignment between reporting on policy progress and financial reporting. That message was reinforced through the Scottish Government’s revised economic strategy and programme for government. The Royal Society of Edinburgh wanted more linkage between the NPF, the budget document and the economic strategy, while others said that a joined-up approach between the NPF, SOAs and the NHS HEAT targets was needed. We found it surprising that the draft budget did not mention the NPF or its five strategic objectives. We note the recent refresh of the national indicators and we will take evidence from the Scottish Government on that next month, but we and others would welcome the clarification that is needed on how the NPF integrates with and informs spending plans and policy priorities. The potential savings that can be realised from the McClelland review of information and communications technology infrastructure are significant. The review identified savings over the five years from 2012-13 of more than £1 billion through improved tendering, procurement and sharing of ICT resources across the public sector. It is encouraging that the Scottish Government has moved swiftly to respond to that review and has set out its strategy to achieve the savings, which includes a £4.7 million annual budget to assist in that. The committee asked for an annual progress report on savings that have been achieved, with an explanation when savings have not been achieved. I am sure that any update that the cabinet secretary can give us on recent actions by the Scottish Government will interest the Parliament. The largest part of the budget is public sector pay, which accounts for roughly 60 per cent of the Parliament’s spend. As our adviser pointed out, control over pay is a key part of the budget. The cabinet secretary announced the continuation of the public sector pay freeze in 2012-13 but said that those who are on less than £21,000 per annum will receive a minimum pay increase of £250. It is important that the Scottish Government will continue its policy of no compulsory redundancies. We acknowledge the potential for modest increases in public sector pay after 2012-13. The committee will consider the issue in more detail in January when we hear from Will Hutton about his review of fair pay in the public sector. The committee took oral evidence from the Christie commission. Its report refers to the need to “achieve more with less”, which is a reality and a challenge that must be tackled positively. Much of Christie transfers to the preventative spend agenda and the evidence that we received. We look forward to hearing what specific actions the Scottish Government will take in response to Christie and we seek six-monthly progress reports on that. I am conscious that I have covered a lot of issues in the time allowed. Nevertheless, I have not had the time to mention non-domestic rates, climate change targets, equalities, level 4 issues or the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body and Audit Scotland budget proposals, all of which the report covered. I could have gone into greater detail on the matters that I raised, but I hope that what I covered demonstrated the thoroughness of the committee’s budget examination. I am sure that colleagues from all parties will cover the other issues. On the Finance Committee’s behalf, I move, That the Parliament notes the 3rd Report 2011 (Session 4) of the Finance Committee on the Scottish Spending Review 2011 and Draft Budget 2012-13 (SP Paper 48) including its recommendations to the Scottish Government.

Does the cabinet secretary agree that James Watt College, which serves my constituency, would be in a much better financial position if it had not entered into a private finance initiative deal under the previous Labour Government whereby, to fund an £8.6 million contract, it will have to repay a whopping £49.2 million, £33.6 million of which is still outstanding?

I welcome the cabinet secretary’s statement and I welcome Derek Mackay to his new post. As the cabinet secretary knows, the previous UK Labour Government gave the Northern Ireland Assembly borrowing consent of £2.5 billion, four times the annual capital allocation to Scottish local authorities, which can themselves borrow. Although Scotland has almost three times Northern Ireland’s population, no such consent was given to the Scottish Parliament. If we had the same per capita share, what would that mean for local government capital projects and employment in Scotland?

With the economy still at the forefront of so many people’s minds, I can think of no more important a subject for us to be debating. However, it was a bit rich of Mr Rennie to suggest that we should be chuffed that there is not to be a 3p a litre increase in fuel duty. Scotland has most of the EU’s oil, yet we pay more for it at the pumps than virtually anyone else. As for pensioners getting their biggest rise ever, it is a feature of inflation that pensions are going up; in real terms, they are not going up at all.

Pensions are not going up in real terms, when inflation is taken out of the equation. We continue to face great economic challenges. Unfortunately, many Scottish households have already endured financial difficulties for far too long. It was, of course, the previous Labour UK Government that led us into the current economic crisis through its failure to regulate adequately the world’s largest financial centre, the City of London, and which allowed inequality throughout the UK to skyrocket. I note that Labour leadership candidate Johann Lamont said: “Government has to intervene to make that bridge between a strong economy and shared prosperity.” Richard Baker rose— However, a report that the OECD released earlier this week showed that inequality rose at a higher rate in the UK than in any other OECD country during the decade leading up to the 2008 economic recession. That happened under Labour. I will let Mr Baker in when I have made some progress. Unfortunately, recent figures from the OBR illustrate that the policies that the Conservative-Lib Dem UK Government has pursued have failed to improve the current economic climate. As we have already heard, the forecasts have been downgraded. The OBR’s revised figures fully demonstrate that the coalition Government’s austerity-at-any-cost approach has failed and that a change of course is sorely needed. The OECD has predicted that the UK will fall back into recession in 2012. Neil Findlay rose— In last week’s autumn statement, the chancellor had a golden opportunity to acknowledge the UK Government’s failures so far and to outline a plan B but, instead, George Osborne has stubbornly clung to plan A. Gavin Brown rose— The previous Labour UK Government put us in a hole, and now the current Conservative-Lib Dem Government in London is digging it even deeper. Prior to the chancellor’s statement last week, the SNP Government called for an expanded programme of £2 billion for capital infrastructure investment in Scotland to help offset the cuts that have been imposed on us. Such a programme would boost the economy and create jobs, and would support the construction of schools, hospitals and roads, among other projects. When Labour was in power, it gave the Northern Ireland Assembly, which represents a population that is a third of the size of Scotland’s, £2.5 billion in borrowing consent but gave Scotland nothing. Perhaps a Labour member would like to intervene to tell us why Scotland was discriminated against in that way. I will be happy to give way to Neil Findlay or, indeed, Richard Baker.

The reality is that, under the Scottish Government, households will be more than £1,000 better off because of the council tax freeze alone. I notice that Mr Findlay was too embarrassed to defend the previous UK Government’s discrimination against Scotland on borrowing consent. Perhaps that is something that he might want to think about for the next debate. Although the UK Government has offered some additional funding, it is not nearly as much as required and most of it will not be available until after 2013. In short, it is far too little, far too late. Despite last week’s disappointing news, I have every confidence that the SNP Government will continue to do all in its power to assist struggling households throughout Scotland during these difficult times. I welcome the measures that the finance secretary has taken to increase capital spending, despite the cuts of 32 per cent that Westminster has imposed. I also welcome the SNP Government responding to Lord Smith’s report on youth unemployment by appointing a designated youth employment minister. That demonstrates how seriously the SNP Government takes the issue, which continues to be a problem in many parts of Scotland, including North Ayrshire. The SNP Government is using every lever at its disposal to boost the Scottish economy and increase economic recovery, as the cabinet secretary has made clear, but the UK Government must play its part, instead of stubbornly sticking to an economic strategy that has proved a failure. I ask Conservative and Lib Dem members to tell their Westminster colleagues to make Scottish economic recovery a higher priority and to repeat our calls for a reduction in VAT on building repairs and maintenance work from 20 to 5 per cent to boost the construction industry and create jobs. If the UK Government is unwilling to take the necessary steps to promote economic recovery in Scotland, it should give this Parliament the powers that it needs to take those vital steps. As the Scottish social attitudes survey illustrates, the Scottish people have moved light years ahead of the Scotland Bill and our ossified unionist opponents by supporting the Scottish Parliament having the power to take such decisions for Scotland. As for Labour members, I realise that their party will soon have a new leader, and I hope that that will bring about a drastic change in the Labour Party's approach to Scotland. However, from what I have seen so far, all we seem to be getting is opposition for opposition’s sake. This week, both Johann Lamont and Ken Macintosh spoke against SNP Government plans to keep council tax frozen for the duration of this session of Parliament, despite the fact that the Minister for Local Government and Planning, Aileen Campbell, told the Scottish Parliament: “the average saving for a council tax band D dwelling over the current session ... will be more than £1,136.”—[Official Report, 24 November 2011; c 3832.] This Government is putting money in people’s pockets when it is most needed, while Labour want to deny Scottish families that money. The economic challenges that we face might be severe but they are not insurmountable. In last week’s autumn statement, the chancellor missed an opportunity to indicate a much needed change of direction. However, this Parliament must press the UK Government either to take the necessary action to restore prosperity or to give this SNP Government the powers that it needs to promote economic recovery and create jobs in Scotland. Of course, access to Scotland’s revenues—the £13.4 billion in oil revenues that is heading south this year, along with the £3 billion in whisky revenues, which, as we heard last week, are up 23 per cent—would go a long way towards ensuring long-term economic prosperity. Look at Norway.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

8. To ask the Scottish Government what its plans are to roll out family-nurse partnerships. (S4O-00426)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that the evidence that the Social Research Unit presented to the Finance Committee last week shows demonstrably that investment in family-nurse partnerships throughout Scotland would produce greatly improved outcomes for children and mothers while delivering a considerable saving for the public purse?

Does the minister agree that the announcement this week of the rolling out of the road equivalent tariff to the isles of the Clyde and western seaboard shows this Government’s commitment to island communities and others served by CalMac? Such islands and other communities can only be boosted by such investment, which gives a shot in the arm to tourism, business and employment.

I congratulate Neil Findlay on securing the debating time and on a very thoughtful speech on an issue in which I have had personal involvement for the past few years. Indeed, members of the save your regional park campaign, whom I have met on many occasions, have taken the trouble to travel through to follow the debate. I have to say that Alex Fergusson really took the biscuit when he denounced wind farms after admitting that he has seven turbines on his land. It seems to be a case of, “I’m all right, Jack, but let’s pull up the ladder after me.” I am happy to take an intervention if he wants to make one, but that is an appalling position to take.

Alex Fergusson wants a moratorium—after his turbines have been installed. Despite the many differences between members and political parties throughout the chamber, I believe that we can agree on two things: first, renewable energy is the future of energy production across the globe; and, secondly, Scotland is home to some of the most beautiful and breathtaking landscape scenery anywhere. Therefore, while wishing fully to embrace the renewables revolution and secure Scotland’s position as a pioneer in developing such technology, we must be mindful of the effect that that might have on our natural heritage. For that reason, in 2009 I sought to introduce a member’s bill on protecting Scotland’s regional parks, which was supported by the Scottish National Party and Conservative groups in the chamber. Much of Scotland’s largest regional park, Clyde Muirshiel, falls within my constituency. Many residents around the park were concerned about proposals to develop wind turbines in it. In my view, the purpose of creating regional parkland is to protect landscape of particular natural beauty for recreational, scenic, farming and forestry purposes. Therefore, although I support the construction of on-shore wind turbines where the community supports that, I do not believe that they should be constructed in regional parks or areas where the community opposes them. Given that energy policy is still reserved to Westminster, my bill sought to prohibit any industrial development within regional parks that was contrary to assisting the park authority to achieve its adopted aims, which would primarily prevent the significant adverse impacts caused by the construction and operation of wind farms. However, it would also have supported local councils in holding back the advances of other interests while allowing utilities to provide essential infrastructure where necessary. Unfortunately, while I was led to believe that the process would be relatively straightforward, despite full consultation the bill was eventually deemed not to fall within the competence of this Parliament and I was unable to progress it. Such are the vagaries of the Scotland Act 1998. The outcome was deeply disappointing for those who campaign against the construction of wind farms in such areas and for people now and in the future who wish to know that regional parks will be maintained in such a way as to safeguard their scenic beauty and recreational purpose. In reality, the majority of Scotland’s renewable energy will come from future offshore wind turbines and the rapid improvement in design and capacity of wave and tidal technologies. I am therefore confident that the issue of the “overconcentration” of wind farms to which Neil Findlay refers will recede. In his motion, Neil Findlay wisely points to the issue of communities reaping the benefits of wind farm developments. I could not agree more, and I believe that the minister will have something to say on that matter, so I will not steal his thunder—well, not too much. I am sure that all members were delighted to hear today’s announcement by Scottish and Southern Energy that it is launching a new Scotland sustainable energy fund, which is set to be worth more than £90 million over the next 25 years. That new move is calculated to increase the benefit enjoyed by local communities to the equivalent of £5,000 per megawatt produced for all new onshore wind farms constructed in Scotland from the new year onwards.

I apologise—I would like to, but I do not have time. That is equivalent to double the amount currently invested by the company. We have no choice but to embrace the future that is renewable energy, as ultimately all other forms of energy are finite. Although we may differ when it comes to ambition and the pace at which we should expand and invest, I am happy that we can agree that we must preserve our unique and beautiful landscape and secure the maximum benefit for Scotland’s communities.

2. To ask the Scottish Government whether it acknowledges the level of opposition to the proposed coal-fired power station at Hunterston. (S4O-00390)

Given the level of statutory and public opposition, what steps can be taken to persuade Ayrshire Power to withdraw its application and save everyone the cost of a public local inquiry?

I thank my colleague Christina McKelvie for securing this debate on a subject of great importance to many people, including some of my constituents. Earlier this year, I tried to submit a motion on this issue but, due to the on-going case in the High Court, it was deemed unacceptable under the sub judice rules. I also wrote to the Secretary of State for Defence at the time, Liam Fox, and the Minister for Defence Personnel, Welfare and Veterans, Andrew Robathan. The notion of nuclear testing is alien to most of us. It beggars belief that such apocalyptic weapons were deployed while thousands of service personnel were instructed to watch, without protective clothing. I recall that UK Cabinet papers that were released in 1985 under the 30-year rule revealed that, in 1955, the Prime Minister at the time, Winston Churchill, contemplated evacuating Scotland north of the Black Isle in order to test a nuclear device in Scotland. Opposition from the Norwegian Government, which was concerned about prevailing wind conditions, meant that the suggestion was, thankfully, never taken forward. However, between 1955 and 1963, the British Government conducted secret nuclear tests at Maralinga in South Australia and on Christmas Island. Seven major nuclear tests were performed, as well as 500 minor tests. In 2001, Dr Sue Rabbitt Roff at the University of Dundee uncovered evidence that suggested that troops had been instructed to walk across the detonation sites within hours of detonation and on the subsequent days, in order to expose themselves to radioactive materials. That was later confirmed by the British Government, contradicting previous statements that no humans were used in experiments related to nuclear weapons testing. Sadly, only 1,000 out of the 20,000 service personnel who were involved in nuclear tests still survive. Seventy of them are in Scotland, including my constituent Thomas Brandon. Although I realise that we may not discuss details of an on-going legal case, it is known that many surviving nuclear test veterans and their families believe that they have a compensation claim against the UK Government and have suffered poor health, mutation and shorter life expectancies as a direct result of the tests. Sadly, the experience of UK test veterans is not unique. During the cold war, forces personnel from the United States of America, Canada, France, Russia and China took part in similar trials. However, as we have heard, service personnel from those nations were afforded decent compensation settlements by their Governments. Indeed, in 1993, the British Government paid the Australian Government £20 million to settle all claims that were made by Australian personnel who were subjected to tests at Maralinga. That is somewhat baffling considering that the letter that I received from Andrew Robathan MP states: “This and previous Government’s position has been that there is no evidence of excess illness or mortality among veterans as a group which could be linked to the participation in the tests or to exposure to radiation as a result of that participation.” We can only assume therefore that the £20 million was an extraordinary act of generosity. Although the MOD maintains that service personnel suffered no ill effects as a result of the tests, the evidence that has been presented by veterans and their families is compelling. This morning, I read the account of Mr Ken McGinley, who I believe is in the public gallery. He said: “All we were told to do was cover our eyes – but when the bomb went off we could see the bones in our clenched fists as they were tucked tightly into the sockets of our eyes. The heat was tremendous and the ill-effects started almost immediately, it was horrendous. That evening there was men crying and couldn’t sleep properly. We were running to and from the toilet with sickness and diarrhoea not to mention the water blisters. And that was just the start.” Two thirds of British Nuclear Test Veterans Association members died before they reached the age of 60. It is argued that ionising radiation, a known mutagen, impacted on veterans’ children and grandchildren in the form of physical deformities. Of course, such matters are the subject of legal proceedings and it would be improper to comment on them directly. However, we owe a debt to veterans such as Mr McGinley, Mr Brandon and thousands of others who were forced to take part in those tests. Their unique service will never be forgotten and I am glad that our Parliament recognises it. Here in Scotland, secret Government records show the political manipulation and manoeuvring that went on behind the scenes in the 1970s to ensure that Scotland did not thwart plans to test fire depleted uranium munitions at the Dundrennan military range near Kirkcudbright. An MOD memo from 1973 warned that test firing would leave parts of the range contaminated, adding: “It will probably be impossible to remove this completely and initial consideration of this fact is essential.”

I have one more sentence, Presiding Officer. The Labour Secretary of State for Scotland at the time, Bruce Millan, protested to Prime Minister Jim Callaghan that depleted uranium testing would compound the problems that he was having with nationalists and environmentalists who were opposing Scotland becoming a nuclear dustbin. Nevertheless, the MOD pursued its plans, opting to hide them.

4. To ask the First Minister whether overseas companies are continuing to invest in Scotland. (S4F-00265)

Does the First Minister share my disappointment that, whenever he announces significant new investment or the creation of new jobs, rather than applaud the hard work of those who strive to bring such companies to Scotland or welcome the positive impact on families, Opposition members sit silently with long faces, disdainful of good news? Does he agree that, rather than constantly scaremongering, Opposition members should show the same confidence in the Scottish workforce as Allan Lyall, the vice-president of European operations at Amazon—

When asked about the prospects of Amazon investing in an independent Scotland, he said: “We are looking for great people that look after our customers the way they need to, and as long as that continues we’ll be in Scotland.”

The process of regenerating some of Scotland’s most deprived areas is of huge importance to the Scottish Government and, as we have heard in this afternoon’s debate, to all members. Regeneration is, of course, essential on a number of levels and will undoubtedly help to create a Scotland that is more vibrant, equal and sustainable while simultaneously supporting and creating jobs and building communities in which people are proud to live. Regeneration projects are rarely simple and are not always successful, and it is therefore vital that they are carefully planned and well financed, that they deliver value for money, that they are supported by a range of organisations and that they focus on securing specific positive outcomes. As Irvine Bay Regeneration Company operates partly within my constituency, I am particularly interested in its activities and I am pleased that we have taken the time to discuss the important matter of regeneration in the Parliament. Sadly, through decades of neglect by successive Labour and Conservative UK Governments, swathes of Scotland have been allowed to deteriorate and decline to a sorry condition. Many areas suffer from high levels of unemployment, poor health, high levels of crime and a lack of suitable housing and local facilities. I am confident that the policies of this Government and the commitment to regeneration projects will help to turn such areas around, creating opportunities and prosperity for the people who live here. Regeneration cannot be done on the cheap and at a time when Westminster has cut Scotland’s capital budget by 36.7 per cent over three years, it is essential to secure investment from all potential sources and to secure as much value as possible from the finances available. The role of the Scottish Futures Trust, established by this Government in the previous session, has been invaluable in that, providing expertise in negotiating development contracts, securing lower rates of interest on finance and ensuring more effective planning and delivery of projects than was the case under our profligate and wasteful Labour predecessors, who have left us with the legacy of private finance initiatives. The benefits already delivered by the Scottish Futures Trust have been quite extraordinary. On 1 September 2010, it was announced that according to independently audited figures it had delivered £111 million of efficiencies for a £3.5 million investment, avoiding costs and developing additional investment on future infrastructure in Scotland during the 2009-10 financial year. The expertise that the Scottish Futures Trust offers will be vital to regeneration projects as it pursues a £9 billion portfolio of projects, including developing a £2.5 billion programme of revenue financed investment in transport, health and education projects to be funded through the non-profit-distributing model. It continues to manage the £1.25 billion schools for the future programme—which will help to deliver a new Garnock academy in my constituency—£400 million to £500 million of which will be funded through the NPD model. It is also vital to deliver homes for intermediate rent under the first phase of the national housing trust initiative. Irvine Bay Regeneration Company is working to revitalise five towns and their environs in North Ayrshire. I have mentioned some of its achievements in a previous debate, but for the future plans are in place to build a hotel, create a new golf course, refresh and develop town centres, clean up old industrial sites, construct quayside office space, extend Ardrossan marina and set up light engineering units. There are many other innovative projects to rejuvenate the communities that the company serves. All that excellent work is taking place over and above Scottish Government and local authority plans to build schools and houses and improve the local transport network. Only a week ago, I attended a meeting with Irvine Bay chief executive, Patrick Wiggins, the leader of North Ayrshire Council, David O’Neill, and the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment, Alex Neil, to discuss the future of Irvine Bay. I am delighted that the cabinet secretary was able to pledge that the Scottish Government will continue to work in partnership with North Ayrshire Council and Irvine Bay Regeneration Company in the medium to long term. Alex Neil asked Irvine Bay to produce a business plan for the next four to five years, focusing on key projects and developments, and made it clear that he would provide secure core funding for the regeneration company over that period. I am aware that both North Ayrshire Council and Irvine Bay Regeneration Company were pleased with the cabinet secretary’s guarantee. Councillor O’Neill said: “We had a very positive meeting and are delighted that the Scottish Government has committed to continued support of regeneration in Irvine Bay. We are happy that they recognise our efforts to breathe much-needed new life into the area. This outcome proves how effective local partnership working can be, with representatives from across the political spectrum and all tiers of government pulling together for the good of North Ayrshire and its people.” Meanwhile Patrick Wiggins, Irvine Bay’s chief executive, said: “We are grateful to the Scottish Government for their continued support. The fact that cabinet secretary Alex Neil has made a number of visits to view the work being done by Irvine Bay has undoubtedly helped him gain a first-hand view of the value of the work that is being carried out.” In terms of further investment in regeneration, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth, John Swinney, has attempted to counteract Westminster cuts by moving £200 million each year from Scottish resource budgets to fund new capital projects in Scotland. We heard from Michael McMahon, who is not with us at the moment, that regeneration is a priority for Labour. However, everything appears to be a priority for Labour if we listen to the funding demands in every area, from colleges to justice to the NHS, from its front-bench representatives. They have completely failed to square the circle in terms of the budget and so lack credibility. Sadly, there appears to be little thinking in the Labour front-bench ranks, although I am glad to hear in Graeme Pearson’s speech that there is certainly some on the back benches. It is unfortunate that there is no joined-up thinking on Labour’s front bench. As for Alex Johnstone, who I note has been listening intently—yes, I am about to talk about him—I was quite surprised by his “rob the poor to feed the rich” speech, which I am sure that he will add to if he winds up. The Scottish Government is fully committed to regeneration and I am fully confident that, even during these difficult times, when this Parliament’s budget has been cut so dramatically by Westminster, we can still bring positive and meaningful change to some of Scotland’s most deprived communities. I look forward to the publication of the new strategy. Housing was mentioned as being very important and we should remember that, in North Ayrshire alone, the Scottish Government, in partnership with North Ayrshire Council, will build 182 council houses in the next financial year. We should remember that between 2003 and 2007 Labour built six council houses in the whole of Scotland, all of which were in Shetland—thanks, no doubt, to the hard work and perseverance of Tavish Scott. This Government has invested more than £216 million directly in regeneration since 2007 and plans for next year will include £25 million a year capital, to be discussed with COSLA, and £7.9 million for resources. Vacant and derelict land—I have talked about that for more than a decade—will receive £40 million. I am delighted at the Scottish Government’s approach and I believe that we will make significant progress in regenerating our communities in the months and years ahead.

Will Patricia Ferguson give way?

I pay tribute to the monumental progress made by the police, in particular, in making Scotland’s communities safer under this SNP Government. The facts clearly show that outstanding progress has been made, with overall crime at its lowest level for 35 years and recorded crime having decreased a full 23 per cent since the SNP took office, with 90,000 fewer crimes a year. At the end of June 2011, there were 1,105 more police officers in Scotland than there were in March 2007, and that is 1,105 more than there would have been if the Labour Party had won the election. Police funding is also at a record level of £1.4 billion this year, £235 million higher than when the SNP took office—an increase of 20 per cent. The resources that the Government has found to fight crime in Scotland, despite unprecedented economic pressure brought on both by the current Conservative-Liberal Democrat United Kingdom Government’s decision to cut Scotland’s block grant by 12.3 per cent and by the fact that the previous Labour Government at Westminster led us into our current economic difficulties, demonstrate the extent of the Government’s commitment to making Scotland safer. In the face of those cuts and difficult economic times, the Government has also overseen vast improvements in the efficiency and swiftness with which justice is delivered. We have also seen a 15 per cent increase in the number of Crown lawyers since 2007. The simple fact is that this Government has been both tough and innovative in forcing down crime. The average length of overall prison sentences in Scotland has increased by 21 per cent since 2006-07 and is now at its highest level in a decade. The Scottish Government has introduced measures that directly benefit communities that are most affected by crime, such as the cashback for communities scheme that was mentioned by my colleague Christine Grahame. The Scottish Government has also recently announced that it will expand its successful no knives, better lives campaign into six new areas of the country, including North Ayrshire, which includes my constituency of Cunninghame North. Although we should welcome the steps that the Government has taken to reduce crime and the great success that has stemmed from them, there is certainly more work to do, and the Government is anything but complacent about making our communities safer.

The cabinet secretary has more than answered that question. We need a wee bit of reality from the Labour Party, not the usual sterility in saying, “Let’s spend more money on absolutely everything.” The Labour Party should try to accept the position that the Scottish Government is currently in. I do not know what anybody else thinks, but I do not think that most people out there are concerned about the number of support staff that there are; rather, they are concerned about the amount of crime in our society and how we will reduce it. It is about outcomes, which I want to talk more about.

I have a minute left. James Kelly knows that I would have been more than happy to let him in otherwise. My colleague Christine Grahame talked about the scourge of alcoholism in Scotland. According to the Scottish crime and justice survey, 63 per cent of perpetrators of violent crime in the current year were under the influence of alcohol. That has to be considered. Surely it is incumbent on members of all parties to work constructively with the Scottish Government in taking a more comprehensive approach to ensuring further the safety of our communities. In this debate, as in every other debate that I can recall, Labour has engaged in an argument not about outcomes in respect of fewer crimes; rather, it has tried to pretend that support staff efficiencies are not essential to ensuring the continuation of front-line policing, with the 1,000-plus extra officers Scotland now enjoys. It ignores the financial difficulties that have been caused by its deregulation of the City of London, which is the world’s largest financial centre, and its inept handling of the UK economy. That led to the financial cuts and the thousands of job losses that Scotland now has to endure. Labour should just once accept its culpability, acknowledge the economic reality, and come up with a positive idea. Pigs will fly first, of course. All members should engage in a positive, robust and serious discussion. I say to Margaret McDougall that the SNP increased the number of community officers in North Ayrshire from 30 to 140, and crime fell by 12 per cent. That is what the people are interested in, not Labour’s sterile arguments.

13. To ask the Scottish Government whether it anticipates the closure of any colleges or major college campuses in the foreseeable future. (S4O-00320)

I am sure that the cabinet secretary shares my concerns that some Opposition MSPs have been scaremongering on that issue. Does he agree that the priority for our colleges is to strengthen management, continue to improve the curriculum and courses, eliminate duplication and ensure more successful educational and employment outcomes for Scotland’s college students?

I welcome the cabinet secretary’s statement. No doubt she shares the widespread disbelief at the death of a 33-year-old woman 750m from an ambulance base because the ambulance man who could and should have driven to her rescue refused to do so because he was on a break. A life was at stake. The Scottish Ambulance Service will now greatly enhance payments to ambulance crews on the very rare occasions on which they are called to provide emergency assistance during rest breaks. Does the cabinet secretary agree that, although rest breaks for crews are important, it is critical that the public know that in an emergency they will be the Ambulance Service’s absolute first priority?

I congratulate Rob Gibson on securing the debate. It is a sure sign of the changing world view on nuclear energy that Germany—a manufacturing giant with a population of 81 million—has turned its back on nuclear energy as a viable source of new generating power. Its decision to build no more nuclear power stations is a landmark moment and, I hope, points to an eventually nuclear-free world. Once upon a time, nuclear power was viewed as the answer to all the world’s problems, with many people predicting that it would result in world peace and electricity that would be “too cheap to meter.” That period of nuclear naivety did not last long. Following accidents and disasters at Three Mile Island and Chernobyl in the late 1970s and 1980s, public opinion shifted away from nuclear power. Unfortunately, it has taken the incident at Fukushima to galvanise opposition and—I hope—to put to rest future developments. I will take issue with a couple of points that Alex Johnstone made. Unfortunately, he did not allow me to intervene. If he had, I would have pointed out that nuclear power is not always reliable. In 2006-07, Hunterston B shut down for 10 months. Reactor 3 at Hunterston B came back online only yesterday after having been shut down last week following a leak. Nuclear power is not as reliable as he suggested. Alex Johnstone also referred to buying electricity from England. In fact, England plans to produce a maximum of only 8 per cent of its energy supply from nuclear power. Of course, England gets the benefits of our oil and gas. Although widespread trepidation is an integral part of Germany’s decision, it has been influenced by numerous other factors, including finance. During this economically challenging time, it would be reckless to sign away billions of euros of taxpayers’ money to fund the construction, maintenance and decommissioning of new plant. It must be remembered that there has never been a nuclear power station built without massive subsidy; I believe that there never will be. That is why the USA has not built a new nuclear power station since 1972. Other forms of energy are simply more cost-effective. The UK Government has proposed that a new fleet of nuclear stations be built by Areva Group. The company has already attempted to build a plant in Finland. Its estimated cost was £2.5 billion, but there it is now expected that there will be a 100 per cent overrun, and the project is three years late after 1,500 safety flaws were identified. Unfortunately, after a series of costly subsidies and tax breaks, the fun is just beginning. As colleagues have indicated, the real monetary cost of nuclear power is in decommissioning. It is pretty shocking that Sellafield will now cost £1.5 billion to decommission and will not be cleaned up for three centuries. In my constituency, Hunterston A was open from 1964 to 1989, so there were 25 years of electricity production, but the site will not be cleared until 2080. That process will be paid for by the grandchildren of those who benefited from the electricity. The cost will be at least £671 million; it cost £41.8 million this year, 22 years after the plant’s closure. The only truly sustainable and environmentally friendly method of producing energy is to embrace the sun, wind, tides and waves. Whether it is nuclear or fossil fuel, ultimately all those sources of energy are finite. If we do not want our descendants centuries from now to live as if they were in the middle ages, we have to develop renewable technologies. If Scotland wants not to be surpassed by China, South Korea and the United States in developing those technologies, we have to be at the forefront in their development. Scotland is well placed to become completely energy self-sufficient in the coming decades and I believe that we can certainly enjoy the benefits of renewable energy.

I thank the member for that helpful intervention. It will take 91 years for Hunterston A to be cleaned up and the Nuclear Decommissioning Authority tells me that it will take anything between 25 and 125 years to clean up Hunterston B. I do not agree with what Alison Johnstone said about closing the plants now: we have to wait until new sources of energy come on stream. The plants will close when they have fulfilled their useful life expectancy and I believe that they will never be replaced.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what annual impact it expects the savings made as a result of the merger of Scotland’s police forces to have on the Scottish budget. (S4O-00190)

Will the cabinet secretary confirm that all the savings that will be made from the reform will be reinvested in the criminal justice system and particularly in helping to maintain the 1,000 additional police forces on our streets across Scotland, which have helped to reduce crime to a 35-year record low?

As colleagues have done, I congratulate Jamie Hepburn on securing this valuable debating time for an issue that is of great importance to many families throughout Scotland. I also thank Save the Children for producing an excellent report in “The Childcare Trap”. The scourge that is child poverty is a source of great shame to our society. The thought of a child being born into poverty, not receiving the opportunities that many of us take for granted and suffering—on some occasions—from malnutrition and illness is truly distressing.  All members of the Parliament can agree on that and we should do all that we can together to eradicate a problem that should belong in a bygone era. Save the Children’s research shows that 90,000 children in Scotland live in severe poverty. In the past few days, there has been much talk of boosting our economy, creating jobs, attracting investment and getting Scots back to work. It is difficult to argue that those are not vital to Scotland’s prosperity. Most people would concede that the Scottish Government is doing a good job in achieving that, despite the economic difficulties. However, people must be able to go to work. Short of winning the lottery, the simplest way to eradicate poverty is to boost household budgets, which is best achieved by securing productive employment. Kezia Dugdale made a good point when she talked about quality employment rather than just employment, as such. For many, the cost of childcare is simply too high, and there is a genuine disincentive to go out and work. Jamie Hepburn discussed that in some detail. Childcare costs in the UK are among the highest in the world, and parents in Scotland face costs that are higher than the UK average. The Daycare Trust’s 2011 survey showed that parents in Scotland pay on average £100 per week for 25 hours of care and there has been an 8.3 per cent increase in the past year alone—a time when fuel and food prices have also been on the rise and many parents have had their wages frozen. Matters have not been helped by the coalition Government’s decision to reduce the amount that low-income families can claim towards the cost of formal childcare from 80 per cent to 70 per cent. I make no apology for repeating that extremely important point. That reduction means an average loss of more than £500 per year for the 44,500 families in Scotland who receive the support. Research has consistently shown that the inability to secure or afford childcare remains the most significant of all the barriers to gaining employment. Indeed, the growing up in Scotland study found that 55 per cent of unemployed parents would work or study if they could find quality, reliable and convenient childcare. Only last week, one of my constituents contacted my office because she was unable to secure adequate childcare so that she could attend James Watt College. She currently has to miss days at college to care for her child and may have to drop out of her course altogether, thus limiting her chances of gaining the type of employment that she wishes for and, of course, stunting not only her life chances but, ultimately, her child’s. Despite the additional funding that the Scottish Government provided for childcare support in the previous session of the Parliament, such situations continue to arise. However, despite budgetary constraints, there is a will to develop support for families to meet childcare needs. That support will include a new generation of family centres, in addition to flexible childcare options, which will include asking local authorities to provide their statutory hours of childcare in more flexible ways in order to support parents into employment. Of course, I argue that the simplest way to address child poverty would be if we had access to our own substantial resources or control of our own tax and benefits system, which would enable us to do far more in Scotland to resolve such matters. One does not have to look far to see how much better things could be: Children in Scotland pointed out that, across the North Sea, Norway has the fourth-highest level of child wellbeing in Europe while the UK sits shamefully in 24th place, behind Slovenia. Furthermore, the child poverty level in Norway stands at 6.7 per cent, which is a quarter of the UK figure. I am sure that the Scottish Government will continue to do all that it can with the resources that it has to improve the life chances of all Scotland’s children. The early years strategy and sure start fund will offer real benefits to thousands of young Scots. However, I agree with Jamie Hepburn that we must also study Save the Children’s report and consider what more can be done to help parents to get back to work and tackle child poverty.

I direct Gavin Brown to page 5 of the document, which indicates that in real terms between 2010-11 and 2014-15 there will be a reduction of 12.3 per cent in the Scottish budget. I want to be positive, so I will not start attacking the other political parties. Members might say that that is me changing the habit of a lifetime, but let us move along. During these undoubtedly challenging times, the achievements of the SNP Government have been nothing short of remarkable: 3,300 council houses were built, 1,000 additional police officers were put on the streets, crime fell to a 35-year low, university education became free again, educational attainment went up, class sizes fell, hospital waiting lists went down, and the small business bonus was introduced. More recently, Scotland became the only part of the UK with rising employment and falling unemployment. Despite our achievements, we appreciate that there is still much to do and much that can be done. Tough choices will have to be made. However, with our strong track record of economic competence and our determination to do what is best for the people of Scotland, I am sure that we can continue along the path of recovery to become a more prosperous country. Our deliberations on how best to play the poor hand that we have been dealt should focus on creating jobs and opportunities for Scots and protecting front-line services. As householders across the country know, when times are tight we must do all that we can to make our money go further. We must get the best value out of the public pound in order to continue to deliver the services that we all expect and rely upon. An effective way of achieving value is through preventative spending, so I am pleased by the commitment that the cabinet secretary gave today. In essence, the idea is to spend now to save later. The concept is painfully simple: address the root of a problem and prevent it from escalating or even from emerging in the first place. In most cases, we would not only prevent a potentially adverse outcome, but would save time and resources that could be better spent. Perhaps the most striking example of that is in the field of healthcare. We are all acutely aware of our personal wellbeing. Despite the fact that fewer of us than would wish it adhere to a healthy regime, we understand that a healthy diet and regular exercise can help to prevent serious illness somewhere down the line. That idea can be extended to the health of the nation at large. Minimum pricing for alcohol and effective tobacco-control legislation will help to address Scotland’s unhealthy relationship with cigarettes and alcohol, but they will also ease the huge burden that is placed on NHS resources and staff every year from alcohol and tobacco related health issues, which will allow resources to be directed towards treatment of illnesses and conditions that we cannot prevent. I am delighted about the additional tax on large retailers of tobacco and alcohol. Similarly, adult mental health issues cost the UK Government £10 billion every year in benefit payments alone, yet only £2 million is spent on prevention and alleviation, including promotion of self-esteem and coping skills. The Scottish Government, by refocusing funding, will not only save a huge amount of money, but will greatly improve the quality of life of thousands of adults who are coping with mental illness. In my constituency, the Garnock Valley Allotment Association, which was set up for a modest sum, enables mainly older people—who in many cases are partly disabled or have long-term illnesses—to get involved in a healthy, social and productive outdoor pursuit, rather than sit at home watching the telly and, in some instances, taking antidepressants. Preventative spending can also be applied to crime. In 2003, a quarter of prisoners in Scotland’s prisons came from just 50 of our 1,222 council wards. It is surely common sense to target spending on education and employment opportunities in those areas, where one in 29 of all 23-year-old men is in prison. That would not only benefit people in deprived communities, because the financial savings could be huge. A young person in the criminal justice system costs on average £200,000 by the time they reach 16, yet each person who is given support to stay out of the system costs the taxpayer less than £50,000. Violent crime is estimated to cost Scotland £3 billion annually. It is no coincidence that the introduction of 1,000 extra police officers, which is a perfect example of preventative action, has helped to reduce crime so much in recent years.

The issue is about ensuring that we spend our money as effectively as possible. The Scottish Government’s approach is all about directing resources to where we get the best value for the public pound. Our move away from short prison sentences, which have been shown merely to create reoffenders, will help to improve the life chances of those in deprived communities, reduce expenditure on criminal justice and cut crime rates. Experts make it clear that the most effective form of preventative spending is, without doubt, spending on the early years. We have sound evidence for that. It is an established fact that a child’s brain develops at a phenomenal rate in infancy and that it is important to stimulate children’s minds and properly educate them during that period to produce well-rounded teenagers and adults. Economic analyses by James Heckman, Alan Sinclair and others show that, for every £1 that is invested in a child between the year of birth and three years old, somewhere between £3 and £14 is saved later on. Those savings often come in reduced costs of prison and mental illness, as well as through enhanced academic achievement and in other domains. I am confident that targeted preventative spending in the early years through the Government’s £50 million sure start fund will help to tackle a great number of social ills, including inequality and poor health, as well as issues of employability and academic attainment. There is a massive benefit to the children and families in question and new research that has been published by the Scottish Government has found that the public purse could save £131 million a year in the medium term through effective intervention in the early years. In the most severe cases, in which a child has complex needs, £37,400 could be saved each year for each child. Faced with diminished budgets while demand for services continues to rise, we must squeeze as much value as possible out of every penny. Preventative spending can help not only to reduce negative spending, but to deliver a better standard of living and a better quality of life for everyone in Scotland.

Does the member share my disappointment that some Labour councils, such as North Ayrshire Council, are not passing on the £250 saving to low-paid workers and are not paying them that sum?

Will the member give way?

First, I find it interesting that Jackie Baillie and Michael McMahon both want increased money for local government and the NHS but will not say where the additional money will come from. Can she tell us why—

What a lot of depressing, negative hot air we have had from the unionist parties. David McLetchie let the cat out of the bag when he said that what he did not want was to disadvantage the UK as a whole. Whether the tax benefits Scotland does not seem to be of much concern to him. He is concerned about comparative corporation tax rates. If he looked beyond the Channel for once he would see that there is a whole variety of EU tax rates, but, sadly, he does not seem to be able to do that. If he did look, he would see that many unitary states have differing levels of corporation tax within them: Germany, Luxembourg, Canada, Portugal, Switzerland and the United States. Luxembourg is one thirtieth of Scotland’s geographical area and has less than one tenth of its population, but, funnily enough, it has twice its standard of living. As the OECD has pointed out, the experience of Canada suggested that tax rates neither converged nor diverged systematically over time and no race to the bottom was observed. Mr Baker said that the SNP wanted a Scandinavian standard of living, but without its corporation tax levels. Perhaps he should take a look at the 2009 World Bank report, which showed that corporation tax levels are lower in Denmark, Sweden and Finland than they are here in the UK. Let us hear what Gordon Brown said on the issue. In some of his many remarks on the matter, he said: “To continue to build a modern corporation tax regime for British firms operating in a global economy I will exempt companies from corporation tax on the gains from the sale of substantial shareholdings.” That shows the Labour Party’s view on that issue. The Office for Budget Responsibility said: “It is also the case for the UK, where despite the planned reduction in the headline corporation tax rate in the UK to 23% by 2014-15, the latest forecasts by the Office for Budget Responsibility predict that total on-shore receipts in 2013-14 will be higher than their pre-recession peak.” It is quite clear that cutting corporation tax is effective. Despite the fervent demands of the unionist parties to abandon our manifesto pledge and call an independence referendum in the near future, we will progress with a very clear economic strategy to improve the real economic powers of the rather sedate Scotland Bill. That will allow us to shore up the economic recovery and build on the progress that we have made in recent months.

I will give way to Mr Findlay because he tried to intervene yesterday and again today.

Yes. In Austria the corporation tax rate was cut from 34 per cent in 2004 to 25 per cent in 2005 and yet between 2004 and 2008 corporation tax revenue rose by approximately 27 per cent. That is clear evidence—yet again—that reducing corporation tax works and will work for the people of Scotland if we have the powers. Yesterday, Alex Johnstone suggested in the finance debate that John Swinney has been such a good finance minister that he does not need more powers. Although it is indeed true that the work of Mr Swinney has been nothing short of remarkable, what Alex Johnstone said is the equivalent of saying that Usain Bolt was the fastest in the sack race, so we should not let him run the 100m. We know that Mr Swinney can achieve a great deal more given the opportunity to have more powers. We saw that when he delivered the M74 under budget and early, with the subsequent announcement of £14 million of investment and the creation of 700 jobs. If the conditions are right, business will flourish, and we must do all that we can to encourage the kind of investment that can create additional jobs. It is a simple economic fact that variations in corporation tax are one of the most significant factors that are taken into account by businesses that are looking to expand their operations. Having the ability to control that tax would allow the Scottish Government to offer companies an inducement to come to Scotland. Mr McLetchie was highly disingenuous when he talked about Ireland having a corporation tax rate of 24 per cent, as that was significantly lower than the UK’s rate at the time, which was 31 per cent. Of course, it would not be necessary to offer a cut in corporation tax across the board; the rate could vary from region to region. It could be targeted to help small and medium-sized businesses or to assist businesses that require significant capital investment or research and development facilities. Such policies are not without precedent. For example, the UK Government has provided such tax relief to the film industry and considered doing the same for the games industry; indeed, it already varies corporation tax according to the size of taxable profits. In addition, the UK Government has consulted on a preferential regime for profits that arise from patents, which is known as the patent box, the rules on which it intends to introduce in next year’s Finance Bill. The patent box will encourage companies to locate in the UK the high-value jobs and activities that are associated with the development, manufacture and exploitation of patents. It will also enhance the competitiveness of the UK tax system for high-tech companies that obtain profits from patents. The intention is that corporation tax that is charged on the profits that are generated from such patents would be set at 10 per cent. GlaxoSmithKline, which is considering a £100 million investment in Scotland, but which other areas in England are competing for, has said that it wants the party that supports an independent Scotland—in other words, the SNP—to confirm that it would continue with the patent box set at 10 per cent. The level of corporation tax will make a significant difference to whether that company wants to invest in Scotland. The reality is that Scotland is at a competitive disadvantage with much of the rest of the UK and further afield. Companies on Arran in my constituency pay the same level of corporation tax as companies in the south of England, which enjoy excellent transport links to the City and continental Europe. That is lunacy. The present system could be rebalanced by offering businesses an additional incentive to base themselves in places such as Arran or Cunninghame North. We need those powers and we need them now.

Does Mr Brown not accept that, if we have powers over corporation tax, we can vary the tax levels geographically within Scotland, just as we do based on the profit that companies make? There is no reason why we cannot do that. As John Mason said, flexibility is the key.

Surely, the opposite could be the case: it could minimise inequalities. If there were different rates of corporation tax in different areas—as is the case in Germany, the United States, Canada and Japan—disadvantaged areas could be equalised by having lower tax rates than others.

The past two years have been a deeply difficult time for businesses, individuals and households. The economic recession and the catastrophic economic policies of the previous UK Labour Government, coupled with rising food and fuel prices, increased taxes and public sector cuts, have all had a dramatic and negative impact upon the lives of our people and have made it difficult for businesses to survive and thrive. The policies of the current coalition are clearly not helping matters. Increases in VAT, failure to effectively regulate energy companies, the slashing of capital budgets—29 per cent in England, but a whopping 38 per cent in Scotland—and a host of other austerity measures are expected to reduce the living standards of UK families by more than 10 per cent during the next three years. Thankfully, there is a more successful way that allows people to work, businesses to grow, and the economy to flourish. The policies of the SNP Government have shown that that is perfectly achievable and they should serve as a lesson to the UK Government. It has been shown that, under the SNP, Scotland’s recession was significantly shorter and shallower than the recession in the rest of the UK, and the outlook for our economy is much more optimistic than it is elsewhere in these islands. That is no coincidence and it can clearly be attributed directly to the Government’s proactive and positive policies, although, as Richard Baker and Mr Swinney said, there is no room for complacency.

Employment has not fallen as drastically as it has in other parts of the UK; growth has not declined as much as it has in the UK; and we have not lost as many businesses, proportionally, as the UK has under the inept government of the Conservatives and their Liberal poodles—sorry, coalition partners. Perhaps one of the most successful policies that was implemented during the previous parliamentary session was the small business bonus scheme, which Labour opposed. The scheme took 64,000 small businesses out of paying rates and cut rates for many thousands more, thus helping them to weather the economic storm and allowing them to reinvest in their businesses by employing additional staff or acquiring new equipment.

That scheme has been absolutely invaluable to the Scottish economy and there can be no doubt that it has helped to safeguard thousands of Scottish jobs. Mr Park wants to intervene.

As Colin Borland of the Federation of Small Businesses stated to the Finance Committee: “Recent FSB research shows that, for one in eight recipients, the scheme made the difference over the past 12 months between sinking and swimming.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 5 May 2009; c 1180.] The policy continues to pay dividends. As today’s employment figures have shown, Scotland is now the only part of the UK with falling unemployment and rising employment. Our unemployment rate of 7.5 per cent is lower than the UK average of 7.9 per cent and the employment rate of 71.6 per cent is higher than the UK average of 70.5 per cent. Indeed, the rise in Scottish employment of 36,000 over the year encompasses the entire UK-wide figure of 24,000. Moreover, at 19 minutes past 1, we all received an e-mail from the Scottish Chambers of Commerce, which said: “It is good news for Scotland ... that the Scottish rate of unemployment is now significantly below the UK average.” This ability to competently manage our economy and shelter Scottish households from the worst of Labour’s recession was part of the reason why the people of Scotland backed the Scottish National Party in such numbers at the recent election. We will not let them down. This Government’s economic strategy is sensible, aspirational, informed and above all ambitious. The measures announced today will help to reinforce the positive steps that have already been taken and also offer a vision to take Scotland forward, providing a higher standard of living and greater opportunities for all. Central to the strategy is our ambition to turn Scotland into the world leader in the renewables revolution. There is no reason why, by utilising our vast array of dynamic and innovative companies, our immense resources and our skilled workforce, Scotland should not lead the way in the design, construction and maintenance of renewable technology, which has the potential to create up to 130,000 jobs in Scotland over the next decade. Indeed, last night, I met representatives of Scottish and Southern Energy in West Kilbride in my constituency to look at a particularly exciting renewables development at Hunterston. However, realising that ambition will require investment and it is the Government’s intention to provide and attract the investment needed. The national renewables infrastructure fund, which is worth at least £70 million, will create new jobs and boost investment in port and near-port manufacturing locations for renewable energy technology. We have made £1 million available to provide the energy and low-carbon sectors with as many as 500 modern apprenticeships this year alone and the low-carbon skills fund, which provides financial support to employers who upskill and reskill their employees in low-carbon technologies, has already benefited more than 800 individuals.

I am sorry—I would like to but, unfortunately, I am running out of time. Our commitment to that ambition has already attracted major jobs and investment announcements from some of the largest energy companies in the world, including Mitsubishi, Doosan, Siemens and Gamesa. It is clear from such announcements that Scotland has genuine potential and ability to reindustrialise, to lead the world in the renewables revolution and to become a low-carbon economy. The policies of this Government will encourage and support such a transition. However, with additional financial powers, there is much more that we could achieve. The ability to borrow would allow us again to front load capital investment in order to build and develop our infrastructure, thus creating jobs and encouraging investment, and the ability to vary corporation tax would allow Scotland to compete on a level playing field and attract companies to Scotland. Access to Scotland’s fossil fuel levy, which has been denied to us by successive UK Labour and coalition Governments and is rarely mentioned by those in the Parliament who have colluded with those Governments to deny Scotland that money, would allow us to further invest in the blossoming renewables sector. Control over the Crown estate would allow Scotland’s communities to benefit directly from our own resources more than the half-baked measure that is being introduced by Danny Alexander. Our future is optimistic. We know that Labour does not have the answers; on Monday, Michael McCann MP told us what we already knew, that his party’s policies in May’s election were “not founded on economic reality”. We could do so much more, though, with the powers of independence.

Hurray!

Will the member take an intervention?

The year before I became an MSP in the constituency where the member is a councillor, 1,536 manufacturing jobs were lost while Labour was in power. What role did the 13-year Labour Government at Westminster, the 31-year Labour administration at local authority level and the eight years of Labour Administration in Scotland play in making North Ayrshire the economic black spot that it currently is?

Following the seminar on the identification of suicide clusters and the reporting of suicide in old and new media, which was held jointly by Samaritans and the University of Edinburgh in the Scottish Parliament on 1 June, what discussions will the minister initiate with Scotland’s media to ensure responsible reporting of suicide, which would help to prevent further tragedies by minimising the likelihood of copycat suicides?

6. To ask the First Minister what economic benefits will be delivered to Glasgow and the west of Scotland by the opening of the M74 northern extension. (S4F-00061)

I thank the First Minister for ensuring that that vital strategic road was built ahead of schedule and under budget. The M74 complete to compete group, which is led by Glasgow Chamber of Commerce and includes Scottish Enterprise, Renfrewshire Chamber of Commerce and the Confederation of British Industry, predicted that at least £1.5 billion, primarily in manufacturing, would be invested over the two decades following opening of the road. Can the First Minister say how many jobs he anticipates will be created as a result of the M74’s completion, to the benefit of families and communities in, for example, North Ayrshire, Renfrewshire and Inverclyde?

I thank Stuart McMillan for securing this debate on an issue of such importance to many people living and working on the west coast of Scotland. Earlier this week, history was made when a passenger ferry crossed the Clyde at Govan for the first time in many years. It marks a new dawn for ferries on the Clyde, a mode of transport that served for more than 230 years until the 1960s and the opening of the Clyde tunnel. As passengers travel between the new Water Row pontoon in Govan and the Kelvin harbour landing stage, crossing to the Riverside museum, the new home of Scotland’s museum of transport and travel, they will experience at first hand the rich tapestry of the Clyde. What a history it has been. The Clyde witnessed the boom of the industrial revolution and became renowned for its shipbuilding, with “Clyde-built” being a byword for unsurpassable quality and precision. In recent years, the Clyde has transformed beyond recognition, with Glasgow deserving the title of European city of culture. The Clyde will bring more success as Scotland pioneers the renewable energy revolution, designing, building and maintaining marine technology. Integral to the success and rich tapestry of the Clyde is the coastguard service, ensuring the safety of engineering workers, fishermen and holidaymakers. Its bravery, skill and dedication for generations has been remarkable. The coastguard service has been in operation since 1829 and, due to Scotland’s long maritime tradition, has been of incalculable value to the people and communities that it serves. However, in its continued efforts to slash public sector spending, the UK coalition Government proposes to slash the coastguard workforce by half, scrap offshore rescue tugs and close eight of the UK’s 19 coastguard centres, of which only three will remain open 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Unfortunately, we have been in this position before. In 2000, Labour’s John Prescott did a Nick Clegg and reneged on his promise to protect the coastguard service, closing three UK coastguard stations—two of them in Scotland, at Oban and Pentland. Unbelievably, the new consultation document has earmarked the Greenock coastguard for closure, intending that rescues be run remotely from Aberdeen, almost 200 miles away. This, colleagues, is madness. The Greenock coastguard station looks after the busy Clyde and beyond. It manages Royal Navy traffic—including submarines, as Stuart McMillan said—ferry routes, cargo vessels, leisure craft and an increasing number of cruise ships. It covers 1,300 miles of island and mainland coastline—an area that is home to a vast array of dangerous and difficult waters and terrain. For years, the Clyde coastguard service has garnered a vast expanse of local knowledge—an invaluable commodity. Under UK Government proposals, that vast local knowledge would be sacrificed as operators in Aberdeen attempt to co-ordinate rescues on the rugged west coast of Scotland with no idea of local place names, landmarks and other information to aid the locating of a vessel or person in distress. It is evident that the proposals have not properly taken into account the number of lives that could be put at risk, and the Government must reconsider its decision with the utmost urgency. Only today, as Stuart McMillan said, the House of Commons Transport Select Committee, which commands a Government majority, called on ministers to abandon their current plans, labelling them “seriously flawed.” Having studied the evidence, committee chair, Louise Ellman MP, said: “We found little support for the current proposals and we have no confidence that, under these proposals, the Coastguard will in future be able to respond to emergencies at sea as well as they do now, let alone in a more effective way. A drastic reduction in the number of rescue co-ordination centres will result in a loss of local knowledge amongst coastguard officers who are responsible for taking calls from people and vessels in distress. The committee is not convinced by the Government’s claim that technology can, at present, replace such local knowledge.” The proposals would see the loss of dozens of local jobs in Greenock, an area of the country where unemployed people outnumber vacancies by a factor of 58:1. It is clear that, as in the past, the busy waters of the Clyde need a strong, professional coastguard service, able and equipped to deal with almost every eventuality. The UK Government must reverse its dangerous proposals and commit to the future of the Clyde coastguard and its skilled personnel, or devolve the service to Scotland so that this Parliament can secure its future.

5. To ask the Scottish Government how it plans to take forward its early years framework. (S4O-00026)

Does the minister agree that preventative spending in early years is crucial in ensuring that vulnerable and disadvantaged children secure a good start in life? If so, how will the Scottish Government progress that?

2. To ask the Scottish Government how much North Ayrshire Council will pay for schools built under PPP/PFI from 2007-08 to 2037-38. (S4O-00012)

I warmly welcome the minister to his new post. He will be aware that, in 2007-08, North Ayrshire Council made payments of £3.8 million on its school estate. This year, those PFI payments will be £11 million, rising year on year to £16.6 million 25 years from now. Does the minister agree that such profligacy with public money is a major reason why Labour-controlled North Ayrshire Council is reduced to cutting 72.7 full-time equivalent classroom assistants this year, causing outrage among parents and inevitably leading to much less spending on teaching and support staff than there should be for many years to come?

Four years ago, Labour-controlled North Ayrshire Council proposed the closure of Corrie primary school on Arran, perhaps believing that the Scottish National Party Government would, like its predecessor, close every rural school that was referred to it for closure. Of course, having found out that the SNP Government had a different policy, Corrie primary was reprieved. Will the cabinet secretary confirm that the commission on the delivery of rural education will have at least one island-based member to ensure that island communities are fully represented?

I am absolutely delighted to follow such a thoughtful speech from my new colleague, Marco Biagi. He is a welcome addition to our benches. I also welcome you, Presiding Officer, to your new post. Throughout the election, parties across the political divide rightly spoke about their desire to create jobs and grow the Scottish economy to offer our young people meaningful and skilled employment opportunities, boost manufacturing and exports, and ensure that Scotland becomes a low-carbon economy and a responsible nation with a determination to produce clean energy and to cut emissions. Through the research, design, testing, manufacturing and maintenance of renewable energy technology, we can fulfil our ambitions to reindustrialise Scotland and provide Scots with the well-paid and skilled jobs that they deserve and require. The SNP has set out an admittedly ambitious vision to make Scotland the powerhouse at the centre of Europe’s renewable energy revolution. We make no apology for the scale of that ambition. Producing 100 per cent of Scotland’s electricity needs from renewable sources by 2020 will not be easy, but it can be achieved. The sheer scale of Scotland’s renewable potential gives us the optimism and belief to set such targets. Last month, Professor Stephen Salter, who has been called the father of renewable energy, and seven leading businessmen publicly backed SNP plans to supply all of Scotland’s electricity needs through renewables by 2020. Earlier this year, Professor Salter was awarded the inaugural Saltire prize medal in recognition of his outstanding role in the development of marine renewables. His endorsement comes on the back of the support from industry leaders and environmental groups that the 100 per cent renewables target received. Professor Salter said that the SNP “is right to say that Scotland can generate more electricity from renewable energy than it uses. We can also produce enough electricity to drive plant to synthesise liquid fuels and gas. We have vast renewable resources in Scotland, especially around our shores. Coupled with decades of engineering excellence and a strong industrial base, Scotland will become a clean green energy hub. There have always been those who doubted our capacity for generating our electricity needs from renewables. I find that lack of ambition depressing and even a threat to this massive opportunity.” Jackson Carlaw should take note of that. Professor Salter went on to say: “Meeting the target by 2020 ... will depend on many factors, not least political leadership but they are achievable and exactly the kind of targets our Government should set.” However, the targets will never be achieved unless somebody with sufficient determination sets them. Alex Salmond has that determination. Professor Salter continued: “We are only starting to tap into the vast potential of our seas such as offshore wind, wave and tidal energy and should absolutely aim for the equivalent of 100% by 2020.”

We are planning for success, Mr Carlaw. We are not planning for failure. Niall Stuart, the chief executive of Scottish Renewables, added: “We welcome the SNP’s ambition and continued commitment to maximising renewable investment in Scotland. This pledge gives investors certainty and will help attract more developers and manufacturers to Scotland. It’s ambitious but can be achieved with the right market framework, investment in grid infrastructure and skills, and the right balance in the planning system.” There was a further boost to the SNP’s renewables policies when Ignacio Galán, the chairman and chief executive of Iberdrola, whose company owns ScottishPower Renewables, said: “Scotland is at the forefront of the renewable revolution ... it is entirely credible to see Scotland producing 100% of its own electricity requirements from renewables by 2020 as well as continuing to produce power from a range of other sources. Iberdrola are keen to be a key part of the investment required to bring that power into production.” Other parties show little ambition or leadership. Mr Carlaw has again given evidence of that. If it was left to them, Scotland would find itself left behind in the renewables revolution sweeping Europe. We cannot let them cost Scotland jobs and investment. Our vision to reindustrialise Scotland and North Ayrshire will bring tens of thousands of jobs to communities across the country. North Ayrshire will not be left behind and we will not let this opportunity pass Scotland by. Two days ago, I met representatives of SSE Renewables, and we discussed a proposal from my constituency, showing how things can work locally. There are plans to produce an offshore turbine testing station, which it is hoped will be in operation by as early as February next year. The station will test turbines to ensure that all faults—or any problems with gearboxes, for example—are resolved in true, sea-type conditions before the turbines are taken out to sea. Eighteen sites across Scotland were considered, and SSE Renewables made it clear that Hunterston was far and away the best. One hundred and thirty-eight turbines will be established 8 miles from Islay, which will create 690MW of electricity capacity. There will be a spin-off to the local community, with tender valuation criteria ensuring that local companies are able to get some of the work. There will also be a gain for the community because of the leap in the number of local apprenticeships. Over the next two or three years, it is hoped and expected that research and development facilities, and manufacturing facilities, will be established at Hunterston.

I think that the minister continues to review the infrastructure plan. I spoke to people at Hunterston on Tuesday, and they seemed perfectly happy with the timescale. They seemed to think that by 2014 there will, indeed, be manufacturing at that location, and that there would be developments offshore. There are technical issues, but the intention is to resolve them. I have quoted Niall Stuart and made the point that the people who will be investing the money and creating the industries believe that the SNP’s ambition in this area will help to set the market conditions that will ensure that what we want to achieve is deliverable.

I begin by offering my personal congratulations to you, Deputy Presiding Officer, on being elected to your most distinguished role. I wish you every success in your work. I have to say: the cheek of Willie Rennie in that speech! There we see the infamous five, sitting on the benches of the Orkney and Shetland party, a political shipwreck whose dreams of coalition in Scotland were crushed by its slavish devotion to the Tories at Westminster and a betrayal of its own Scottish voters. If Willie Rennie really wants things to move forward in renewables, he should take his begging bowl to the coalition Government at Westminster and ask for the long-promised fossil fuel levy to be delivered to the people of Scotland. It is a great privilege for everyone here in the Parliament to have been elected to represent and serve the people of Scotland. I am genuinely delighted to see so many fresh new faces, particularly on the SNP benches. I am confident that new members of all stripes will contribute positively during the session as we seek to make Scotland fairer, more successful and prosperous. I welcome them all to this, their first parliamentary debate. The past few weeks have marked an unprecedented phase in Scottish politics, as the SNP secured a majority of seats under a banner of securing more powers and autonomy for the people of Scotland and their Parliament. There can be no doubt that the time is right for us to seek those powers, which will help Scotland to become the nation that we know it can and should become. As the First Minister made clear in his speeches last week and today, there is much common ground between the parties on a number of issues, and I hope that we will be able to secure support from across the chamber in securing the powers that are necessary to take Scotland forward. Political commentators and voices from the various opposition parties have cited a number of reasons for the SNP’s emphatic victory. My local Labour candidate even suggested that he lost to Alex Salmond. I am therefore delighted to inform the First Minister that he is now also the MSP for Cunninghame North, with a healthy majority of 6,117—the constituency in which we secured the greatest percentage increase in the SNP vote in the country.

Indeed. The victory of SNP positivity over the negative campaigning of other parties featured in all the post-election analyses. We set out a positive and ambitious vision of Scotland’s future, which offers safety, security, good health, employment choices, opportunities and aspiration. We focus on what Scotland can achieve, not on what people who would talk it down say we cannot do. We have faith and confidence in our own people and their potential and in what can be delivered. Our vision is not one of subservience to London’s interests. We will continue to work hard for Scotland, because independence is the natural state for nations like ours. We have the ability to determine our own destiny and to build the best future for our country. We are a nation with a distinct political culture and distinct institutions and interests, and we need the full powers to match that, so that we can realise our full potential as a nation, with full access to Scottish resources and a full voice in the European Union. As for the huge powers that Richard Baker mentioned, the Scottish Parliament does not even have the powers of Jersey or the Isle of Man, never mind the powers of other nations of the world. In case anyone wants to know what we aspire to and what we mean by independence and equality, let me say that we mean that Scotland should be equivalent to Denmark, not Viborg; to Canada, not Saskatchewan; and to Australia, not Queensland. We believe in the equality of nations. We think that it is our right to pursue that and we fully intend to do so during the next few years. In taking Scotland forward, it is important that we look at what we can deliver with the powers that we currently have. We are committed to providing 25,000 modern apprenticeships each year during the next five years. We will continue the small business bonus scheme, which has given rates relief to thousands of small businesses. In North Ayrshire, 1,838 businesses have no rates to pay as a result of the policy. Labour opposed the policy for four years, but I am thankful that it now supports the scheme. We will also provide an export support package, to increase our exports by 50 per cent over the next 10 years. As the First Minister pointed out, we have ensured that there are no compulsory redundancies, through negotiations with Government unions in the areas that we control. However, in these uncertain times it is important to extend that security to people who work throughout the public sector. In my constituency, I am sad to say, Labour-controlled North Ayrshire Council has reneged on its party’s manifesto commitment to there being no compulsory redundancies in the public sector by seeking to sack dozens of classroom assistants. We have pledged to maintain 1,000 extra police officers on Scotland’s streets. That approach has seen crime fall to a 32-year low and has, in Ayrshire, contributed to an incredible 31.7 per cent fall in serious violent crime in the past year alone. We will reintroduce our proposal for minimum pricing of alcohol, which 160 independent organisations fully support—Christine Grahame mentioned many of them. We will also introduce the detect cancer early initiative, which will save 300 lives per annum. Independence is about making Scotland more successful. At its most basic, it is about taking our own decisions rather than leaving them to our next-door neighbours. Other countries see Scotland as a society and a nation, and no one cares more about our success than the people who live here. That is why independence is the choice for our future. It will mean a strong new relationship between Scotland and the rest of the United Kingdom—a social union, to replace the current political union. As a member of the EU we will have open borders, shared rights, free trade and extensive co-operation. It will be an independence of equality, which allows us to make major decisions. That is the reality of independence in this interdependent world, and I look forward to the day when we can secure it.

Can the member explain how the Tory policy to have some children leave school at 14 will help their educational attainment?

Will the member take an intervention?

4. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government has done to support job creation over the last four years. (S3F-2982)

According to Scottish Enterprise, between May 2005 and May 2007, 1,733 jobs were lost in North Ayrshire through 28 major redundancies. During that time, Cunninghame North was represented in the Parliament by the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, Allan Wilson, and Labour controlled North Ayrshire Council, held power here in Holyrood and was in government at Westminster. So many livelihoods were lost before the recession—which was caused by Labour’s chronic mismanagement of the world’s largest financial centre, the City of London—even began. [Interruption.]

Does the First Minister agree that that litany of Labour economic incompetence shows that Scotland’s economy is not safe in the Labour Party’s hands and that it is vital to secure the re-election of a Scottish National Party Government that is committed to investing in skills, infrastructure and our small businesses to tackle the scourge of unemployment?

I am delighted to join this morning’s love-in—sorry, debate. I am glad to see so much consensus. The bill shows what can happen when everyone works together towards a common aim. As has been said, the bill’s stimulus was the Shaw report in 2007, which examined child abuse in residential and children’s homes from 1950 to 1995. Tom Shaw concluded that difficulties for former residents of such homes in tracing records for identity, family or medical reasons were due to poor record keeping in the public sector. To ensure that future generations are not affected in that way, new legislation is needed to encompass fully all public records. The bill is of course that new legislation. Mr Shaw told the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee that the bill would end “a range of weaknesses, gaps and inconsistencies”. He also said that record keeping needed to be viewed as “a proper way of recording the life experience and circumstances of an individual” rather than “a bureaucratic chore” or “a storage problem.” Mr Shaw said that his historical abuse systemic review found that record keeping was unsatisfactory in more than half the public authorities that were surveyed. He told us how one of his researchers had visited several archives and stores where records were held and described what she found: “it sounds Dickensian—dusty storerooms where cardboard boxes that appeared not to have been opened for a long time sat. Whenever people were asked what was in the boxes, the answer was in effect, ‘We don’t know—would you like to have a look?’ ... In that way, existing practice has failed ... My ... concern is that the longer it takes to” put right, “the more records will be lost and the more people who never access what is held on them will pass through the system.”—[Official Report, Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, 19 January 2011; c 4543, 4546-7.] In many cases, records are simply non-existent. The issue is about identity, as other members have said. Many unfortunate Scots have slipped through the proverbial cracks because of inadequate record keeping for too long and have grown up without knowledge of their youth, family history or who they really are. Scotland has a moral obligation to manage the populace’s personal records successfully. Moreover, the bill’s primary aim is simply to improve public record keeping. The race to keep records has—unfortunately—lagged behind technological developments and population growth. The bill covers the management of records once they exist. Decisions on how they should be created will be left to the keeper of the records of Scotland and the authorities. Organisations with largely successful record-keeping practices will not be affected and will be able to continue good practice, whereas those that have obviously poor record keeping will feel the greatest impact of the bill and will be required to make a positive change. In relation to the allegations about Kerelaw school, the absence of effective record keeping was undoubtedly a key factor. No longer will files be lost or hard to locate because of neglectful minds and careless storage of important documents. The bill is about better handling of records and not about creating new records. The bill is necessary to ensure consistency across public authorities, whose records management plans will be approved by the keeper. Children who grow up in care have often been unable to find any record of their childhood—not even a photograph of them or their family. We owe to those who are in care and to future generations the assurance that records will now be properly kept.

It is cheaper than buying a lottery ticket.

6. To ask the Scottish Government how many children were being educated in schools classed as in need of repair in May 2007 and how many are now. (S3O-13269)

Does the minister agree that the Scottish Government’s commitment to refurbishing and rebuilding hundreds of our schools has created a more positive learning experience for our young people, and that future projects such as the new Garnock academy in my constituency, which will be built with the help of £18.8 million in Scottish Government funding, will benefit thousands of Scots schoolchildren for generations to come?

8. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to aid job creation and training and encourage economic growth in North Ayrshire. (S3O-13161)

I was pleased to see the minister and Mr Neil at the meeting. Does the minister agree that manufacturing remains a key component of the North Ayrshire economy and that the 37 per cent decline in United Kingdom manufacturing employment under the previous Labour Government hit the area particularly hard? What will the Scottish Government do, with the limited powers that are available to it, to help manufacturing in North Ayrshire?

I am delighted to have secured this debate and would like to sincerely thank the 33 members who supported the motion, and Epilepsy Scotland for their assistance and encouragement. Epilepsy is the most common neurological disorder in the world and affects one in every 130 people in Scotland. The disorder is diagnosed when a person has multiple seizures originating in the brain. When normal neural activity experiences a disturbance, the brain fires off random nerve-cell signals, which cause an epileptic seizure. There are more than 40 types of epileptic seizure, ranging from symptomatic, in which brain damage is the cause, to idiopathic, in which no direct cause can be found. The different types of seizures can last anywhere from a few seconds to a few minutes and each type produces a different reaction, ranging from temporary loss of awareness to extended periods of convulsions. Each type of epilepsy must be dealt with in a specific way. The people surrounding an individual who experiences an epileptic seizure are responsible for keeping that person safe. As such, those who care for individuals with epilepsy need to be aware of the different types of disorder and how each can most safely be addressed. As children are not equipped to deal with medical scenarios such as epilepsy, it is essential for pupils to have responsible adults nearby who are aware of and can react quickly to their condition as necessary. Therefore, it is vital to take any possible measures to protect and promote the safety in our schools of children who suffer from epilepsy. To secure maximum safety for those young individuals, it is of the utmost importance that all teachers be educated in the detection of epileptic seizures and in the proper means of treatment during and after said seizures. As key care givers in children’s lives, teachers are responsible for their pupils’ development and safety while the children are in their care, and it is our duty to ensure that they are equipped to handle any condition that is as common as epilepsy. Currently, teaching staff go through epilepsy training only when one of their students is diagnosed with it. Given that students are not always near their instructors, but are sometimes in the presence of other teaching staff, it is vital for all teaching staff to be proficient in their knowledge of epilepsy and how it impacts on developing children. One third of pupils with epilepsy have learning disorders and many have emotional, cognitive and behavioural difficulties. All teachers need to be aware of epilepsy and its effects, so that they can be as helpful to and as understanding of children with epilepsy and, indeed, their peers, as possible.

I certainly hope that it will. As the years progress and as epilepsy training becomes more common for teachers and as children learn to understand it, there will be much more understanding of what is a widely misunderstood illness in our society. Epilepsy training should become a mandatory segment of the student teacher training course. Although many people with epilepsy take medication to prevent seizures, epilepsy can manifest at any age, so seizures might happen without warning in the classroom, which makes teacher training all the more vital. Epilepsy training would prepare all educators to care most effectively for students with epilepsy, as well as for students who have unexpected seizures. The training would also enable teachers to feel confident about, rather than threatened by, the possibility of an epileptic seizure occurring in their classroom. Knowledge of which actions to take for different types of epileptic seizures and the ability to recognise signs that a seizure might be about to occur would guarantee that teachers could keep their pupils safe. Furthermore, as teachers are prominent figures in children’s lives, it is essential for them to understand the most effective means of supporting students with epilepsy and their families and peers. The proposed training for teachers would not only develop teachers’ skills in dealing with this serious and common medical condition, but guide them to promote the normalcy of epilepsy, thus reducing the stigma that often plagues the disorder, which Cathy Peattie touched on. As many as 7,000 Scottish children experience epileptic seizures, and any reduction in stigma would benefit the psychological development of children with epilepsy and improve their ability to cope with their disorder. Programmes for epilepsy awareness among teachers that are similar to the one that I am suggesting have been quite effective in other nations. Epilepsy Wales, for example, is a programme that sends field workers into Welsh schools to instruct teachers how to react to seizures and how to increase sensitivity to epileptic pupils in their classrooms. It has had great success in increasing awareness among teachers and pupils. A study that was carried out in Thailand revealed teachers’ immense impact on the attitudes that their pupils have towards epilepsy. The study concluded that a public education campaign about epilepsy would certainly improve the quality of life and safety of children who suffer from epileptic seizures. The United States has experienced benefits for children with epilepsy through the efforts of the school alert programme, which is run by the Epilepsy Foundation of America. The programme has sent experts to instruct teachers in how to respond to epileptic seizures that occur in their classrooms. It has been so successful that an epilepsy education programme may soon be approved for teachers to take as part of their continuing education programme. Scots are gaining awareness of epilepsy through the excellent work of Epilepsy Scotland, which is making efforts to improve the health care for the 40,000 people who are living with epilepsy in Scotland. The organisation’s website reads: “Being informed about the condition, knowing the medical terms and how to handle any problems helps reduce the impact epilepsy has on a person’s life.” Epilepsy awareness training would advance those efforts and improve the standard of health not just for children, but for all people with epilepsy. Making epilepsy training mandatory during student teacher training would promote the wellness and protection of pupils in classrooms throughout Scotland. The safety of all pupils is a benchmark in classroom standards, and guaranteeing teachers’ capability in dealing with epileptic seizures would benefit students, and ultimately expand national awareness of this often misunderstood neurological disorder.

Scotland is facing a fuel price crisis. We are reaching a point at which Scots motorists, businesses and families will no longer be able to sustain the spiralling costs of petrol and diesel. It is no exaggeration to say that serious action must be taken to avert a crisis in which people will lose their jobs and established and budding businesses will fold. Much has been made of how the crisis in the middle east is affecting oil prices and driving up the cost of fuel to intolerable levels, but that is a fallacy. In July 2008, the price of oil reached $142 per barrel; today, the price is $114, but fuel is much more expensive now than it was then. It is the policies that successive UK Governments have pursued that have dramatically increased the cost of fuel. The fuel duty escalator, which Labour and Tory Governments pursued, with a penny increase in one budget and a penny increase in the next, soon added up, as Mr Carlaw said. The approach has pushed the cost of fuel through the roof and left many people struggling to cope. In the heady days of 2008, fuel duty stood at 50.35p per litre and the VAT rate was 17.5 per cent. Next month’s proposed increase will bring duty up to 58.95p per litre, at a time when VAT is 20 per cent. That will stuff Treasury coffers with £34.6 billion this year. UK motorists are the most highly taxed in the European Union. Some 62 per cent of the average price of a litre of diesel consists of tax. The current formula for fuel duty increases is inflation plus 1p each April until April 2013. If we consider that fuel price rises increase inflation and inflation increases fuel prices, it is clear that the situation is unsustainable. To add insult to injury, although most EU oil comes from Scotland, not only do we pay more at the pumps than anyone else does but, this year, we will send £12 billion in oil revenues to the UK Treasury.

I will give way to my clansman.

During the past decade, a third of petrol stations have closed and rural Scotland has been hit harder than most areas. People who live in rural communities have to travel ever further to fill their tanks. During tough financial times, it is the duty of Government to boost the economy, secure employment and protect businesses and services. Many people could learn from the Scottish Government’s small business bonus scheme, for example, which has meant the difference between sinking and swimming for one in eight Scottish small businesses. However, far from attempting to help businesses through these difficult times, the UK Government is placing more obstacles in businesses’ way. Information that the Federation of Small Businesses provided set out the devastating effects that increasing fuel duty has had and will continue to have on businesses unless drastic action is taken. The figures on the increased costs of road haulage are particularly eye watering, as we heard. The FSB’s national chairman, John Walker, summed up the situation when he said: “small businesses want to grow, innovate and create employment but the cost of fuel puts the brakes on their ability to drive the recovery ... Every extra penny spent at the pumps is a penny not being spent elsewhere in the economy and our members are finding it hard to plan for the future, as well as survive the present, due to the spiralling cost of fuel.” We cannot allow work to stabilise and grow our economy to be undone by short-sighted and unjustifiable increases in fuel duty. However, it is not just the business sector that is feeling the squeeze; ordinary Scots families, motorists and people who travel on public transport are finding that their budgets are seriously stretched. They are paying hundreds of pounds more every year to get to work, which pushes already-tight budgets even further. During better times, a fuel price increase could be offset by a rise in wages, but employees are currently experiencing the largest real-terms cut in their wages since the 1920s. The higher costs of goods and services add further pressure to household budgets. The coalition Government is often heard to talk of fairness, but what is fair about all that? I welcome the comments of Liberal Democrat and Conservative members who do not support the increase in fuel duty. I hope that the message gets through to their chancellor down south. For more than a decade, the Scottish National Party has campaigned for lower fuel prices. We are therefore aware of the options that are available to give motorists and businesses a better deal. A fuel duty stabiliser would ensure a freeze on fuel duty increases and a reduction in duty to match any increase in VAT revenues from higher pump prices. That would provide greater certainty for businesses and families. In rural and island communities, the burden of fuel costs is even greater. The people on Arran in my constituency, for example, do not have to deal with high levels of duty and taxation alone; isolation and low sales volume add approximately 15p to the price of a litre of fuel. A constituent informed me that in Brodick in Arran today diesel was 149.6p per litre and unleaded was 142.2p per litre. That is surely the highest in the country.

I must apologise to Charlie Gordon, because I would like to take his intervention, but I am running short of time and am speaking about my constituency. Since 1999, the SNP has pursued the idea of a derogation on fuel duty for rural and island communities to ensure that fuel duty in such communities would be less than on the mainland in order to make up for the price differential. Bizarrely, the previous UK Labour Government supported that measure in EU countries such as Portugal, Greece and even prosperous Luxembourg—which has the lowest fuel duty and VAT rates in Europe—but not in Scotland, even when the MP who was in charge of the policy represented the island of Arran. The new coalition Government is more sympathetic to the idea. On 9 October 2010, Danny Alexander MP, Chief Secretary to the Treasury, announced that a pilot scheme with a 5p duty derogation—not a particularly great sum, but at least something—would be introduced for islands from the Scillies to the Shetlands. However, Mr Alexander omitted the Clyde islands. Unfortunately, having challenged him on the issue—I have the correspondence here—I discovered that that was not merely an oversight and that the UK Government does not intend to extend the derogation to the Clyde islands. Unless we have some kind of level playing field, high fuel prices will impact on households, businesses and public services on Arran, and islanders will be adversely affected. That will ultimately cost jobs and reduce disposable income. Throughout Scotland, we are talking about not a mere 1p rise in fuel duty, but thousands of jobs. The chuntering Lord Foulkes does not seem to care much about that, because all he does is chunter and chunter without anything positive to say.

We are talking about business survival, about the delivery of public services and about daily household budgets being stretched to breaking point. I know that, with his income, Lord Foulkes will not be affected. The UK Government will raise £1 billion in extra revenue if it follows through with its proposal in Scotland. The consequences of that will, in the long run, cost it and the Parliament far more.

Gaun yersel!

Regeneration is integral to the betterment of our society, and the Scottish Government has shown a strong commitment to the regeneration of our urban areas since it took office in 2007. That has included the provision of substantial levels of funding for urban regeneration companies and the creation of the Scottish Futures Trust, as well as a number of other innovative policies and initiatives. Despite its good intentions, Labour’s raising of this important issue nonetheless smacks of hypocrisy, given that only two weeks ago Labour voted against £31 million of support for urban regeneration companies—£6 million more than had been planned in the draft budget. It is quite baffling that Labour has lodged a motion that “recognises the importance of continued support from the Scottish Government for regeneration initiatives” when regeneration is all the more necessary following the shocking economic mismanagement and ineptitude of the previous Labour Government at Westminster. Alex Johnstone said that there was a 9.8 per cent reduction in output over the Labour Government’s 13 years in office, but he did not say that despite pledging in 1997 to protect manufacturing it oversaw a 37 per cent decline in manufacturing employment in the UK, which has hit my area of north Ayrshire, where manufacturing is of disproportionate importance, particularly hard. It is why the former Cabinet minister Alan Milburn said that, under Labour, the gap between rich and poor was the widest it had been for 80 years. The fact that urban regeneration is of particular interest to me is due in no small part to the fact that one of the six URCs, Irvine Bay Urban Regeneration Company, covers my constituency. I was delighted by Mr Neil’s most welcome announcement. URCs are special purpose organisations that were established to attract and co-ordinate public and private sector investment around a shared set of objectives that have been decided on by investors and—most important—the communities themselves. Irvine Bay URC spans 14 miles of coastline and is one of the largest URCs. Its aim is to develop the built environment in Ardrossan and Saltcoats in my constituency and in Stevenston, Kilwinning and Irvine in Cunninghame South. That is an essential task, given that some of those towns contain large pockets of deprivation and have high levels of unemployment and ill health. Irvine Bay URC is working to engineer new investment and sustainable employment, to boost tourism and to improve the social conditions in the area. I have witnessed at first hand—on at least two occasions with the minister—the important work that the company has undertaken during its relatively short existence, and I am excited to see its projects coming to fruition. They range from small projects such as the renovation of several listed buildings that have been turned into art galleries and restaurants to bigger projects such as an 8,000ft2 business centre in Stevenston, the Ardrossan marina, which will create some 400 jobs and attract £70 million of investment, and several large-scale town centre regeneration projects. Those new retail and leisure facilities will also create jobs and give people a reason to come to that part of Ayrshire to spend money and to enjoy what is on offer. In addition, the creation of 300 construction jobs, which will include 31 trainee positions, and the building of a hotel will provide a significant boost. There are many good things to say about what is happening at Irvine Bay. Of course, such developments not only benefit communities but provide support for ancillary industries such as construction, as I have mentioned. Further to the Scottish Government’s commitment to URCs, the national housing trust initiative will also support regeneration. The aim of that scheme is to deliver, through an innovative high-value-for-money solution, thousands of houses that are suitable for mid-market rent in areas where there is a high demand for such housing. Homes that are brought into the scheme will be funded jointly by participating councils and developers, and the Scottish Government is offering councils a guarantee to ensure that they can repay any money that they borrow to fund the scheme. It will keep people in jobs, particularly in the construction industry, by allowing house builders to kick-start construction on stalled housing sites that in many cases would otherwise remain mothballed. This innovative scheme is being taken forward by the Scottish Futures Trust, which the SNP Government set up and which Labour intends to scrap in the unlikely event of its forming the next Administration. The SNP has many other initiatives and policies. For example, in the recent strategy document “Homes Fit for the 21st Century”, we set out plans to allow councils to increase the rate of council tax that they charge on long-term empty properties. There are 25,000 such properties in Scotland and it makes no sense for a council tax rate of 50 per cent to be levied on them. Our policy would not only discourage leaving homes empty but raise £130 million for councils, which is enough money to deliver 800 new homes a year and to support 1,500 construction jobs. Local communities are often best placed to decide how their area should be regenerated, so the SNP has bold plans to assist and empower local communities through our proposed community empowerment and renewal bill, which will enable community purchase of underused and unused public sector assets and enable communities to regenerate dormant land and vacant or derelict buildings in their area. Granting local people such powers and assistance can often provide the spark for wider-ranging regeneration and investment.

On Tuesday—unlike the member—I was at a meeting with North Ayrshire Council, Scottish Enterprise, the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism and the Minister for Housing and Communities at which that very case was made. I have pressed for that since my election. What we have heard from some Labour members—particularly Duncan McNeil who, sadly, is no longer present in the chamber—is a somewhat incoherent and blinkered view. We have had the bare-faced denial of Labour’s responsibility for the recession and the cuts that are having to be forced on Scotland by the UK Government according to the Tories’ philosophy. Laughably, we have even had criticism of how money is distributed to local authorities, despite the fact that the SNP uses the same distribution formula that the Labour Party used when it was in power. Unfortunately, time prevents me from talking about the coalfields community but, along with Mr Neil and Mr Stevenson, I have family who worked in the coal mines; my paternal grandfather was a miner from Leven.

What about Labour’s cuts?

When I was a Glasgow councillor, we were advised that £500 million had been spent under the Conservative Government on attempts to regenerate Glasgow, yet the postcode areas that were the poorest before the regeneration money was spent were still the poorest afterwards. I asked the council—whose leader was Mr McAveety—for a report on which regeneration activities were successful and which were unsuccessful, so that we did not repeat the mistakes of the past. A decade later, I do not think that that report has been produced.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to reduce crime levels in North Ayrshire. (S3O-13043)

Can the cabinet secretary confirm that the increase in community officers in North Ayrshire from 70 to 140 since 25 October is already beginning to show results? Does he share my welcome for the opening of the new custody suite in Saltcoats just this week? Does he agree that the increase in capacity from 10 to 21 will mean that fewer offenders will have to be transported to Greenock or Killie—a journey of about 50 minutes—which means that more officers can spend time on the front-line policing duties for which they are trained?

4. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s position is on schools being switched to a four-day week. (S3F-2902)

A four-day school week has no educational merit whatever. Contrary to the insinuation from Mr Gray, the SNP group was not aware of the Labour proposal before it hit the media—[Interruption.]

The First Minister is aware that Labour-controlled North Ayrshire Council’s grant will fall by £5.5 million in the year that begins in April. The council said that the cut would be £64 million, which caused widespread consternation among staff and service users. Given that the council’s general services budget will still be more than £340 million and that there is an underspend of £5.4 million, does the First Minister share my concern that, although difficult decisions have to be taken, North Ayrshire Council and other Labour councils are scaring parents, playing politics with children’s education and worrying staff, by overplaying budget reductions for their perceived electoral advantage?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I was in the chamber from the start of questions on health and wellbeing and I know that you only got to the 18th question. Although 10 members of the Labour group were listed to ask questions, at one point only one was in the chamber and a number of them came into the chamber only one or two minutes before they were due to ask their questions. One or two who came in late even got to ask supplementary questions. Is it appropriate to remind all members that they should be here from the start to the end of questions and that those of us who are here from the start to the end should get an opportunity to ask our questions?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Standing order 7.3.1 states that members must consider their conduct in the chamber. Earlier this afternoon, at First Minister’s question time, the leader of the Labour Party in the Scottish Parliament, Iain Gray, inferred that it was the Scottish National Party group in North Ayrshire Council that suggested to the ruling Labour Party that the council should consider the possibility of a four-day school week. After looking at the record and discussing the issue with North Ayrshire Council this afternoon, I have had confirmation that that is absolutely contrary to the truth. I therefore ask whether it would be possible for the leader of the Opposition to be given an opportunity to consider his comments and to bring them into order in terms of his obligations under standing order 7.3.1.

The SNP Government’s budget is geared towards economic recovery and protecting jobs. We listened carefully to the ideas that Opposition parties put forward and approached them constructively. It is a sign of maturity and shows a spirit of consensus that some of the Opposition parties have given time and thought to the budget instead of simply dismissing it out of hand. I hope that the spirit of consensus and compromise will continue and we will reach agreement on a budget that will deliver the absolute best for Scotland during these difficult times. Let there be no mistake: these are indeed very difficult times, with an unprecedented Westminster cut of £1.856 billion in real terms to the Scottish budget, rising inflation, an increase in VAT, an increase in national insurance and an increase in the already extortionate fuel duty. All of that increases the burden on public services and impacts on their delivery while simultaneously squeezing the budgets of Scots families and individuals as they struggle to cope with the greatest real-terms cut in their wages since the 1920s. It is our duty as members of this Parliament to do all that we can to help to cushion the blow and ensure that we invest in projects and initiatives that will protect and create jobs and help our economy to grow. By the very nature of politics, we all have different ideas on how all that can be achieved. On the SNP side of the chamber, we say that Scotland should be in charge of her own resources and economy, as that would allow us to invest properly in infrastructure, energy projects, jobs and education, but that is a debate for another day. The depressing reality is that we have a limited pot of money, and we must agree on the most prudent way of spending it. Although we all have our pet projects that we would happily advance at the expense of others, we are, I believe, broadly agreed on some of the main issues: protecting our NHS; providing world-class education that is affordable to everyone; maintaining record police numbers; and creating more jobs and training opportunities for our young people. I therefore hope that we can iron out our relatively minor differences so that we can pass the budget today. I maintain what I said in the stage 1 debate: this is an outstanding budget, considering the extreme challenges that the cabinet secretary has faced. Local government spending has been reduced by only a fraction of the amount that many prophets of doom had warned that it would be and in comparison with the reductions down south. Concessionary bus travel has been not only protected but extended to injured service personnel. Free university education has been maintained, and the council tax has been frozen once again. Those are but a few commitments in the budget that will make very real differences to the everyday lives of Scottish people. This Government, as is reflected in the budget, is truly committed to providing the best services for Scotland. That includes an absolute commitment to protect NHS budgets, in conjunction with the previous commitment to pass on any Barnett consequentials from the increased health spending in England to the health service in Scotland. The budget also includes an £8 million increase in funding to tackle hospital-acquired infections to ensure that our hospitals are as clean and safe as they can be. That funding comes on top of the £54 million that has already been committed to tackling the issue. Further to our commitment to protect services, the budget puts in place measures that will boost our economy and create jobs. The additional £6 million for regeneration is particularly welcome. Perhaps the most successful of the measures that the Government has taken over the past few years has been the introduction of the small business bonus scheme, which has removed the rates burden from more than 63,000 properties, thereby allowing businesses to reinvest, employ more people and grow into the successful and dynamic businesses on which this country prides itself. In case anyone thinks that that is simply rhetoric, we should remember that Colin Borland told the Finance Committee that one in eight of Scotland’s small businesses would have gone bust during Labour’s recession had it not been for the small business bonus scheme. In maintaining that valuable scheme into next year, the budget will help tens of thousands of Scotland’s businesses during these tough times. As we have heard, the budget will provide an additional 1,200 college places at a cost of £8 million, and an additional £15 million has been provided for college bursaries. That is £1 million more than the NUS asked for in its recent campaign. In addition, an amendment has been made to include a £10 million fund to support job creation in small businesses, which I know that the Conservative party was extremely keen to see happen. Most members will welcome that. We have also made provision to increase the number of apprenticeship places by 25 per cent next year to a record 25,000. It must be said that there would be no demand or requirement for such a vast quantity of young tradespeople without the budget’s investment of £3.3 billion in the construction sector. The SNP has listened to and acted on the various suggestions of Opposition parties, and it is disappointing that at least one and possibly two of those parties do not seem to be as enthusiastic for the budget as they should be. I believe that the cabinet secretary has bent over backwards to accommodate as many different perspectives and points of view as possible in an effort to help the people of Scotland and the Scottish economy. I therefore ask all members of the Parliament to support the budget today.

Will David Whitton accept an intervention?

Come on.

Will the minister confirm not only that the teaching budget at James Watt College has increased substantially over the past four years, but that the number of student places there has increased from 13,000 to 16,000 in the same period and that student numbers will remain at that level next year?

13. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to help protect small and medium-sized businesses from the economic downturn. (S3O-12730)

Does the minister agree that our larger retailers have a moral and civic responsibility to help to bear the burden of the Westminster-imposed cuts? Does he agree that the proposed increase in business rates for large retailers would help to ease the burden that is borne by small and medium-sized businesses? Does he agree that Labour and the Conservatives would perhaps find it easier to support those proposals had they not received more than £14 million in political donations from the Sainsbury family over the past few years?

Could the member explain how the increase in fuel duty will make Scotland more competitive?

Will the member take an intervention?

Forgive me if I do not take Tory concerns about job losses seriously. I remember the Tories saying that the abolition of fox hunting would cost 2,000 jobs in Scotland. I congratulate the cabinet secretary on producing a budget that delivers for Scotland in the face of unparalleled cuts. It will help to protect front-line services and jobs, and to grow our economy and spending on the national health service, all in the teeth of £1.3 billion of cuts in next year’s budget from the coalition Government at Westminster—£1.856 billion in real terms—and following hard on the heels of Labour’s real-terms cut of £679 million this year. The severity of those cuts is indeed shocking. However, despite these cuts coming from a Tory-Liberal coalition, let us not forget for one minute why we are in such a financial quagmire. Economic mismanagement by Labour left the UK with its largest level of national debt since the second world war, tipped us into the worst recession in living memory, and destroyed the country’s balance of payments as Labour spent money like it was going out of fashion. What should we expect from a party that always leaves a financial crisis when leaving government and which had the International Monetary Fund bail it out in the 1970s? Gordon Brown promised us that the days of boom and bust were gone. We must be gracious enough to acknowledge that he delivered on half of that promise. We should also remember that two thirds of the cuts that Scotland will endure were already planned by Labour. Alistair Darling drew up plans for an £814 million cut in the Scottish block before factoring in plans to raise national insurance by 1 per cent, which would have added a further £104 million of pressure to Scotland’s budget. That measure was met by deafening silence from Labour north of the border. Labour also bequeathed Scotland £28.1 billion in private finance initiative debt when it left office in 2007. For Labour to now blame Scotland’s woes on the policies of a Scottish Government that it does not wish to control interest rates, VAT, national insurance, fuel duty, corporation tax, oil revenue, all income taxes and the financial sector is ridiculous and the people of Scotland will see straight through it. By accelerating spending and investing in Scottish jobs and our economy and people, the Government has helped small and medium-sized businesses. The most recent data that are available show that our approach is paying dividends. Scotland’s recession was shallower than the UK’s and we exited recession a full three months before the rest of the UK. Scottish unemployment fell by 5,000 towards the end of last year, with 18,000 additional jobs in the Scottish economy, while UK unemployment increased by 49,000 in the same period. In construction, employment grew by 23,400 last year, while it fell by more than 26,000 over the border. The SNP will build on that record to deliver the best possible deal for Scotland with the modest resources that we have. The SNP is committed to ensuring that our young people receive the best available education. That includes maintaining the number of student places and the education maintenance allowance, investing in school building projects, reducing teacher unemployment through a settlement with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, and creating a new early years and early intervention fund. Of course, we also abolished Labour’s tuition fees. During the past four years, our approach has seen our young people achieve the best higher pass rates ever recorded and 86.8 per cent of school leavers have moved on to positive destinations. Those have included apprenticeships, which we have increased by 30 per cent since Labour was in office, college education, employment and, of course, university with free tuition. The SNP will protect spending in the NHS to deliver excellent care to the people in our society who need it most. That is something that Labour rejects, as confirmed by Mr Whitton’s appearance on “Newsnight Scotland” last Thursday, and something that Jackie Baillie obviously missed.

If Jackie Baillie had had the courtesy to accept an intervention from me or my colleague Joe FitzPatrick, I would have been happy to take one from her. But, of course, it is all about infantile politics for Ms Baillie, who talks about spending more money on this or that, but gives us no idea where that money is supposed to come from. It is empty rhetoric of the worst kind. Our determination is to protect the NHS budget in conjunction with our previous commitment to pass on Barnett consequentials from increased health spending in England to the NHS in Scotland. No doubt Labour would rather that we spent that money on the white elephant of the Glasgow airport rail link, about which it has been rather quiet today. The health budget includes an £8 million increase in funding to tackle hospital infections, on top of the £54 million that we are already spending; that is treble what Labour spent when Andy Kerr was the health minister. The SNP Government will extend the free concessionary bus pass to all injured forces veterans. At the Glasgow East by-election, Labour falsely said that we would abolish that. That goes some way towards recognising the sacrifices that the veterans and their families have made. In contrast, the UK cuts agenda has been exposed as fundamentally flawed. Yesterday’s figures show that the UK teeters once more on the brink of recession. Mervyn King rubbed salt into the wound by pointing out that workers were suffering the sharpest fall in real wages since the 1920s. He predicted that inflation could reach 5 per cent in the next few months as we await the full impact of VAT, national insurance and fuel duty increases. VAT, national insurance and the latest fuel duty insult will take £3 billion out of Scotland this year to line Treasury coffers, in addition to the £12 billion from North Sea oil that will head south. It is shameful that, although Scotland has most of the European Union’s oil, prices here are the highest in Europe, thanks to the UK taking so much tax. Higher costs for goods and services have an impact on competitiveness, and jobs experience the inevitable consequences. I have not heard a single word from any member of the London-led parties to call for mitigation of that burden returning to the Scottish block of the millions that have been taken, to pay for increased fuel duty and VAT, from the NHS, local government and so on. That is because putting Scotland first simply does not occur to those parties. Meanwhile, they moan about a tax on 235 megastores that would cost those businesses only one fiftieth of 1 per cent of their gross revenue while delivering for Scottish public services and creating a level playing field for small businesses. The £30 million to which that would amount is 1 per cent of the money that Scotland is losing in the payments for VAT, fuel duty and so on that I have mentioned. The budget delivers for Scotland to protect our economy, jobs and front-line services. Until the Opposition parties reveal where they intend to conjure more money from, explain where they would make cuts instead and perhaps even outline costed policies, they have a duty and a responsibility to pass the motion today.

Will Robert Brown give way on that point?

Will the member accept an intervention?

Give just one.

Aye, by putting up fuel duty.

Where is David Whitton’s budget?

He should show us his budget.

Mr Whitton keeps talking about all the budgets that have been cut. If he wants money to go back into those budgets, from where would he find the money?

On a point of clarification—

I welcome today’s debate and firmly believe that any measures that can help businesses to thrive and survive, and which offer our young people opportunities to realise their full potential are worth serious consideration by this chamber. The SNP Government has a good track record on such matters and although we can always do more, and intend to do so, that record must not be overlooked. Last year, our young people achieved the best higher pass rates ever recorded and 86 per cent of them left school to move on to a positive destination, including apprenticeships, college, employment and, of course, a free university education. Further to that, the small business bonus scheme helped to protect and grow small and medium-sized businesses, thus keeping more young Scots in work. However, we must do more to ensure that all our school leavers move on to positive destinations. Children from deprived areas, those who have additional support needs and looked-after children continue to be less likely to succeed in life. We must therefore continue to focus on the problem. As the motion makes clear, the Grameen Bank is not a new idea. The first such scheme was founded in 1976 in Bangladesh by Nobel prize laureate Professor Muhammad Yunus to help to improve lives and reduce poverty in rural villages. It proved to be hugely successful. The possibility of having such a scheme in Scotland, however, is debateable because of the legal question: can someone who is claiming welfare benefits receive a Grameen loan? There is yet to be clarification from the Department of Work and Pensions to explain what flexibility, if any, might be available for Grameen borrowers. Despite that, the Grameen Bank Trust recently set up a partnership with Glasgow Caledonian University with the aim of extending services in Scotland. On 5 July last year, Professor Pamela Gillies and Professor Muhammad Yunus met John Swinney and the chief executives of Social Investment Scotland and Scottish Financial Enterprise. The meeting was a great success, with the cabinet secretary describing the Grameen Bank as “a very innovative proposal which has much to offer in terms of tackling social and economic challenges.” Professor Yunus made the valid point that “If it works in every single country, why can’t it work in Glasgow, why can’t it work in Scotland?” There is a comparable organisation to the Grameen Bank that goes some way towards demonstrating how successful such projects can be. The Prince’s Scottish Youth Business Trust offers finance and support to young people living in Scotland who are aged between 18 and 25, or up to 30 if they are disabled, to help them to set up and run their own business if they are unable to get funding from anyone else. The trust aims to help up to 650 new businesses a year and to provide aftercare and mentoring to more than 1,200 businesses in Scotland. As well as that, the PSYBT offers start-up grants of up to £1,000, low-interest loans of up to £5,000, development loans of up to £25,000 to help grow existing businesses that have already received PSYBT funding, and test-marketing grants of up to £250 to help carry out marketing to show viability. Organisations and projects such as that are vital to our unlocking the entrepreneurial talent that lies dormant in many of our young people, and they contribute hugely not only to the lives of the young people but to wider Scottish society. For proof of that, I recommend that members read the case studies on the PSYBT website that highlight some of the exceptional small businesses that would never have started up otherwise. The SNP is committed to unlocking the potential of our young people. Under our Administration, we are seeing more young people than ever move into training, employment and further and higher education, and we must build on our record. There are tough times ahead for the people of Scotland as Westminster cuts hit home. I hope and believe that innovative schemes, such as the PSYBT and the Grameen Bank, in partnership with the Scottish Government, can and will help to cushion the blow from the recession and secure employment for even more of our young people. The powers and resources of an independent Scotland would also help.

Who has he fired?

To ask the First Minister what the impact will be on Scottish public services of the recent rises in VAT and fuel duty. (S3F-2821)

Does the First Minister agree that it is a shocking indictment of successive UK Governments that they have imposed the highest fuel duty in Europe on Scottish motorists in order to maximise revenue? Most of Europe's oil comes from Scotland, but shamefully we have to pay more for it at the pumps than any other nation. The burden of additional UK VAT and fuel duty will make Scottish goods and services less competitive and it will cost jobs by draining £2.4 billion from Scotland into the Treasury's coffers this year. Will the First Minister therefore engage with the UK Government to seek the restoration of the funds that have been taken by the Treasury from the Scottish block to avoid further cuts in public services, and to seek the establishment of a fuel duty regulator?

Will the minister confirm that, as the draft electricity policy statement that was launched on 17 November said, thermal requirements will fall from an estimated 50 per cent to 20 per cent of Scotland's requirements by 2020 and that fewer new power stations—even those with partial carbon capture and storage—will be required than was previously thought?

Although many of us have contrasting opinions on education, we must never lose sight of its importance to the people of Scotland. Therefore, the debate is welcome. Scotland has a proud educational tradition. It is the key that unlocks many doors and the primary reason why our small country has, for centuries, punched far above its weight in so many fields. Scotland was home to the enlightenment and can lay claim to an exhaustive list of mankind's greatest inventions and discoveries. We owe all that to the Scottish belief in quality and universal education. Our greatest natural resource is our people, and our education system is fundamental to ensuring that they can achieve not only for themselves but for their country. On taking office in 2007, the SNP made a firm commitment to education. Successes can be seen across the education spectrum, from early years and nursery education through to school leavers and students, as well as adults who wish to return to some form of education. All areas of education are critical and intertwined in a complex way. That is why the SNP has worked to improve educational standards and availability across the board. In early years education—the most critical years for a child's development—the SNP has worked to make great improvements. Through our concordat with COSLA, local authorities now deliver 475 hours of nursery education per child, which is a substantial increase on the previous figure of 380 hours. The latest statistics also show that almost 22 per cent of pupils in primary 1 to primary 3 are now in classes of 18 or fewer. That exceeds the agreement that was reached with COSLA in December 2009, when we set a target of 20 per cent. Under our most recent agreement with COSLA, that ratio will be maintained. In secondary schools, pupils have also reaped the rewards of SNP investment, governance and co-operation with local authorities. The higher pass rate is the highest that it has ever been, with 47.3 per cent of school leavers attaining one  award or more in 2008-09 compared with 43.6 per cent in 2007-08. In 2008, the universities entry body, the Universities and Colleges Admissions Service, conducted an expert study of the standards of Scottish highers and advanced highers. It found that the value of highers against English A levels had increased, and therefore highers were uprated in comparison with A levels for university entry throughout the UK. That is praise indeed for the Scottish secondary education system, as it comes from an entirely independent education organisation. The increased level of attainment is good not only for our country but for hard-working pupils. In 2009-10, 87 per cent of school leavers went to positive destinations—that is, work, training and further or higher education. That is the highest level ever recorded and is due to, in no small part, our 16-plus learning choices scheme, which guarantees a suitable offer to all young people at that crucial stage in their lives. The same cannot be said of the situation under the previous Lib-Lab Administration, when we witnessed a year-on-year increase in the number of young people who were, as that Administration put it, not in education, employment or training. Scotland has an enviable university education system. We are home to some of the most prestigious seats of learning in the world and our young people are guaranteed free education should they wish it. The SNP recognises the importance and status of our higher education establishments and has ploughed unprecedented levels of funding into our seats of learning, in sharp contrast to what is happening south of the border. Scotland currently spends a higher share of its gross domestic product on university research than any other country in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. In the last UK-wide Government research assessment exercise, which worked on a subject-by-subject basis, all Scottish universities were ranked as producing world-leading research. The SNP is committed to maintaining and building upon the world-class standards of our universities and to making university education available to all Scots who want it. That is why we abolished the graduate endowment fee and oppose the reintroduction of Labour's tuition fees. Education is a right and should be based on the ability to learn, not the ability to pay. That policy will be recognised in years to come as one of the SNP's greatest achievements. Of course, education is not all text books and academia. We must also remember that an ever-increasing number of our young people are  entering practical training programmes and apprenticeships. In 2009-10, we exceeded our target of 20,000 new apprenticeship starts, and maintained it in 2010-11 with the help of European Union funding. That turned around a year-on-year declining trend of starts. Beginning in 2004-05, the number was 21,349. That fell to an unimpressive low of 15,772 in 2007-08—a fall of a quarter—under the previous Labour-Lib Dem Executive. Last July, we announced the step forward Scotland campaign—a £6.5 million package of support to help the additional young people who expected to leave school and college that summer. It included 800 vocational pathway opportunities for 16 and 17-year-olds and a £1,000 incentive for up to 2,000 employers to offer modern apprenticeships to young people facing specific barriers to securing such an opportunity, including care leavers. Despite the impact of Labour's recession, the SNP has done what it can to improve Scottish education. However, we still want to achieve many things and would like to have the means to achieve them at our disposal. If we want to maintain and improve our enviable, world-class education system, we must secure the fiscal powers to enable us to do so, and that can best be achieved by independence. We have heard about what is happening in Renfrewshire; I leave other colleagues to comment on that. However, although Hugh Henry has shed crocodile tears recently about the reduction in teacher numbers, it does not appear that tears were shed between 2004 and 2007 in Glasgow when Labour cut 64 nursery teacher posts and replaced them with nursery nurses. Labour must be consistent if it is as concerned about the issue as it claims to be.

Why are you shutting them, then?

To ask the Scottish Government what the change has been in the number of nurses who are employed by NHS Ayrshire and Arran since May 2007. (S3O-12470)

I am pleased that the cabinet secretary is able to confirm that hundreds more front-line health professionals, including nurses, are now working in NHS Ayrshire and Arran than was the case when the Scottish Government came into office, not least in the accident and emergency unit that her predecessor tried to close. That proves this Government's commitment to continuous improvement in the health of people  in Ayrshire and Arran and, indeed, the health of the nation.

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the many shameful and biased comments that have been made by the London-based media about alleged discrimination against English students in Scotland. Will he confirm that while English students will have to pay increased fees in Scotland, the same will pertain to Scottish students who choose to study in England—something that the inflammatory English media have so far ignored?

I welcome the statement and the extension, however modest, of additional powers to Scotland. Sadly, it still means that the Scottish Parliament post Calman will have fewer fiscal powers than Jersey, Guernsey or the Isle of Man, such is the lack of trust and faith that the unionist parties have in the Scottish people. Does the minister agree that it is deeply disappointing that, while Northern Ireland, with a third of our population, has borrowing powers of £3 billion, Scotland will be limited to the £2.2 billion in capital that she has mentioned and £500 million in cash, only 10 per cent of which can be drawn down in any given year—a restriction that is not applied to Scottish local authorities?

The Children's Hearings (Scotland) Bill is, as colleagues have said, one of the longest pieces of legislation in the history of the Parliament. It has demanded a large amount of work not only from the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, but from Ken Norrie, the minister and his dedicated and hard-working staff, and many individuals and organisations who work alongside and within the children's hearings system. I specifically thank the Law Society of Scotland for the vast array of amendments that it has offered via Ken Macintosh. I also thank the children's panel chairs group, Children in Scotland, the Scottish Association of Children's Panels and the witnesses who presented evidence to the committee for their constructive input to the legislative process. Although there is no doubt that our unique system of children's hearings has been effective, it has been clear for some time now that the system is in need of modernisation. The creation of the children's hearings Scotland body and the national children's panel, paired with the dissolution of the children's panel advisory committees, helps to achieve the degree of simplification that is necessary in the hearings system, while complying with the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child. In doing so, the bill takes steps towards making decisions in children's hearings more consistent throughout Scotland. In line with the idea of consistency is the responsibility that the national convener will have in overseeing the standards for the training of panel members. For too long, panel members from separate local authorities have been trained in and expected to adhere to separate standards while directing some of Scotland's most vulnerable children. The establishment both of national standards that are set out by the convener and of the national scheme for legal aid will go a long way towards making the child the focal point of the hearings system. The bill takes great strides towards putting the child at the centre of the system, and goes further towards protecting the child's best interests than previous legislation has done. The provisions for allowing information to be withheld from a relevant person if the release of that information would be significantly against the interests of the child show that the hearings system serves to protect the child's interests. The provision in the bill that keeps offence grounds that are accepted at a hearing from appearing on disclosure certificates required for work in trusted positions—unless it is a very severe case, as has been acknowledged—further protects the interests of the child as he or she  progresses into society. That ensures that children's panels will have the ability to show children who have committed minor offences the error of their ways before those ways can detract from future possibilities for a child. Although one of the bill's explicit goals is to put Scotland's children at the heart of the system, it is vital that Parliament keeps in mind the Scottish citizens who volunteer their time to make the system work. One of the bill's most shining achievements will be its establishment of a feedback mechanism through which panel members, local authorities, the national convener and Scottish ministers will share information on the effectiveness of the hearings system at both local and national levels. We in the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee have the ability to review legislation and ensure that it is efficiently and satisfactorily implemented, and I believe that panel members should expect the same. As some of Scotland's most valuable citizens, children's hearings panel members deserve access to information regarding the outcomes of their hard work. Through the feedback loop, individual panel members and local authorities will have the ability to assess the implementation and effectiveness of their suggestions by way of information that is provided by the national convener. In addition, information regarding national trends will be available to panel members, which will allow them to make decisions that are based not solely on their own experiences, but on the experiences of panels throughout Scotland. As such, the feedback loop is one of many ways in which the bill will, while simplifying and making the hearings system more consistent, bring about co-operation between the local and national levels. The work that committee members such as Ken Macintosh, Karen Whitefield, Elizabeth Smith and Margaret Smith have put in is to be highly commended, as is the work of my colleague Christina McKelvie, who did much from my party's point of view. For a member whose party is in government, amendments to the bill can be frustrating, given that most of them tend to be lodged by the Opposition or the minister, and they are often left on the sidelines. However, Christina McKelvie has gone deep into the bill, and I support her efforts. I look forward to the passage of the bill.

In light of the draft electricity generation policy statement that was published last week, can the minister confirm that 2.5GW of new, efficient thermal generation would satisfy all of Scotland's security of supply needs? Will he further confirm that there is therefore no need for an increase in current thermal capacity and that the basis of the decision on each application for thermal electricity generation new build, such as at Hunterston, will be the economic, environmental and social merits of the application?

Why does the Labour Party want to win the election next year but operate an SNP budget? You are basically calling for us to set a budget for a four-year term of office throughout which you hope to be in power. Is that because you want to sit in office—if you win, which is unlikely—and blame the SNP for all the cuts that were imposed thanks to the incompetence of the previous United Kingdom Labour Government?

The First Minister will be aware that the Labour-Tory coalition that runs Inverclyde Council, which borders North Ayrshire, has recently decided not to object to the Hunterston coal-fired power station application; indeed, it is in favour of it. Does he agree that that shows the hollowness and blatant opportunism of Labour's position in claiming to oppose an unwanted and unnecessary development while its elected representatives actively support it?

I welcome the cabinet secretary's achievement in producing such a positive budget in difficult circumstances. The lack of any Labour alternative is glaring. Unlike Mr Rumbles, I will at least ask my own question and not one that David McLetchie asked 13 days ago. Can the cabinet secretary set out how he addressed the widely trailed and inaccurate claims of a 16 per cent cut in higher education budgets at the same time as protecting student places, preserving the education maintenance allowance for our poorest students and keeping them out of poverty, and avoiding the Labour-Liberal Democrat-Tory tuition fees?

I start by saying how pleased I am that Parliament is discussing this issue today. I congratulate Helen Eadie on securing such an important debate, and on all the hard work that she has done on the issue over many years. World arthritis day has been celebrated annually since 1996, allowing people around the world who suffer from arthritis to unite to raise awareness of a debilitating condition, to influence public policy in  a way that is beneficial to sufferers, and to ensure that people who have arthritis, and the people who care for them, are aware of the vast amount of support that is available to them. Arthritis affects approximately 700,000 people in Scotland, and it is estimated that arthritis and other musculoskeletal conditions account for 48 per cent of all work-related illness in Scotland. The scale of the suffering is truly disturbing, and it is surely our duty as elected representatives to do everything in our power to ease that suffering by supporting people who have arthritis and their families and carers in any and all possible ways. It should always be remembered that, although arthritis is commonly associated with old age, it affects many young people, which can have a huge impact on their careers and personal lives. Earlier this year, I met a young constituent who was being sponsored to walk the west highland way in aid of Arthritis Research UK. She was diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis by her GP when she was aged only 23, but she manages her condition with painkillers and anti-inflammatory medication, and she lives a full and vibrant life. However, as she explained to me, that is because of early diagnosis by her GP, swift and excellent treatment from the NHS, and a full understanding of the support and services that are available to her. Many people are not so fortunate: many of those who suffer from arthritis are unaware of the care and support that is available to them, and they may lose their independence and experience terrible pain, which is often needless. That is why the awareness that world arthritis day raises is so valuable. Of course, world arthritis day is an annual international event, but it is important to remember that there are charities and other organisations in Scotland that work every day of the year to help the people who are affected by such conditions. The work that those organisations carry out and the expertise that they bring are invaluable and vital when we are forming health policy and providing services. Their unique position and constant dialogue with people who are affected by arthritis makes them the best-placed and most-informed organisations to advise Parliament. For example, Arthritis Care Scotland has more than 50 branches throughout the country, an army of devoted volunteers, and it campaigns tirelessly for the changes that will benefit people who suffer from arthritis, their families and carers. The NHS must also be commended for its role in the fight against arthritis. Although there is no cure, its pioneering treatments help people to cope better and to live fuller lives with the condition. Arthritis Care Scotland has also helped people to cope in their communities with their illness in  simple but effective ways by, for example, altering traffic lights to allow people more time to cross the road. That is the kind of thing that we might take for granted, but through contact and dialogue with sufferers, Arthritis Care Scotland understands what people need and how to make positive changes to make things easier for them. Jamie Stone talked about psoriasis. Twenty years ago, I worked for a company called LEO Laboratories Ltd, which brought out a revolutionary new treatment for psoriasis, called Dovonex. I was in my late 20s and I had never met anyone who had psoriasis but suddenly, when people realised that I worked for the company that made that drug, loads of folk came out of the woodwork and said that they had psoriasis. They were people I had known all my life; three members of my own family, including my mother's sister. That was because there was a stigma around psoriasis: people wanted to keep it hidden and, of course, traditional treatments for it were quite horrible. I agree with Hugh Henry, but I am not convinced that rewards for pharmaceutical companies are really necessary as their reward comes through the bottom line, although certainly it would not do any harm. I know that the Scottish Government is committed to tackling the problem of arthritis and that it gives significant grants to arthritis charities such as Psoriasis Scotland Arthritis Link Volunteers, which receives a three-year Scottish Government grant, but much more has to be done. I therefore hope that in the forthcoming weeks and months we as a Parliament can form a consensual national strategy to help to combat the crippling conditions that affect so many of our fellow Scots.

Does the minister agree that North Ayrshire is in a unique position to benefit from regeneration? It can secure resources, such as joint European support for sustainable investment in city areas—or JESSICA—funding channelled through the Irvine Bay Regeneration Company, Nuclear Decommissioning Authority money and, at Hunterston, its share of the £70 million announced last week to progress development of our renewables industry. This morning I met the Minister for Housing and Communities and Scottish Enterprise to discuss those issues.  Does the minister agree that co-ordination of the agencies involved in regeneration is fundamental to maximise public and private investment in North Ayrshire's regeneration?

I warmly welcome the cabinet secretary's statement. The literacy commission has highlighted the decline in Scottish performance in international tests of literacy in the programme for international student assessment and progress in international reading literacy study tests between 2000 and 2006, when Labour and the Lib Dems were in power. Does the cabinet secretary have any insights into what went wrong in that period that might have led to such a decline? What has the Scottish Government taken from that period as examples of what to do and what not to do to meet best practice?

The cabinet secretary is aware that a tax increase of 3p in the pound under the tax-varying powers would cost taxpayers on £30,000 a year an additional £676 a year. Although that might not be a lot to Lord George Foulkes, it would certainly be a lot to most ordinary families. Does the cabinet secretary agree that, together with Labour's plans to scrap the council tax freeze, that represents a double whammy for middle-income families that are already hit hard by Labour's recession?

To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made in securing the fossil fuel levy moneys held by HM Treasury. (S3O-11625)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that if the coalition Government wishes to retain even a shred of credibility regarding its respect agenda, it must return that money to Scotland to boost jobs and investment in our renewables sector?

I congratulate Ross Finnie on securing this evening's debate. I fully agree with the heading of the motion, but unfortunately I did not feel able to sign it, simply because of the last few words, which are that the Parliament "believes that the development of carbon capture and storage technology should be restricted to existing coal-fired stations." Members might recall that, in 2007, there was a proposal to build a £500 million CCS plant at Peterhead, which was expected to create about  1,000 jobs. BP said that the decision to shelve the project was a major disappointment, but that it was due to Westminster delays over financial support. The project, which would have been the world's first industrial-scale hydrogen power plant, was supported by Friends of the Earth. It would have demonstrated post-combustion capture of carbon dioxide emissions relating to electricity output of the equivalent of 400MW of capacity using an existing gas turbine, an existing steam turbine, an existing electricity network connection and so on. Peterhead would be an excellent site for carbon capture. Hunterston is not. Ross Finnie mentioned Longannet. Last year, I visited Longannet with representatives of West Kilbride, Largs and Fairlie community councils, and we looked at the experimental model there. It was clear that it is at a very early stage. We were told that, for every 3 tonnes of coal that is cleaned, it takes another tonne of coal to do that. The technology is therefore very resource rich. Longannet was hoping to get the ratio to about 1:7. When I spoke to Ayrshire Power about the issue, it said that it expected the United Kingdom Government to pick up the tab, which in the case of Hunterston would amount to about £300 million a year for the 40-year lifespan of the project. There would be an electricity levy on UK taxpayers to fund that. It is clear that the Hunterston project has little support. To illustrate that, I lodged a parliamentary question, which was answered only today by Jim Mather, to ask how many expressions of support and how many objections had been received by 1 September 2010. The answer states that there were 13 expressions of support and 15,500 objections to the Hunterston proposal. It is clear that there is significant opposition to the project. It has to be said that Ayrshire Power has not covered itself in glory. When the project was first mentioned in 2008, the company talked about it as the world's first carbon capture plant, but we then realised that it would only be carbon capture ready with, as Ross Finnie pointed out, only a small proportion of carbon capture and sequestration included in the plant. Local people are concerned about air quality. Dust already goes on to the houses of Largs and Fairlie because of the coal terminal. People are worried about the impact on traffic, about health, about ash lagoons, and about mountains of gypsum being stored up. EDF Energy, which runs Hunterston B, has put in what is, in my view, a damning objection that expresses its concerns about safety given the proximity of the Hunterston development. I certainly agree with Ross Finnie that Longannet should be progressed, and I also believe that Peterhead should be progressed. In  today's Guardian , WWF Scotland's director Richard Dixon expresses concern that the UK Government might actually pull its resources from Longannet. Of course, Longannet is the site of the large-scale trial, so we need to progress it if the technology is to have any future. WWF makes it clear that use of the other sites that are being considered, including Hunterston, would result in vastly higher carbon emissions—in fact, an amount equivalent to Scotland's total annual emissions. The Parliament should make it clear that we do not oppose the technology, but that it must be used in the right place and that Hunterston is certainly not that location.

Once again, we find ourselves in the chamber attempting to clear up the mess of Labour's recession. The task could not be much more difficult. The economy has contracted by 6 per cent, which is even more than Iceland's economy has—thousands have lost their jobs and the country is drowning in debt. The people of Scotland are facing a decade of austerity and misery, due largely to the economic practices of the previous new Labour Government. Given that London is the world's largest financial centre, claiming that it is somehow an innocent victim of the global recession is simply laughable. It is as culpable in the crisis as Wall Street is.

I will let Mr Kerr in later; I want to make some progress first. The scale of the economic vandalism cannot be overstated. The UK national debt is set to top £1 trillion next year. Anger, disappointment and incredulity at such incompetence are understandable, but the SNP Government is attempting to get on with the task at hand, despite the limited powers that are available. It is repairing the damage, restoring our battered economy, protecting jobs, securing investment and ensuring that high-quality front-line services are delivered. The most telling contribution from the Opposition was Lord Foulkes's somewhat embarrassing speech. He seems to believe that Scots do not pay taxes, but rely on handouts from London. It is interesting to note that, when he suggested raising tax by 3 per cent, Mr Kerr shook his head vigorously to make clear that that is not Labour policy. One would have thought that, before they came into the chamber, Labour members would have had some idea of their position on such important issues. Elaine Smith raised an important issue. She talked about perhaps taxing the rich more heavily. Sadly, we do not have the powers in the Parliament to take such a decision if we wanted to do that.  Labour, which says that we have to bring our budget forward now rather than waiting a few weeks until we have the precise figures, itself ducked the entire issue of the £311 million that the UK Government said we could either cut now or have as cuts next year. It did not clarify the position on that at all. Iain Gray ducked and dived on it until it faded from the media spotlight. There is no hiding from the fact that there will have to be cuts in the near future. That is one of the side effects when, in the words of former Labour minister Liam Byrne, "There's no money left." However, it would be foolhardy to say where cuts and savings will be made without full knowledge of what the Scottish Government's budget will actually be. Of course, we will soon find that out, as we are only a few weeks away from having the information. Mr McCabe suggested that the SNP is somehow holding back plans for electoral advantage, but my understanding is that the bill will be passed some months before the election, so it will be in the full glare of attention from the public and the media. The real issue at hand is that we do not have all the powers that we need. We heard an attack on three of our local neighbours from Mr Jeremy Purvis, who is not with us in the chamber at the moment. He said that Ireland is bankrupt—everyone seems to assume that that is the case—and that so is Iceland, but let us look at the actual figures for their economies. Per capita income in Iceland last year was $38,000, and purchasing power parity was also $38,000. The figures for Ireland were $51,000 for the actual and $39,500 for purchasing power parity; for Norway they were $88,600 and $53,000; and for the UK they were $35,000 for each. The standard of living in poor wee Iceland is still 7 per cent higher than in the UK. In Ireland it is still 10 per cent higher—and Ireland does not have our oil and gas reserves—and in Norway it is 50 per cent higher. I am not aware of any great campaigns to return Norway to Swedish control, Iceland to Danish rule, or Ireland to the benevolent control of London, which left it a poverty-stricken backwater when it got its independence last century. We should remember that the Liberal Democrats' austerity measures follow on, a year later, from when they suggested an £800 million cut, so perhaps it is not just a case of the Tories wagging the dog, as we perhaps thought before. In opposing the SNP's view that Scotland should be independent and have responsibility for its own affairs, it seems that the Labour Party and the other unionist parties have replaced Obama's "Yes, we can" with the slogan "No, we can't."

The point of an intervention is to ask something. It is not to go on and add a couple of minutes to the endless speech that the member made this morning. We actually believe in the Scottish people. That is the difference between us. We have faith in them. We are not saying why we cannot do this and that—things that all the countries in Europe take for granted. I looked up Lichtenstein in Wikipedia after Scotland's rather desperate 2-1 victory the other day to find that it has the highest per capita income in the world. It is a small, landlocked state in the middle of Europe with nothing but mountains and glens, yet we, apparently, cannot aspire to be even half as prosperous. We have to stick with the poverty, the unemployment and the emigration that we have had for decades under the United Kingdom. [ Interruption .]

When we joined the union, Scotland's population was a fifth of England's; now it is a tenth. That shows us where wealth has moved in the past three centuries and how Scotland has been neglected. People in Denmark do not grow up thinking that they will have to emigrate in order to get employment. They know that they can have a good standard of living in their society. One thing that is causing the Scottish Government difficulties is the public-private partnership legacy. This year, the education budget alone is hit by costs of £244 million, and the NHS is having to stump up £1 billion over five years, yet Iain Gray is calling for more private finance initiative expenditure to fund the Glasgow airport rail link, which is a white elephant and totally unnecessary.

I am interested to know where Labour would find the £175 million to fund that project.

It will probably be David Miliband soon.

The Liberal Democrats have sold out to the Tories.

To ask the Scottish Executive what its position is on the report by Professor Neil McKeganey suggesting that markets from drug dealing could be seen as having a positive impact on the surrounding community. (S3O-11133)

Does the minister agree that drug dealing is entirely negative and devastating to families and communities? He will be aware that on 23 June, the Daily Record described Professor McKeganey as "a crackpot". Will he confirm that the Scottish Government has lost all faith in Professor McKeganey and his pronouncements?

To ask the First Minister what the implications of the emergency budget are for Scotland. (S3F-2499)

The latest "Government Expenditure and Revenue Scotland" report shows us to be in a much stronger fiscal position than the  UK as a whole, with a budget surplus of £3.5 billion over the past four years, compared with a UK deficit of £72.3 billion. Does the First Minister agree not only that Scotland is in a position to accept greater fiscal responsibility by way of a few modest powers reluctantly conceded by London some time in the future, but that the time is now right for Scotland to have full control of all its resources, including oil and all taxation and spending—that it is now time for independence? [ Applause .]

I congratulate the finance minister on securing a record low underspend yet again. Does the minister agree that, given that the economy is still in an extremely fragile state, it is vital that as much money as possible is invested in sustaining economic recovery? What progress has the Scottish Government made on securing borrowing powers and a guarantee from the chancellor that we will be able to draw on the £185 million of fossil fuel levy moneys that the Treasury holds and were denied to Scotland by the previous Labour Government? With declining resources while we remain in the UK, how will the Scottish Government optimise public expenditure to ensure the continued delivery of services?

Will the member give way?

Is it not the case that unemployment among teachers is proportionately higher in England, Wales and Northern Ireland than it is in Scotland? Yes or no?

Like the cabinet secretary, I am astonished at the self-reinvention of Ken Macintosh, the newest of new Labour MSPs, as a scion of the left. He even appeared to mention the dreaded S-word—socialism. No doubt Diane Abbott can count on his vote in the forthcoming Labour leadership stramash. As for the SNP being like the Tories, it is not our former members of Parliament who stampede to join George Foulkes in the House of Lords, it is not our party that introduced tuition fees and expanded PFI, and it is not the SNP that is in formal coalition with the Tories in five Scottish local authorities. I state my opposition to the motion. I will focus my remarks on concerns about the reduction in the number of teachers since 2007 and the problems that newly qualified teachers face in their attempts to secure a job.

I will move on a wee bit before letting Mr Macintosh in. I know that, whenever I mention him, he always leaps up seconds later. It is true that the number of teachers who are unable to find permanent or even temporary employment is a problem. However, there are a number of reasons for that.

I am sure that Mr Macintosh's constituents in Eastwood would be interested in his answers to some of those questions. He probably recalls that a number of organisations that are active in the anti-poverty area made clear  to the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee that provision of free school meals would be beneficial to all children. My figures may be slightly off, but well over 100 organisations—114, if memory serves me well—supported the Scottish Government's policy on the issue. None of the anti-poverty organisations opposed our policy, unless Mr Macintosh can name one. I am happy to sit down to let him do so.

No, if the member does not mind—I am not even a quarter of the way through my speech, and a third of my time has gone. I was responding to a point by Mr Macintosh; he was the member to whom I was hoping to give way, but sadly he did not intervene. Labour councils are using the future of Scotland's children for party-political ends. I will put some figures on that. Labour-led councils are responsible for two thirds of this year's drop in teacher numbers. The November 2009 figures indicate that more than a quarter—28 per cent—of teacher posts that were cut by councils were cut by Glasgow City Council. The number of posts that were cut in Glasgow was 379, out of 1,348 throughout Scotland. Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee colleagues will recall that the reason given for that in evidence was falling school rolls, because Glasgow does not believe in smaller class sizes. All councils are facing financial pressure, thanks to the Westminster cuts that Labour has imposed on Scotland. I say to Mr Rumbles that we would not have to endure such cuts if Scotland were independent. Of course, SNP councils—Perth and Kinross Council, East Ayrshire Council, Stirling Council and East Lothian Council—were able to increase teacher numbers in 2009. Why do Labour-led councils make cuts while SNP councils are hiring? Let us look at what the EIS has said. On 6 June, it said on BBC Online: "Promises have been made to reduce class sizes in our schools, and the progress has been extremely limited to date. Some local authorities have openly refused to work towards their commitments to reduce class sizes, in defiance of the Scottish Government's stated aims and the concordat that local authorities freely entered into. The message to the Scottish Government and local authorities is clear—teachers expect the promises made to them on class sizes to be kept, and teachers will do everything possible to hold our political leaders to account." That message is directed to local authorities and the Scottish Government. I turn to the sharp rise in the number of newly qualified teachers who cannot obtain permanent or even temporary employment. Teacher numbers  are decided many years in advance. The number of teachers who did their probation year in 2008-09 was decided in 2006-07—before the SNP came to power—for those who took the postgraduate diploma in education route, and 2003-04, for those who took the bachelor of education route. Labour and the Liberal Democrats—who were its pals at the time, but have now switched sides—were the ones who got their sums wrong. It was preposterous for Mr Macintosh to say that there are no teaching jobs in Scotland. As of 1 June, 280 teaching jobs were advertised, 95 of which had been unfilled for three months or more. In its motion, Labour describes the decline last year in the proportion of newly qualified teachers who went into permanent, full-time work as a sharp fall, but that decline of 10.4 per cent is smaller than the decline from 2004-05 to 2005-06, which was 15.5 per cent.

I would really like to, but I am only halfway through my speech and am tight for time. The Labour Party has forgotten about its disgraceful management of Scotland's education system. Ms Craigie is whooping with shock, but there were far more unemployed teachers under Labour in 2000, 1999 and 1998—1,015, 1,230 and 1,675 respectively—than there are now. Mr Macintosh said that at the end of the session there will be 100,000 pupils in "bad" or "poor" schools. That is a lot better than the figure of 260,000 that Labour bequeathed to us in 2007. The Scottish Government is concerned about some of the problems and is committed to resolving them with utmost haste. We are supporting early retirement. More than 10,000 primary, secondary and special school teachers over 55 could retire at any time. More than 20 per cent of teachers in 2009 were aged 55 or more. Anthony Finn, the chief executive of the General Teaching Council for Scotland, said in December: "Indeed, given the number of older teachers expected to retire over the next couple of years, I expect that we will need all the teachers we are currently training to fill future vacancies." We are addressing that problem. Councils have been given a borrowing facility of £10 million to support the costs of early retirement and to pave the way for the employment of new teachers this year and next. There are hard times, many of which are unforeseeable and unavoidable, especially after Labour wrecked the UK economy with its imposed recession. The Scottish Government is committed to education and making progress in these difficult  times. One of my colleagues said to me yesterday that this debate would be only the "latest in the long line of lie-drenched fear-dominated hypocrisy-laden Natbashing education debates." I hope that future speakers from the Labour benches will make clear that that is not the case. Sadly, so far it appears to be.

I join colleagues around the chamber in commending the National Union of Students for its student fees pledge. I also congratulate this Government on its approach to student fees thus far in straitened times. The SNP, of course, stands against both fees and debt. Where possible, we have made genuine attempts to alleviate the problem; it is regrettable that previous Governments have stood against student debt in word, but have increased it. This Government, with Liberal Democrat help, abolished the graduate endowment tax, removing a charge of £2,289 from about 50,000 students. In addition, the SNP replaced loans with grants for part-time students. I realise that that was not particularly popular with everyone. I remember reading an issue of Holyrood magazine in which  Rab McNeil took Ken Macintosh to task for suggesting that a loan is as good as a grant. Mr McNeil suggested that Mr Macintosh might prefer to have his salary in the form of a loan. The Scottish Government has boosted discretionary hardship funds and trebled career development loans. By contrast, the previous Executive left 370,000 of Scotland's students and former students collectively more than £2 billion in debt. The Opposition has showed where it stands when it comes to fees, and it is not on the side of students.

My God. That took you about 20 seconds, Ken. I was wondering when you were going to come back to me.

One has to look at the context in which we are living; for example, Labour's catastrophic recession. Labour introduced a recession that has cost 1 million jobs in the UK over the past year and has given us the biggest financial deficit. Also, according to former Labour Secretary of State for Health, Alan Milburn, the gap between rich and poor is wider than it has been for over 80 years. Of course, it was Labour's Scottish MSPs who rammed top-up fees down England's throat in the first place. In so doing, they had to overcome a party rebellion that they had created by blatantly breaking campaign promises. How would English students have answered the West Lothian question after Scottish Labour MPs foisted that now failed new Labour policy on them—although that is not to say that old Labour has not also failed them. I do not know what to believe from the Labour Opposition. It opposes fees in its manifestos, but introduces them when it is in Government. Back in 1997, when all this began, Labour did not even mention the fact that, right after the 1997 election, it intended to bring in tuition fees—fees that have hurt the pockets of so many of our students over so long. It is sad to see how the Conservatives have U-turned on the issue over a number of years, given that they fought against tuition fees in high-profile campaigns in at least two elections in Scotland and south of the border. Liz Smith said in the debate that students should make "a contribution ... after graduation." By and large, when students graduate, they get jobs that pay more than those that people who have not had a higher education get, which means that students pay higher taxes  than others do. Students make a significant contribution to their education through the taxes that they pay as doctors, lawyers or whatever—

Whenever I mention a member, they immediately want to come back to me.

I could have asked Elizabeth Smith exactly the same question a decade ago. If I had done so, she would have said that she supported free education. The SNP believes that free education is a right. Education should not be only for the sons and daughters of the wealthy people who support the Conservative party in ever dwindling numbers north of the border. Our universities are highly regarded. On a per capita basis, our students and academics produce world-leading research. Only Switzerland is ahead of Scotland in that regard. Our institutions of higher education need to be funded properly and responsibly to ensure their competitiveness for years to come. Thus far, we have kept up with competing universities south of the border and overseas that receive extra income by hanging debt, like the sword of Damocles, over the heads of their students. Professor Steve Smith, the former president of Universities UK, testified that Scottish university funding has kept up thus far despite the extra income down south. He said: "The issue is almost completely irrelevant in Scotland ... It's not something we are thinking about. Because the funding level is roughly comparable, it seems to me there is no issue." A Times Higher Education Supplement report said that Scottish universities had been planning for a freeze with a worst-case scenario of 5 per cent cut in the current financial year. Instead, higher education received a 3.6 per cent uplift, courtesy of the cabinet secretary. Robin McAlpine of Universities Scotland said: "This has been a good day for us ... This budget puts universities right at the heart of the Scottish Government economic-recovery strategy." The Scottish Government has done everything that it can to support higher education with 7,500 more students in Scotland this year, compared with 6,000 fewer in England. An increase in the cap on tuition fees south of the border would limit our ability to support universities in the future. Financial support to English universities brings  Barnett consequentials to Scotland. If that support is instead brought through top-up fees, no such consequentials would come, even through such fees are set out in law and are centrally regulated. As a result of the top-ups, funding per student from central Government revenue in England has fallen in real terms. If England wants top-up fees, that is its business, although I doubt that its students do. As the motion states: "any rise in fees in England and Wales would be detrimental to the interests of Scottish universities". The consequences of that could be solved, however, if the Parliament had full fiscal autonomy or, even better, independence, rather than our hoping that Westminster budget policies will meet the needs of our students. If our students need more debt hanging over them, Westminster policies would certainly meet their needs. We note, however, that our students do not need debt—they need a Government with full financial powers that can deliver unique Scottish solutions. What about access in the first year of top-up fee applications? The number of English students going to universities in England fell by 4.5 per cent against a previous trend of year-on-year rises. That same year, the number of applications by English students to universities in Scotland increased by 2 per cent. Should not higher education be available to all Scots, regardless of their ability to pay? The SNP abolished the graduate endowment and, in the two years since, the number of acceptances through the Universities and Colleges Admissions Service for Scottish universities has gone up by 17 per cent. We have, by dumping the debt, supported the least privileged people who seek higher education. Although not all of it has been dumped, it is smaller than it was. This Government is moving in the right direction and has already provided much more relief than any other party has even promised. As for Karen Whitefield saying that, ultimately, Scotland's budget is the responsibility of the SNP Government, I thought it was the Scottish block that decided the resources that the Scottish Government had to work with. Labour's infantile stance of arguing for an increase in every budget yet not suggesting moving anything during budget debates will be seen for the opportunism that it is.

We would have the resources to tackle them, for a start.

We are committed to the success of the NHS in Scotland, and are interested specifically in the quality of front-line patient care. That deserves the highest priority and should be the fundamental principle when deciding policy and budgets for the NHS. The SNP Government has a proud record of working to improve the NHS and patient care. We have created greater access to dentists, introduced the phasing out of prescription charges, cut waiting times—thanks, in part, to our abolishing Labour's hidden waiting lists—and met key targets for cancer treatment. Listening to the speeches from Labour members in the debate this morning, one could be forgiven for thinking that the huge cuts that are being imposed on Scotland this year and those that will come next year have nothing to do with their Westminster bosses' shockingly inept handling of the UK economy. Under the previous Labour Government, unemployment increased by one  million, gave the UK its biggest deficit in history and widened the gap between rich and poor to its greatest extent in 80 years, according to the former Secretary of State for Health, Alan Milburn. Let us consider what this week's Economist says, to put in context the legacy that the SNP Government in Scotland and the coalition Government in the UK must deal with. Projected economic growth in the UK this year is less than a third of that of Australia or Canada, a sixth of that of Brazil and a seventh of that of Singapore. Manufacturing output this year is projected to be a quarter of the European average. Iain Gray, Labour's group leader in Holyrood—dithering, as usual—has failed even to say what Labour's position is on the £332 million cut that the coalition Government has said can be imposed in this or the next financial year. What level of leadership are we receiving from the Labour Party on that issue? Labour's plans are to introduce 3 per cent efficiencies in the NHS, 50 per cent more than the SNP's 2 per cent—and it would be top-sliced. The SNP allows for the reinvestment of savings back into NHS front-line services, whereas Labour plans to move that money from the health budget to education. That would mean £77 million less for Scotland's health services, according to Labour's own manifesto commitment and the comments that were made by Jack McConnell when he was Labour's First Minister prior to the 2007 election. The SNP Government has made it a priority to provide the greatest possible quality of care. Despite the cuts from Westminster, we have increased NHS resources by £264 million this year. We should recall—as my colleague Anne McLaughlin pointed out—that the Labour Party made no proposal whatever to increase spending on the NHS this year. In fact, Labour would, no doubt, have taken money from the NHS in other budgets to put into the white-elephant project that is the Glasgow airport rail link. Amazingly, there was an eruption of opportunism one week after this year's election—suddenly, the Labour Party became all too interested in the NHS. One of the problems that Scotland must face is the legacy that we inherited on PFI.

Paul Martin has been bouncing up and down every time PFI is mentioned. He will now be like a hen on a hot griddle, desperate to intervene.

I will let my esteemed colleague Mr Martin in, but I ask him to let me  actually say something first on the issue, before he comes in with his pre-prepared comments. £1.1 billion in payments will have to be paid by the NHS over the next five years alone. Between 2011 and 2015, NHS Lothian will pay £271 million for the Royal infirmary of Edinburgh, despite the capital costs of that hospital being only £206 million; NHS Lanarkshire will pay £136 million for Wishaw general, a project that is worth £121 million; and £106 million will be paid for Hairmyres hospital, which is worth only £68 million.

The most savage indictment of Labour and its pals in the Lib Dems when they were in power is not that PFI contracts were signed; it is the level of interest that Labour agreed to. Would Paul Martin buy a flat for £100,000 and agree to pay £120,000 in interest over four years? I do not think so, yet he is happy to see his colleagues do that with public money. The PFI payments will come to £8 billion over the next few years. So desperate is Labour to make some capital on issues around the NHS that the Labour Party group leader, Iain Gray, has tried to mislead the chamber. For example, on 13 May, he stated at First Minister's questions: "a new kidney unit is being cancelled in NHS Ayrshire and Arran".— [ Official Report , 13 May 2010; c 26190.]  My colleague Willie Coffey wrote to Ayrshire and Arran NHS Board about the issue, and the chief executive replied: "the renal dialysis bays have been increased on the Crosshouse site with a second phase which brought the capacity to 40 bays ... The strategy also set out a proposal to build another unit within NHS Ayrshire and Arran and also to expand home based haemodialysis."

NHS Ayrshire and Arran's chief executive went on to say: "In terms of your specific question regarding the cancellation of our Kidney Unit, I can confirm that the Renal Satellite Unit is still on the Board's Capital Plan to deal with future hospital capacity if that is required." Everything that is happening in Scotland should be kept in context.

I am in my last minute. Otherwise, I would have done.

I have got seconds left. The bottom line is that Labour is misleading us. We should recall that the NHS down south was told to make 10 per cent cuts in staffing—137,000 jobs over the next three to four years. We should hear no more of Labour's crocodile tears on that issue. If Scotland had full fiscal powers, including over oil and whisky revenues, we could mitigate against the too-often arbitrary whims of Westminster. Sadly, Labour and some other political parties that are represented in this place would rather have Scotland lose money in its budgets and in its health service. The best way forward for Scotland's NHS is to secure the re-emergence of Scotland as an independent sovereign state with full control of its own resources.

On behalf of the committee, I thank all the speakers in this afternoon's debate and all those who made the 2009 act possible. As the committee's deputy convener, I submit that the committee's report on the "code of practice ... together with the Official Report of the Parliament's debate on the report, should form the Parliament's response to the Scottish Government on its revised code of practice, supporting children's learning ." The revisions to the code of practice are of great importance, as they stem from stakeholder  concerns that did not appropriately fit in the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Bill to revise the 2004 act. The committee's due diligence has ensured that all relevant stakeholders' concerns have been addressed, which satisfies the requirement of section 27(3) of the 2004 act. Most important, we have confirmed that parents of children with additional support needs have had those needs heard. In addition, the Scottish Government confirmed to the committee that it had consulted all education authorities, health boards and other appropriate agencies under the 2004 act, so members of the Parliament can be assured that their constituency views were noted during the consultation process. We also raised the need for a consistent approach to co-ordinated support plans. We were satisfied with the Scottish Government's response to those concerns, and we note the minister's comments this afternoon. We took evidence from the support for learning division and the Scottish Government, and we thank those who provided evidence to the committee. In addition, the Subordinate Legislation Committee considered the code of practice, and the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee has noted its comments with thanks. The Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee has thoroughly reviewed the code of practice, and the Parliament should feel confident in our response. As stated before, the code of practice is key to ensuring that the system works well for children with additional support needs. Education authorities need to know clearly what they must do to provide appropriate support where necessary. In due course, the practitioners will tell us whether the code does its job properly—that is, whether it results in speedier and better decisions that lead to better experiences for the children and young people concerned. Future education committees may wish to continue to monitor it. Now that the Government has examined our response, which is laid out in the committee's report on the code of practice and the Official Report of the debate in the chamber, I and the rest of the committee look forward to the Government proceeding appropriately so that children with additional support needs have the best possible experience in the education system in the years ahead.

Other well-respected organisations?

I agree with colleagues from all parties about the merits of high-speed rail. For years, its benefits have been demonstrated by countries around the world, so why does the UK, which is so dependent on air travel, remain so far behind? Now that Westminster has finally put forward a plan, why is Scotland being left almost as an afterthought in a project that might take decades to come to fruition? None of the UK parties has shown real commitment to high-speed rail beyond Manchester, notwithstanding the interesting points that Robert Brown made. Indeed, Robert Brown was right to point out that Network Rail does not see a positive business case in high-speed rail unless the route goes from Scotland to London. I believe that Scotland should be included in the first stage of any high-speed rail development; Scotland must be part of the initial scheme. High-speed rail would bring economic benefits—of potentially tens of billions of pounds, as the minister said—but the evidence from Network Rail and Atkins consultancy shows that the scheme's benefits would outweigh its costs only if the line was extended to the whole of Britain. Why should Scotland not be included? As the recent flight delays due to volcanic activity suggested, Scotland's economy should not be forced to rely on short-haul air travel. Scottish businesses should not need to wait 30 years before being connected to their larger European market. In that timescale, many of us, I am sad to say, will not be here to see the results. In Europe, fast rail has become the norm, so why do UK parties insist on tossing Scotland aside when we should be building direct connections to Scotland's major centres? We should not just accept the crumbs off the table.

To be honest, I think that Patrick Harvie shows a shocking lack of knowledge of business. All the studies have shown that significant economic benefits would arise from a high-speed rail link precisely because  it would reduce journey times. I realise that, if it was up to Patrick Harvie, we would still be at the horse-and-cart stage, but we need to move on. What about our environmental goals? How will Scotland be a leader through reducing our carbon footprint when our businesses are dependent to a large extent on air travel? Reduction of our emissions from road and air travel must be key to achieving our targets. Given that Edinburgh is the second most visited city in the UK, how will we welcome more and more visitors in future years? We cannot expand our airports while we wait for a future generation to install a better way. Dr Dan Barlow, who is head of policy at WWF Scotland, has said: "Aviation is the fastest-growing source of climate pollution so it is critical that alternative, more sustainable transport options are promoted." Colin Elliff, of 2M Group, told Parliament: "I envisage that the typical energy consumption of high-speed rail travel will be about one fifth of that of air travel. The environmental benefits are probably being understated at the moment."—[ Official Report , Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee , 18 November 2008; c 1056.] One of the main arguments in support of high-speed rail is that it could improve capacity on the UK rail network.

If I have time, I will give way later. I always like to take interventions from Alex Johnstone, but I need to move on. The Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee's report on high-speed rail cites "written evidence provided by National Express on the impact on French domestic aviation of the introduction of new high-speed TGV lines. This states that prior to the introduction of the TGV Mediterranean service ... rail held only 22% of the air-rail market between those destinations. Within four years of the introduction of the TGV service, the market share held by rail rose to 65%." The report also cites others, who said: "The lesson from other countries is that we must have vision and be bold. No one ever said that this kind of major shift would be easy: it requires political buy-in, vision and people working together."—[ Official Report , Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee , 18 November 2008; c 1056.] To reduce demand for polluting short-haul flights, Scotland cannot be left behind. Labour's white paper described a connection to Scotland as a potential extension to be decided upon later. Far too often we hear of Scotland's needs being decided on later. Why cannot our needs come first for once? I recall driving from Glasgow to Southampton 20 years ago. The deadly A74—as it was—took me to the border, from where, as if by  magic, there was the M6 and motorway all the way down to London and the south coast. Scotland should not be a forgotten tail-end Charlie in rail as it has been in road. I am suspicious of the coalition agreement's phrase about completing the project "in phases", which Alex Johnstone mentioned. Clearly, that is a message that Scotland will, indeed, be last.

I do not accept that for a minute. Whichever way we look at it, rail uses less energy than other forms of transport do. In its white paper, Labour goes on to admit that, if Scotland is not included in the first phase, a two-tiered build of high-speed rail will provide barely faster Glasgow to London times than are available at the moment. I say to Charlie Gordon that we hear of pinch points and straightening out bends, but we should be a bit more ambitious than that in the short-to-medium term. If Scotland is not part of the first stage of high-speed rail, the long-term benefits to the whole of Britain will be drastically reduced. The real benefits will come from the planned connection to and from Scotland, as Network Rail recommends. The UK parties must commit to this. It should be no surprise that the Scottish National Party is committed to ensuring that Scotland is part of the first phase. I have not quoted the minister thus far; I will do so now: "There has never been more interest in high speed rail in the UK as there is now. 2010 is the year for decisions on the future of high speed rail. The planning starts now and we need to be part of that process." The new coalition Government in Westminster—

Dearie me. I congratulate my colleague, Joe FitzPatrick, on securing the debate on an issue that is of great importance to the people of Scotland and to the people in my constituency. Although the Scottish Government is committed to the running of our existing nuclear power stations, such as Hunterston, and is aware of the energy that they provide to the national grid, we see no need for any future nuclear facilities. Indeed, in the context of jobs, the Nuclear Decommissioning Authority is of the view that decommissioning Hunterston will take anything from 25 to 125 years—70 years is about the best bet—and that decommissioning will provide more jobs than the plant currently provides. Incidentally, Hunterston A, which closed in 1989 after 25 years of operation, is still being decommissioned—at a cost last year of approximately £49 million.

I will let Lewis Macdonald in in a wee second. The key to the debate is the word "need", in the context of nuclear power. I met Muir Miller, the project director of Ayrshire Power Ltd, which proposes the coal-fired power station that Mr Macdonald spoke about a few moments ago. He accepts that Scotland has no need for the energy for its own use, but his company is progressing with the project in order that energy can be exported. That company appreciates the fact that there will be an energy surplus in Scotland in the future. Even in the past year, we have learned that Cockenzie power station, which was going to close, is likely to be reconfigured as a 1.5GW gas turbine plant, and that Longannet will be completely renewed as a 2.4GW coal-fired power station. That would provide about three times the current energy output of Hunterston.

If Mr Macdonald looks at the plans for Ayrshire Power Ltd, he will see that they are not being applied for under the national planning framework, but under industrial policy 4. He may want to look at the matter in a bit more detail. Any argument about nuclear power stations being somehow more efficient and safer must surely be dispelled by recent experiences in France and Finland. French company Areva is currently constructing two identical power stations at Olkiluoto—I hope that I have pronounced that correctly—in Finland, and at Flamanville, in France. Billed as the models of a "nuclear renaissance", those plants were meant to be cheaper, more powerful, safer and more efficient than previous generations of nuclear power stations. However, their construction has been hit with a plethora of problems. First, both projects are massively over budget. In Finland, the plant's estimated cost was €2 billion, but the cost is now more than double that. Secondly, both plants were supposed to be built within four years, but are currently going to take six years.

I would really like to give way, but I have only a minute left and I am not even halfway through my speech. Perhaps most worrying is that there has been genuine concern about the safety of the plants. The Finnish Radiation and Nuclear Safety Authority identified 700 non-conformances during investigation of the project, and the director-general of that authority condemned Areva's  "attitude and lack of professional knowledge" in failing to correct problems more than a year after they had been identified. He also slammed the design of the plant as failing to meet "the basic principles of nuclear safety". It is, therefore, extremely concerning to note that the proposed fleet of new nuclear power stations to which the UK Labour Government has recently given the green light are likely to be built by Areva and will be, in the words of the chairman of UniStar Nuclear Energy, standardized down to "the carpeting and wallpaper." Nuclear energy is costly and potentially dangerous, and the Scottish Government's stance on the issue is widely applauded by environmentalists. I agree with my colleague Joe FitzPatrick that the money that is to be spent on new nuclear power would be more effectively spent on enhancing the renewable energy sector in Scotland and other parts of the UK. Scotland has already been identified as a world leader in renewable energy technologies and has huge offshore renewables potential. Failure to invest in the skills and resources would be a massive opportunity missed as the world races to create viable and efficient renewable technologies. Admittedly, only a small percentage of Scotland's energy requirement is produced at the moment by, for example, the Siadar wave energy project, which will nevertheless create energy for 2,000 homes and 70 jobs, but more is in the pipeline from a new hydro project in the Great Glen and from offshore wind—of course, 6.4GW of capacity was leased by the Crown Estate only recently. Scotland has unique offshore potential, for which many countries would give their eye teeth. Continued investment in research and development and pilot projects could lead to Scotland providing up to a quarter of the European Union's energy needs. There is no need for nuclear power. We should go ahead with other forms of energy production.

I am delighted that the vital A737 Dalry bypass remains a priority in the strategic transport projects review. Does the minister agree that the Labour Party should apologise to the people of North Ayrshire for deliberately misleading them by telling them that the project, which is on-going, has been shelved?

I, too, am opposed to the Hunterston proposals as they stand, but is it fair to lodge an amendment in the knowledge that ministers cannot vote on it, given that they will have to consider what is a live application? The rest of us can vote on it but, as Alex Johnstone said, it puts ministers in an invidious position.

To ask the Scottish Government whether it supports the development of cultural links between Scotland and Catalunya by, for example, encouraging the organisation and holding of football matches between their teams. (S3O-9840)

The minister will be aware that Catalunya has undertaken a number of matches over the years against the full international sides of Argentina, Brazil and Nigeria, to name but three. Does she agree that a match between Scotland and Catalunya, preferably at Hampden, would encourage and enhance links between Scotland and Catalunya, bring tourists and revenue to Scotland and give our national side an idea of what it can expect when meeting Spain in the European qualifiers?

To ask the Scottish Government how much it will have to find in total from 2010-11 onwards to fund all existing PFI and PPP contracts. (S3O-9521)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that PPP and PFI contracts have proven to be an extremely expensive way of delivering new schools, hospitals and infrastructure projects, often to a less than impressive standard? Will he confirm that the Scottish Government will use traditional procurement methods and the Scottish Futures Trust to build much needed infrastructure projects that represent much greater value for money and do not bequeath an intolerable burden on future generations?

One of the ways in which MSPs publicise what they do is through their work with their constituents, which obviously involves communicating with them. We know that budgets are tight but, in this first year of capped budgets for postage and stationery, will the SPCB—in setting next financial year's budget—take into account the fact that, in April, first-class postage will increase by about 7 per cent and second-class postage by 11 per cent?

To ask the Scottish Government what impact the Chancellor of the Exchequer's plans to increase national insurance contributions by 1 per cent from April 2011 at a cost of £104.3 million to the Scottish budget will have on jobs in local government, the national health service, the police and fire services. (S3O-9417)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that the £104.3 million that the chancellor will remove year on year from the Scottish block through his national insurance increases and which will go straight to the Treasury should be returned by the UK Government to Scotland? Will he therefore initiate discussions with the Treasury on that basis?

It is important to have appropriate fines for people who cause damage in marine protected areas, regardless of who they  are or what their occupation is. I am concerned about the exemption for commercial fishermen in section 85(2), as are the Community of Arran Seabed Trust in my constituency and Scottish Environment LINK. The sea provides livelihoods for people in many industries, from ports to tourism and from aquaculture to the oil industry, and all sectors should be treated equally. That is what my amendment seeks to do. I move amendment 118.

There is a delicate balance here. I listened to all the arguments that have been made, but I gave the most credence to Robin Harper's, because we need to think about the long-term health and safety of the seas if we are to have long-term sustainability. His argument is that, rather than moving towards what is being done in the EU, the EU should move towards a position in which it protects our seas a bit more.

To call my amendments "a full-frontal attack" on the Scottish fishing industry is hyperbole, to say the least. Section 17 lists licensable marine activities and states that Scottish ministers must have regard to the need to protect the environment and human health. Section 17(4)(c) states that in deciding on exemptions, ministers must have regard to "the need to prevent interference with the legitimate uses of the sea". It can be argued, therefore, that that effectively makes the marine licensing regime inoperable; that is the point behind amendment 108, and amendment 112, which is similar. Nearly all uses of the sea are legitimate with the exception of personalised watercraft, which probably have no authorisation under the public right to navigation, and beach users except anglers and swimmers, neither of which is authorised under common law. This exemption process is not included in the UK Marine and Coastal Access Act 2009 and perhaps that is why.

The previous speaker would not take an intervention from me. Is the member aware that when representatives of Audit Scotland  were asked about education funding in the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee this morning they said that in the past five years, which include the first two years of Scottish National Party Government, there was a 5 per cent year-on-year real-terms increase in councils' education spend and that the share of local authority expenditure that goes on education has increased from 28 to 31 per cent?

Will the member give way?

Will the member accept an intervention?

I underline my support for the budget, which delivers the best possible deal for the people of Scotland in the present circumstances. In this time of austerity, which is unsurpassed in modern times, and under the shadow of pending cuts by an incoming Labour or Conservative Government, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth has produced a budget that will help to drag Scotland from the worst financial crisis since the great depression. I was amused by Andy Kerr's comment that the restoration of GARL will be a Labour Party manifesto commitment next year at Holyrood. Given the stampede of Labour MSPs to grab the Westminster seats that are being abandoned by his colleagues in London, I do not think that many on the Labour benches believe that there is any likelihood of there being a Labour Administration next year. I would not be holding my breath on that one. Indeed, I wonder whether Iain Gray perhaps wishes that he was not Labour leader so that he could go for the East Lothian seat, assuming that Anne Moffat is finally ousted from that position. Speaking about Westminster, it should be pointed out that GARL is not flavour of the month among Labour MPs—for example, Ayrshire Central MP Brian Donohoe has made it very clear that he believes that there is no benefit whatever for the people of Ayrshire in the project's going ahead. It is beyond argument that the Scottish Government budget allocation has been slashed dramatically, and the Labour Party's claims that  the budget is on the increase would be laughable if it were not a matter of such seriousness. In fact, only Labour MSPs still cling to that ridiculous view—not even their colleagues in Westminster give the claims any credence.

SPICe has confirmed that there will be a reduction in the Scottish budget of £814.4 million—the equivalent of 13,000 Scottish jobs. Of course, I would expect Andy Kerr to avoid the fact that Alistair Darling has failed to provide Scotland with £350 million of accelerated capital for 2010-11 and has cut the Scottish budget, as he is one of the MSPs who thinks that it is his job to talk about Scotland and Scots being too poor, wee and stupid to rule our own future. Not only has our budget been cut, but the finance secretary has had to look ahead and consider the £104.3 million annual impact on the Scottish block from April 2011 as a result of the Chancellor of the Exchequer's 1 per cent increase in employers' national insurance contributions—a clear tax on jobs. Despite the swingeing cuts and the financial straitjacket that Scotland must work in, the finance secretary has produced a detailed budget that is committed to delivering first-class services, protecting jobs, stimulating growth and protecting Scotland's environment and financial future. As we have heard, the Scottish Government has contributed £30.9 million for housing and regeneration, having already provided a record £1.6 billion for housing over three years. It has provided an extra £20 million to help the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council to meet the higher demand for places in further and higher education and £16 million to create an additional 7,800 apprenticeship places, which represents a 73 per cent increase. The Government has, of course, also increased funding for health boards by 2.7 per cent and has provided £10 million for a new insulation scheme, and a similar sum for a Scottish investment bank. The budget provides further investment across the board, including in front-line education services, rural development, further education, student support, funding for local government to support the business gateway, and renewable energy projects. In line with the Scottish Government's commitment to tackling climate change and assisting with tackling fuel poverty, we have heard the announcement that the boiler scrappage scheme will be introduced. In the stage 1 debate, Wendy Alexander—who will speak next—talked about scrutiny of capital  expenditure during the budget process. She claimed that, because capital budgets have never been changed in budget negotiations, "Parliament is tying its hands behind its back, because capital spending is what determines the strategic direction of any organisation".— [ Official Report , 20 January 2010; c 22887.]  She believes that the Scottish Government should publish annual spending figures that are broken down by capital project, so that Parliament can be aware of slippage or delay. That is a red herring. Some projects fall behind schedule, which frees up funding, but more money is required to be put into other capital projects that make swifter progress on delivery—for example, construction of the M74 northern extension is ahead of schedule. Capital projects are monitored closely. The director general finance and corporate services reviews them every week and the cabinet secretary reviews them monthly. In the past financial year, the Scottish Government spent its capital budget to within £5 million of the £3.7 billion total, which strongly suggests that the current system is working well. To show that, John Swinney wrote yesterday to Opposition party leaders to provide a breakdown of all the capital projects that are under way and what has been spent on them. That information showed that the capital programme is on track and that only five projects show any variance. Labour Party opposition to the budget has become increasingly ridiculous. Labour members' failure to support it as a somewhat contrived protest against GARL's cancellation serves only to highlight their capriciousness. The GARL project was cancelled with good reason. Before the Scottish Government took over, the Scottish Executive commissioned a study into the viability of creating a rail link to Glasgow airport. The report of that study was damning—it is the Sinclair Knight Merz (Europe) Ltd consultants' report, for those who want a closer look. The report highlighted key criteria that should be met for the rail link to succeed, which were primarily that revenues should at least cover operating costs, that there was demand for a rail service and that any public sector contribution to capital costs should be at least matched by non-user benefits. The Glasgow airport rail link failed to meet any of those criteria. First, the service has no real demand. The report noted that the project would cater for only 5 per cent of passengers who accessed the airport—no wonder Brian Donohoe and other Labour MPs do not support GARL. The lack of demand means that the revenues that would be generated would not cover operating costs, which would make the service unsustainable unless it were to be heavily subsidised. Such subsidies and the massive  amount of capital that would be required would not provide value for money. The budget focuses on issues that really matter to the people of Scotland: jobs, housing, education—

I echo Pauline McNeill's view that local newspapers are of great importance and value to the people and present an opportunity to discuss and champion issues that affect local people—all members who have spoken so far have indicated that. However, my view is that the debate is not about whether we support local newspapers but about how local authorities spend their money. The motion makes it clear that Labour would prevent local authorities from deciding what is appropriate for their area in terms of public notices; in my view, the motion is therefore fundamentally undemocratic. Should the Scottish Government succeed in allowing councils to decide, do any Opposition members seriously dispute that Opposition-controlled councils would be among the first to reduce their usage of printed public notices? Opposition MSPs are in danger of being isolated from their local authority colleagues on this issue.

I will maybe let the member in in a minute, but I want to move on first. Let us look at the COSLA briefing paper that members received from COSLA president Councillor Pat Watters, who is of course a Labour member. He writes: "COSLA unequivocally supports the Government's proposed legislation and the consultation process that precedes it. ... The current legislation is 50 or 60 years old and relates to a time when the printed media was by and large the only method of ensuring general public access to such notices. ... COSLA is simply seeking to ensure that the full range of media opportunities can be explored in order to ensure the greatest possible public access to public information notices. ... 'the primary focus in the provision of information is ease of access for the intended recipients'. It would seem unlikely that this objective can be achieved if only one source of media is supported by legislation as is currently the case. ... Local authorities have a duty of 'Best Value' imposed on them by the Scottish Parliament. ... We believe that by using a mix of media outlets, both printed and digital, a saving of £3-5m across local government is achievable."

I will let members in in just a wee second or two, if they just let me move on. I will take interventions. Pat Watters writes: "The legislation means that councils will no longer be required to use only the printed media and enables the use of online publication. The legislation does not require that councils only publish online. ... One example is from Glasgow Gorbals library where there were more than 2500 internet bookings a week compared with 1500 book issues. ... Any older person ... who wants a weekly print out of public information relating to their area, will be able to get that service." I give way to Hugh O'Donnell.

Well, you thought wrong.

The point is that no one is going to prevent public information notices from being put in newspapers. I have been advised that some newspapers charge premium rates for statutory notices, because they know that the local authority must use them. They therefore charge higher than normal rates for PINs. For example, a huge proportion of election budgets is used by small local authorities to publish PINs rather than to run the elections. One thing that will surely come out of this is that local authorities will get more competitive rates for PINs. We have talked about the decline in newspaper circulation, but evidence to the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee showed that one of the main reasons for the decline is that some newspapers are more lively, exciting and interesting than others. Some newspapers have therefore declined by only 1 per cent in recent years, while others have declined by some 24 per cent. The public notices issue will not change that. I received an e-mail yesterday from Mr Bruce Skivington, who is publishing director of LRE Media Ltd. He said: "I think this is important in that what is going to decide on local newspapers is the amount of general advertising which presently is on the floor due to Gordon Brown's  recession. ... The Scottish Government is under severe spending restrictions and any saving on public notices could be used more efficiently elsewhere. ... The newspaper industry has done very well over the years, my editors have earnings well above MSPs ... Local newspapers are not going to survive on public notices ... The Scottish Government has a responsibility to the taxpayers". David Hutchison, who is a professor of media studies, told the committee that newspapers still make profits of around 10 per cent gross, although that was disputed by some proprietors. Professor Hutchison made the important point that, if we do not approve the measure that the Scottish Government has proposed and the notices continue, the Parliament should at least seek "some kind of reciprocal understanding" from newspapers, such that we receive "undertakings on the number of journalists employed ... undertakings on the range of journalists employed" and, as in Sweden, agreement that at least half of "editorial content must be unique to the newspaper" and that "editorial content must amount to at least 1000 column meters per annum". He suggests that, if we decide not to progress the measure, we should at least look at what we will get as a Parliament and a society for our money. On access, if jobs, for example, are advertised in a specific local paper, clearly people other than that paper's readers will not see them. However, through the pilot project, North Ayrshire Council was able to cut its recruitment advertising spend by 65 per cent; Perth and Kinross Council reduced the time taken to hire by almost half; and 90 per cent of surveyed candidates rated the application process as very good. We are not saying that PINs must be on the net; we are saying that local authorities must have the choice. Local authorities are saying that they will still provide information in libraries and public buildings.

Last week, I went to Saltcoats community council and discussed this matter. About 25 people were present and, with one exception, they all thought that the measure was a good one. We should certainly explore the idea. It is about choice.

Yup.

I congratulate Mr Swinney on his constructive and positive budget speech, in what I am sure we all agree are extremely difficult and restrictive financial conditions. The cabinet secretary has burned the midnight oil for weeks trying to produce the best possible budget for Scotland. I used the words "difficult" and "restrictive" for a good reason. Conditions are difficult not only because we are living through one of the worst financial crises since the great depression but because the UK Labour Government's policies have made producing a budget that ensures the economic and social prosperity of the people of Scotland an uphill struggle. The Labour Party in Scotland continues to deny it, but the Scottish budget has been cut. It is simply infantile for Labour members to continue to say that the Scottish block grant has not been cut; not even their party in Westminster shares that view. Despite all the bluster and posturing, I am  pretty sure that most Labour MSPs are well aware of the situation. Back in September, Professor Bell, who was the Finance Committee's adviser, made it clear in a report to all parliamentary conveners and deputy conveners that the UK has the highest fiscal debt as a share of GDP of any western economy—it is higher even than that of Iceland or Ireland. Of course, Norway has a huge fiscal surplus—oh, for a $400 billion oil fund. The UK's interest payments on debt are among the highest in the world and 1 million jobs throughout these islands have been lost. Inflation is touching 3 per cent and the economy shrank by 5 per cent last year, which is more than the figure in Iceland—a very small country of only 250,000 people. On 12 December, Jim Murphy said that Iceland's economy had totally collapsed. What does that say about the United Kingdom? Labour is not far off repeating 1976, when the International Monetary Fund had to bail out the UK economy. As with the Labour Government at Westminster then, Gordon Brown's Government will end in a financial crisis. In the next four years, UK debt is projected to increase by £578 billion to an astronomical £1,370 billion. What do some of the cuts mean for Scotland? The chancellor has failed to provide Scotland with £350 million of accelerated capital for the next financial year. Despite Labour Party claims that the Scottish budget has increased, the chancellor's so-called efficiency savings mean that the figure is £500 million less than the Scottish Government was promised in the 2007 comprehensive spending review. That money had already been allocated. Independent figures from SPICe confirm that the result is a reduction of £814.4 million in the Scottish budget, which is the equivalent of 13,000 jobs. Of course, we all know that worse is to come. As a written answer to me revealed just last week, from April 2011 the public sector in Scotland will pay millions of pounds to fund the chancellor's 1 per cent increase in employer's national insurance contributions. The estimated additional cost to the public sector in Scotland of that tax on jobs will be £36.3 million for the NHS, £57 million for local government, £10 million for police forces and fire brigades and £1 million for the Scottish Government. That will place an additional pressure on Scottish budgets from 2011-12 of an estimated £104.3 million in that year and subsequent years. For my area of Ayrshire, that will mean a cut of £6.3 million from front-line NHS and local authority services. That money will go straight to the Treasury; Labour politicians should argue for that money to be restored to Scotland. We can add to that the fact that the UK Government plans to scrap attendance allowance  and elements of housing benefit and disability living allowance, while hammering motorists with increased fuel duty at the pumps. Fuel in Scotland is the second cheapest in the European Union before tax is added, but after tax it becomes the most expensive. It is increasingly difficult to see what Labour is doing to benefit anyone in this country.

We have seen how Norway managed to deal with the economic crisis—it has a 9.6 per cent fiscal surplus, through having its oil fund. I say to Mr Kerr, who appears to be trying to make a career out of talking down Scotland, that we believe in the Scottish people's ability to run their own affairs. Information that came out on Monday, for example, showed that if Scotland had been an independent state during the past 10 years, its debt burden would be £33 billion less than its current share of the UK's debt burden. We have faith in the Scottish people. On Wendy Alexander's point about whether we are arguing for more money for capital spending, the Scottish National Party wants all aspects of the Scottish economy to be under Scottish control. Let us consider how the chancellor has wasted money. Some £100 billion has gone into Trident, £26 billion has been squandered on botched information technology projects and billions of pounds have been wasted on the Iraq war and the identity cards fiasco. Surely it would make much more sense if the chancellor looked closer to home when he made efficiency savings, instead of jeopardising the Scottish Government by slashing our budget. Members want to talk about the GARL project, so let us talk about why the cut, which I do not think any member wanted, had to be made. A major issue with which the cabinet secretary had to cope was the impact of the £129 million cut in the capital allocation to the NHS, as a result of Barnett consequentials. We had to put that £129 million back into the NHS. Some of us think that money that is allocated to health boards the length and breadth of Scotland for capital projects is money better spent than money spent on GARL, which many experts think would have secured less of an economic boost than was prophesied. The budget can deliver for Scotland in a recession as best as it can do, given the powers that we have. I hope that all members will support it.

I have long been an admirer of Johann Lamont, a woman whom I hold in great esteem and no little affection, yet her speech was the most woeful that I have ever heard in all the years that I have known her in a debate in the Parliament. I profoundly believe that, along with many of her colleagues, Johann Lamont is deeply embarrassed at being attacked from the left by the Conservatives on the issue. That is probably why we have only a beleaguered gang of four sitting on the Labour benches at this time. I thank Alex Neil for bringing the debate to the chamber. Although the issue is reserved, it is of huge importance to thousands of Scotland's most vulnerable people. The UK Labour Government's  green paper, "Shaping the Future of Care Together", is ironically titled considering that the word "together" suggests some sort of debate or co-operation on the matter. As we heard a couple of moments ago, that has clearly not happened. The green paper outlines the UK Government's plans to create what it calls a national care service that will integrate benefits such as attendance allowance and disability living allowance. However, it has been widely met with criticism, with many people noting that it is nothing more than a cynical attempt to swindle the most vulnerable people in our society out of money that they desperately need, in order to cut Labour's ever-mounting budget deficit. Over the years, I have, at times, become desensitised to the cold and complacent way in which the Labour Party has often treated the people of Scotland, but I feel that in this instance it has outdone itself. The proposals represent the most appalling attempt to save money by hitting the poorest and most vulnerable—the very people whom the Labour Party claims to represent—harder than anyone else, and I find that shameful. It is no wonder that Peter Watt, Labour's general secretary until 2007, said in The Daily Telegraph on Monday, of the Prime Minister's ascent to power: "There was no vision, no strategy, no co-ordination. It was completely dysfunctional. Gordon had been so desperate to become Prime Minister that we all assumed he knew what he was going to do when he got there. I imagined there was some grand plan, tucked away in a drawer. But if any such document existed, nobody seemed to know about it. Gordon was simply making it up as he went along." The UK Government's green paper is a sign of that. On 1 May last year, the former Home Secretary, Charles Clarke, said: "There have been things that have been done recently which have made me feel ashamed to be a Labour member of Parliament." I suggest that today we are talking about such an instance. If rules relating to parliamentary language did not prevent me from repeating them, I would quote John Hutton MP's comments in The Scotsman of 23 December 2009. We all know that Labour has become an establishment party par excellence, with 15 unelected lords propping up Gordon Brown's chaotic and deeply divided Government. The fact that Labour is allowing the Royal Bank of Scotland—which is 84 per cent owned by the taxpayer—to hand over £1.5 billion in bonuses while cutting the benefits of those who can least afford such a cut says it all. Through Labour's waffle and backtracking—of which we had an admirable example this morning  and which is supported by an almost total media silence from the house newspapers, which are more interested in vilifying the former ministers who were behind last week's clueless coup attempt by Hewitt and Hoon than in helping to head off the proposed cuts—some things are now clear. Those who receive money to spend as they see fit, according to their own needs, will no longer receive that money, which they use to cover the extra costs of living with a disability, such as extra fuel, clothing, leisure and housing costs, and to make up for loss of earnings. The recipient may use that small budget to pay for informal services that are delivered by friends and family, such as grass cutting or lifts to the shops. How can the UK Government seriously expect people to believe that stripping attendance allowance from the nation's older disabled people and handing the money over to local authorities to administer will provide a better system of care? The green paper states: "People who need services are often the experts in their own care, and the system for the future must respect this." The utter hypocrisy of the green paper is clear. On the one hand, it argues that individuals are most aware of their own needs and, on the other, it favours the ability of an overly bureaucratic local authority system to assess individuals' needs as it sees fit. Currently, 168,000 Scots are in receipt of attendance allowance and, for many, it is an essential source of income that keeps them above the poverty threshold. The removal of benefits would have a catastrophic effect on recipients and their families. The Institute for Social and Economic Research predicted that the removal of attendance allowance would cause 40 per cent of attendance allowance recipients to fall below the poverty line. In my constituency, 1,104 people would thus be affected. Receipt of attendance allowance by a disabled person is one of the grounds for the receipt of carers allowance by their carer. As the minister pointed out, scrapping attendance allowance will make it harder for carers to receive financial support. Currently, 97,000 people in Scotland are eligible for carers allowance and 46,300 receive payments. However, they stand to lose that crucial support in order to pay for social care in England. Outrage at the proposals is widespread. Help the Aged, Age Concern, the Royal National Institute of Blind People, Macmillan Cancer Support, Leonard Cheshire Disability and the Parkinson's Disease Society have all expressed concern. Indeed, just this afternoon, I received an e-mail from the Parkinson's Disease Society that included quotations from a host of sufferers who explained how the proposal would affect them. One said:  "The government is behaving like a mugger at a cashpoint. It sees old, frail and disabled people with cash in their hands and thinks 'I'll have some of that'. At least muggers only rob one person at a time." Our own Jack McConnell expressed his opposition to the proposal by signing Bill Kidd's motion on the subject, and tens of thousands of signatories to a number 10 petition have expressed their outrage. The Labour Party must recognise that the public, the experts and even its own members do not wish it to go ahead with these outrageous proposals, which will impoverish thousands and provide a substandard level of care. The old and disabled people of Scotland deserve and demand better. Is it not about time that the UK Government listened to them? Should not Labour's Scottish front-bench members ignore their London bosses for once and do what is right? We all know that Labour MSPs will, after a modest period of time, turn turtle on the issue of minimum pricing of alcohol on orders from London. Today, there is an opportunity for the worm to turn and to stand up for Scotland and the most vulnerable members of our society. In case some Labour members do not think that the recipients of the benefits are concerned, I inform them that Carers UK carried out a survey that found that 96 per cent of carers are opposed to the Government's plans.

I thank the honourable member for Havana north for her contribution, which was a speech rather than a question. What we see here are proposals to cut benefits. Perhaps the minister will contemplate bringing to the chamber a debate about the plans to cut housing benefit by some £300 million, which have been condemned by Labour MP Frank Field. This is an outrageous set of proposals from the UK Government, and I am delighted that, with the exception of members of the beleaguered Labour Party, everyone in the chamber looks set to unite against it.

I fully agree with Hugh O'Donnell. At a parents' night, I saw an essay by my daughter that contained several spelling mistakes. Teachers thought that they were marking the creativity in essays and that pointing out spelling mistakes would undermine the child's creative potential. Occasionally, we must return to first principles. If an essay contains spelling mistakes, they should be pointed out, so that they can be addressed.

The best way in which to cultivate literacy is to encourage reading and a love of books. For example, in both primary and secondary sectors, time must be dedicated each day to private reading, ranging from 10 to 60 minutes depending on the pupil's age. Alongside that, we must promote a culture of reading and each child should always have the book that they are reading in their school bag or close by them. Built into the curriculum should be opportunities for people to talk about reading. The five-to-14 assessment's emphasis on talk encouraged that, as does the talk element of standard grade English and the group discussion element in intermediate English. The key is to normalise reading, as it will not be the custom in every home. Children who do not read at home have a much poorer chance of engaging with the curriculum and achieving successful outcomes. That could be done alongside reading initiatives such as DEAR—drop everything and read. A bell could ring in the school once a day or once a week and everyone—from the janitor to the head, wherever they were and whatever subject they were studying—would have to take out a book and read until the bell rang again. That reading spell could last as long as the school saw fit. It is also important that children see adults reading for pleasure. Reading assessments are important. Regardless of the level they are at, children must be assessed according to nationally standardised criteria, with feeder primary schools sharing assessed work with secondary schools and vice versa. That used to be the norm, but it is not done nearly enough these days. It is important that primaries and secondaries understand assessment criteria in the same way. If we do not  all assess in the same way, with the same application of national criteria, the transition to secondary can be difficult and there may appear to be slippage when there is none. Indeed, that is why there are many difficulties with the transition between primary 7 and the first year of secondary school in a number of cases. Once a child's stage of development is understood, teachers can set individually agreed long-term and short-term targets for that child with the parents involved as much as possible. A role should be found for parents in overseeing progress towards those targets. When that is not possible, teaching staff could be assigned a tutor group of pupils. A child's progress towards achieving his or her targets should be monitored, and they must be realistic for the child; otherwise, they will not be achieved despite the child's best efforts, and the child could even be discouraged. Literacy evenings in schools encourage parents and pupils to discuss how they can ensure that a culture of reading is developed at home, and local writers could be invited to such events. The school library must be used across the curriculum in secondary schools, not just in the English department, although that is where it clearly plays a key role. There is no subject in which a library does not have an important role to play, and every school should have a qualified librarian. Primary schools in a cluster could share one between them if they were not large enough to justify their own librarian. Of course, the number of school librarians was reduced under Labour and the Lib Dems. I believe that local government should be encouraged to restore school librarians where they have been removed. Encouraging children and their parents to join their local library is also important. Reading could be set as a piece of homework to be completed with a parent, even when parents do not value education—a situation that itself must be addressed. As other members have said, there is an issue about generation after generation being in the situation of functional illiteracy. Reading is important for instilling civic responsibility, too. For example, there could be a readathon, and children could be sponsored to raise money for a charity by having, say, five class hours over a week to read at home. They could be sponsored by the hour, by the book or at a flat rate, and the whole class could gather a sum for an agreed charity. Illiteracy can be solved with imagination. The findings of the literacy commission must act as a stark reminder of the problems that we face. Only yesterday, at the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, we were advised by a witness that, astonishingly, trainee journalists at Cardonald College in Glasgow often have to be  given remedial classes in basic spelling, punctuation and grammar. That is unbelievable. Shocking figures in the commission's report reveal that 18.5 per cent of Scots children leave primary education functionally illiterate and that 1 million Scots have literacy problems. The Scottish Government recognises the report's recommendations, such as the creation of literacy plans by local authorities, and is already working actively to promote literacy and numeracy. We whole-heartedly agree with the call for a sustained commitment to tackling illiteracy at all levels. The curriculum for excellence has three action points in relation to that. First, as a fundamental principle, the focus on literacy and numeracy should be increased and embedded throughout all learning and teaching. Secondly, all teachers—rather than just English and mathematics teachers—will be responsible for improving literacy and numeracy. Despite what Liz Smith said, I do not believe that that was previously a fundamental principle in all subject areas. The Scottish Government is introducing a national literacy qualification, which all children in secondary 3 will take. The proposals have been heralded by many education experts, including Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education, which stated that the " Curriculum for Excellence proposes to address literacy and numeracy directly, emphasising the need to develop these fundamental skills across the curriculum and to provide formal recognition of progress up to the end of every young person's school career." The Scottish Government contributes £500,000 a year to the positive behaviour team, a nurture group working alongside local authorities and schools to provide training and support to improve educational approaches and attitudes towards learning. The Scottish survey of achievement will, biennially, measure performance on literacy using a representative sample of pupils from primaries 3, 5, and 7 and secondary 2. At present, the survey is conducted only every four years, but the information will be used for action on illiteracy. Illiteracy is not confined to the classroom. As other members have pointed out, many adults have difficulties. Last September, the Scottish Government published "Progress in Adult Literacy and Numeracy in Scotland", which sets out goals and directions to improve adult literacy. Central to that is the Scottish Government's learning connections adult literacy team, which provides support and funding in a variety of forms. For example, learning connections funds the big plus campaign to encourage improvements in people's reading, writing and numeracy by their taking up some of the free help available throughout the country.  The community learning and development initiative also plays a pivotal role in combating adult illiteracy. The partnerships in each local authority, comprising representatives from councils, colleges, third sector organisations, Jobcentre Plus and trade unions, help to deliver adult literacy and numeracy. The Scottish Government is investing a further £4 million in the initiative over the next two years to improve skills and boost the community learning and development workforce. I welcome the work and commitment of the Scottish Government, and parliamentarians from across the political spectrum, in attempting to eradicate the problem of illiteracy in Scotland.

I am glad that Ross Finnie said "a minimum of 6.88 million tonnes of CO 2 ", because when I met Ayrshire Power Ltd, I was told that, according to it, the actual annual figure is 11,277,043 tonnes of CO 2 , which is a rather precise figure. Will the minister confirm that if such a project were ever to get off the ground, there would be no emissions from it that would be harmful to human health and that no smoke would be seen coming from the stack—all that would be seen would be water vapour on cold days?

During Labour's recession, further education has played a major part in delivering Scotland's recovery programme. Will the cabinet secretary build on commitments such as the £28 million for extra courses and the 16,000 new apprentice  places and continue to ensure that Scotland's colleges have the support that they deserve?

To ask the Scottish Government what impact it considers that there will be on the incidence of violent crime and disorder if minimum pricing of alcohol is introduced. (S3O-08830)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that the evidence for minimum pricing is so overwhelming that if the approach does not become law there will be more violence and disorder, more people will be arrested and hospitalised and there will be more distress for families and communities than would otherwise be the case? There is a proven link between price and consumption. Does he therefore agree that the responsible and sensible way forward is for all  members to support minimum pricing, which is an important law and order and public health measure?

Go on: tell us whether he voted SNP.

And mine.

In the past 10 days, I have visited Arran high school, Dykesmains primary school and Garnock academy in my constituency, where there are no signs of the chaos and crisis that the Opposition has talked about so melodramatically in recent weeks. What I saw on my visits were dedicated teachers and committed pupils. Margaret Smith talked about the reduction in the number of teachers in employment, but there are a number of reasons for that. First, due to Labour's recession, from which the United Kingdom is the only OECD country still to emerge, the number of teachers taking early retirement has fallen sharply. That means that fewer places are available for young teachers when they finish their probationary year. I assume that no one would sensibly argue that the Government has powers on taxation and borrowing that would allow us to recover from the recession more quickly, as we would wish to do. Secondly, as I am sure both Lib Dem and Labour members are fully aware, required teacher numbers must be planned for at least four years in advance for PGDE students and seven years in advance for BEd students. For example, if the Government assessed that it needed a certain number of teachers by 2016, recruitment interviews for those teachers would begin in 2010, training would begin in 2011 and the probationary year would end in 2013. Another three years should be added for BEd teachers. That means that many of the teachers who cannot currently find full-time employment were recruited at the behest of the Liberal-Labour Government, in the years before the SNP came to power. I ask Des McNulty, who has left the chamber, and Margaret Smith to admit that their parties have got their sums wrong. The proportion of probationary teachers in full-time employment fell from 64 per cent in 2004 to 40 per cent before the SNP took over.

The Liberal Democrats have some cheek to talk about teacher numbers. Imagine if the £800 million cut that they suggested  be imposed last February had been implemented—what impact would that have had on local government, services and teacher numbers? Because of the rank opportunism of the Liberal Democrats in this area, as in so many others, in the recent Glasgow North East by-election they were defeated by Solidarity and outpolled by more than 2:1 by the British National Party. The party is clearly marginalised and is going nowhere. Between 1997 and the present day, the UK Labour Government has appointed no fewer than eight education ministers. During its years in power, the Labour Party in Scotland appointed five education ministers, one of whom lasted less than six months. Considering that that rapid transition was during the period 2003-04, would it be fair to say that it was the reason for the rather spectacular miscalculation of teacher numbers that I have mentioned? Perhaps the Labour Party has forgotten about its rather shameful management of Scotland's education system in previous years. I recall members in the first session of Parliament calling for the resignation of the Labour Minister for Children and Education over the shambolic SQA scandal, in which thousands of Scottish students' exam papers were lost or left unmarked. When the current Government took over in 2007, the Labour Party left 260,000 pupils in schools in poor or bad condition. Instead of attacking the Government, perhaps the Opposition should heap praise on it for removing 100,000 pupils from such schools. Mr McLetchie touched on the early retirement package that the Scottish Government has announced. Des McNulty's change of heart on the issue is remarkable. On 26 November, he said: "The SNP Government needs to put new money in for more teachers jobs to get new teachers into work. Experienced teachers play an important role in our schools, not least as mentors for those entering the profession. The scheme will take experienced teachers out of the classroom." We can see clearly that there has been a U-turn on the issue within a few days.

I would like to take an intervention from Ken Macintosh, but I cannot, as I have a long way to go. I apologise for that. Despite the Opposition's narrow and unfounded criticisms of the Scottish Government, it has neglected to mention the many successes, such as the introduction of free school meals. The Liberals did not vote against that measure, but they have castigated it opportunistically again today.

I am pretty sure that you abstained on the measure in committee.

All right, so Liberal Democrat members do not think that poor and young kids should get free school meals. We have also abolished the graduate endowment. The Tories promised to do that for almost a decade, before turning turtle and opposing the legislation.

Not as long as you have in order to raise your vote above 2 per cent.

The only reason why the Liberal Democrats were fifth in my constituency in the previous Scottish Parliament election was that there were not six candidates. We have provided £30 million extra for university and college students and a £1.25 billion programme of central funding to rebuild or refurbish schools. We have increased the proportion of young people entering further or higher education from 56 to 62 per cent. With reference to higher education spending, which has increased from 3.73 to 3.87 per cent of the budget—by £50 million a year—under this Government, Professor Anthony Cohen, former principal of Queen Margaret University, stated on "Newsnight" on 10 September: "This Government has I think manifested an extraordinary commitment to the universities since they came to power. The taskforce itself was the closest engagement which any Government in my recollection has had with the universities". The Scottish Government has an excellent record on education, and the Scottish education system is something of which we should all be rightly proud. Perhaps in the future I should take a closer look at what the Liberal Democrats are saying on some aspects of education. However, I find it difficult to do so, as they are a sore element in Scottish politics.

In March 1998 at the SNP national council, I proposed that there should be a presumption against the closure of rural schools. I am therefore pleased that, 11 and a half years later, we appear to have gone a considerable way towards securing that objective. In 2007, the SNP made a manifesto pledge to "introduce a legislative presumption against closure of rural schools and tighten the regulations for closing all schools." It is therefore my hope that, after due discussion and deliberation today, we will fulfil yet another promise to the people of Scotland. There have been many congratulations for those who have made a significant contribution to the bill. I do not want to repeat all the names that have been mentioned, some on a number of occasions, but we should thank Mervyn Benford, the information officer with the National Association for Small Schools, who came up from south of the border to share the experience on rural schools down there with the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee. I found his contribution to be invaluable. The bill is an extremely important one that will benefit not only the schoolchildren of Scotland, but their parents, teachers and wider communities. The fundamental aim is to improve and update the consultation procedures that local authorities apply to school closures and to help safeguard schools throughout Scotland that are vulnerable to closure, particularly in rural areas. As Karen Whitefield said, a unified all-Scotland approach is important, and I believe that the bill will deliver that. Although the right to attend a good-quality local school is important to people throughout Scotland, it is right and proper that an emphasis should be placed on rural schools. For those who have not had the good fortune of visiting my constituency of Cunninghame North, I say that it comprises many towns and villages. In such areas, the importance of the local school should not be underestimated. Two years ago, North Ayrshire Council proposed the closure of one of my island schools, in Corrie  on Arran. There was an outcry on the island about that, not just because of the potential loss of a much-loved school that is a century old and which forms a focal point of the village, but for many of the reasons that Murdo Fraser touched on and which came up in the evidence to the committee. Without a school at their heart, many villages would likely die, given the closures that have already occurred of shops, post offices and other facilities and amenities. Corrie is a village in which half the houses are already let to second-home owners, so the closure of the school would have been a nail in the coffin of an extremely picturesque and important village. There is also the domino effect. If a local authority is seen to close one small rural school, there is the possibility that other schools nearby could close. That was certainly an issue on the rest of the island. I am delighted that the bill that we are passing will make that less likely. It can be argued that to close a rural school takes away part of a town's or village's identity, can damage it economically or socially, and can destroy a way of life. If we want our most fragile communities to thrive and prosper, we cannot think it reasonable to take away their local school and make them unattractive and isolated places for people with families to live and work. The bill has a direct impact on not only rural schools but Scottish teachers. It is surely wrong for local authorities to close schools in an attempt, in many cases, to save money, rather than according to strictly educational criteria. Glasgow City Council this year voted in favour of closing 11 of the city's primary schools and nine nursery schools, but it has emerged that many parents feel that the correct consultation process was not adhered to. That highlights the failings of the current consultation process and shows that the measures in the bill are needed as well as desirable. Parents who feel that they have been unfairly treated by authorities can now ask ministers from this Parliament to call in the closure proposal in a manner that is similar to the process in the planning system, to ensure that the law is properly adhered to. The bill ensures that parents are involved with the relevant authorities from the very beginning of the six-week consultation period. Many members have touched on the consultation period being six weeks and including at least 30 school days. They are right to do so, because it is the crux of the bill. The three-week period after the consultation report is published will allow people time to voice opposition and doubts before the final decision is made.  It may be too late for the people of Glasgow to save some of their schools, but this Government wishes to ensure world-class education for all its young people. That is why it is ploughing more than £3 billion into school construction, why class sizes are at a record low, why gross capital expenditure on education is at a record high and why we support the bill in order to protect Scotland's schoolchildren, their parents and teachers, and local communities.

During a meeting of the Finance Committee, David Whitton asked the chief executives of Highlands and Islands Enterprise and Scottish Enterprise whether the changes had had any adverse impact on delivery. Mr Cumming of HIE replied that there was "no evidence of any negative impact", and Mr Perry of Scottish Enterprise replied: "the answer is no. We have driven year-on-year productivity improvement within the organisation ... the head-count reductions were of our design—they were not mandated by the Scottish Government ... We have seen nothing but an improvement in our productivity, and our output measures have actually increased over the period."—[ Official Report , Finance Committee , 5 May 2009; c 1216.] Is the minister aware of that exchange?

In an uncertain and unstable world with a resulting competition for jobs, the value of a college education should not be underestimated. College is an investment. It provides students with a tremendous range of opportunities, knowledge that is vital to succeed, and the validation that future employers require. However, the significance of a college education does not begin and end with the prospect of future employment. Colleges provide students with the opportunity to mature intellectually while they learn valuable life skills. They are also a focus for cultural learning and cultural identity. Scottish colleges currently accept 5,500 international students from 117 countries. More than half of those students come from outside the European Union. Colleges open up the world to Scotland and open up Scotland to the world. A key point in the 2007 report entitled "Skills for Scotland: A Lifelong Skills Strategy" is that we need to focus on "Achieving parity of esteem between academic and vocational learning, recognising that vocational learning is a valuable alternative to the academic pathway and important to all." That stresses the vitality of Scotland's college sector. In 2007-08, almost 490,000 students enrolled in Scotland's 43 colleges. Almost 43,000 of them were full-time students. We have heard a wee bit about whether there are enough teaching staff. There are around 12,700 teaching staff and around 9,000 non-teaching staff in our colleges. In December last year, around 150,000 students enrolled in health and IT courses, which are crucial to growing Scotland's economy. The Scottish Government has, of course, decided on six key skills for a successful Scotland, and the colleges play a vital role in delivering in the economic sectors that the Government has identified as crucial in securing our economic future. Those sectors are the creative industries; energy; financial and business services; food and  drink; life sciences; and tourism. "Skills for Scotland" called on colleges to deliver "core, employability and vocational skills and training to meet national, regional and local needs". They do so by offering everything from basic literacy and numeracy courses to 25 per cent of Scotland's higher education through a broad range of HNC and HND programmes. Colleges are constantly developing, updating and refining courses to suit an ever-changing world in which we need clear and sustainable competitive advantages not just at home but in international markets. That cannot be done without the hard work of college principals, staff and students. In the college that is closest to my constituency, James Watt College, radical improvements have been made over recent years in financial management and the delivery of modern and innovative courses. Indeed, through the funding allocation that we have heard so much about, more than £509,000 has been allocated to James Watt College—the third-highest allocation in Scotland. I am very pleased about that. In making that investment, we are able to deliver some of the most important courses that young people will ever undertake. James Watt College is turning out high-quality graduates who are finding jobs in some of Scotland's most prestigious resorts and hotels, including Gleneagles and Turnberry. Stephen Lyndsay and David MacDonald, who studied for Scottish vocational qualifications in food preparation and cookery, were offered full-time posts at Gleneagles. Craig MacDonald, from James Watt College, works as a commis chef at Turnberry. We also have a graduate in Hotel du Vin at One Devonshire Gardens—a place that, I am sure, many members frequent. Campbell Johnston, the curriculum manager in hospitality and tourism at James Watt College says: "We maintain good working relationships with a number of top hotels and restaurants and it is important that we are able to offer the best possible work experience opportunities for students." That shows the relevance of what is being taught at our colleges. We can be proud of the fact that almost 30 per cent of teaching in Scottish colleges in 2007-08 was given to students from deprived areas and almost a quarter to students with a declared disability. The way forward in any economy is to capitalise on the areas in which there is talent.

The Government has allocated a sum that we have already talked about, which has enabled an extra 3,000 students to enter colleges this year. The cabinet secretary is keeping the situation under constant review. As the figures show, Scotland is concentrating on those areas to produce more and more bright young graduates from all walks of life who might previously have been forgotten. In the past, prospective students have been discouraged because of the price tag; therefore, I welcome the £500 grant that has replaced the loans for part-time students. I am sure that that will make a significant difference. Indeed, in the draft 2010-11 budget, the Scottish Government is increasing funding for further education by almost £45 million, an increase of some 6.9 per cent. James Watt College has welcomed that, especially at this difficult time. I have a lot more to say but, unfortunately, I do not have much more time. I wanted to address the issues that members have raised about the fact that 15 major funding streams are open to students; some of those funding streams are administered at college level, some come through the Student Awards Agency for Scotland and some are determined by the benefits system at Westminster. A joined-up system, although it would be difficult to design, is something that everyone needs to focus on if we are to do the best that we can for the people who go to our colleges.

To ask the Scottish Executive what recent discussions it has had with the Scottish Environment Protection Agency regarding the environmental impact of power stations. (S3O-7986)

The minister will be aware of proposals to build a 1,600MW coal-fired power station at Hunterston in my constituency. Does she accept the need for Scottish Government policy to be more ambitious than the somewhat cautious approach of Westminster in delivering carbon capture and storage technology to any new power station that may be built? Has SEPA yet expressed a view on how it would ensure that such a facility was delivered to the highest-possible environmental standards?

I speak as the chair of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on tobacco control. I pay tribute to the work of that group and in particular to Richard Simpson, who has made a vital contribution to it in the first session of Parliament and in the present one. In 2000, I lodged a proposal for a member's bill, which called for a ban on smoking in places where food is served. That helped to pave the way for the even more ambitious Smoking, Health and Social Care (Scotland) Act 2005, which has proved such a tremendous success since it came into force in 2006. Towards the end of last year, I called for the sale of cigarettes by vending machine to be banned in a motion that gained the support of 23 members of four political parties. I am therefore delighted that we intend to take further action to resolve the negative impact that smoking has on our nation by banning tobacco displays and vending machines.  The Parliament has done an outstanding job in tackling Scotland's not insignificant smoking problem, but much work remains to be done if the incidence of smoking is to diminish and, ultimately, fewer lives are to be lost to that vile habit. The bans on tobacco advertising and smoking in public places have had positive and direct effects on the health and wellbeing of our nation. Notwithstanding the Tories, we are right to be proud of that. According to the New England Journal of Medicine , in the year following the ban in 2006, the number of patients who were admitted to hospital for heart attacks fell by 17 per cent, with the figure increasing to 36 per cent after three years. It is widely accepted that that is a direct result of the 2006 ban. The bill is supported by the Scottish coalition on tobacco, which involves organisations such as ASH Scotland, the British Heart Foundation Scotland, the British Medical Association Scotland, Cancer Research UK, Chest, Heart and Stroke Scotland, Macmillan Cancer Support, the Royal College of Nursing Scotland, the Roy Castle Lung Cancer Foundation, the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh and the Royal Environmental Health Institute of Scotland. On the vending machine ban, 22 European countries already have such a ban, and the World Health Organization supports extending that to as many countries as possible. There are still 1.1 million smokers in Scotland and 13,000 Scots die every single year as a direct result of smoking. Those are disturbing figures, but the tobacco industry encourages more young Scots to take up smoking through its advertising and, as Richard Simpson eloquently set out, in not-so-subtle ways involving display and packaging. The measures that we can take through the bill will save the lives of future generations from the scourge of tobacco. Point-of-sale displays have steadily become a loophole that tobacco companies exploit ruthlessly to advertise their lethal wares and maximise their profits. That is particularly evident when we consider the growth in the number and size of tobacco displays in many premises—for example, the use of clocks, back lighting, non-standard shelving and specially designed towers to highlight specific brands. As we heard from Richard Simpson, brand families are expanding to such a point that 300 brands are now on sale in the United Kingdom. Research shows that point-of-sale display has a direct impact on young people's smoking. In 2006, 46 per cent of UK teenagers were aware of tobacco displays and those professing an intention to smoke were far more likely to recall brands that they had seen at the point of sale. That is why, for example, BMA Scotland welcomes attempts to  crack down on the promotion of tobacco products to young people and believes that the measures included in the bill will help to make tobacco less accessible to young people and prevent illegal sales of tobacco. Research in Australia and the United States has shown that point-of-sale display normalises tobacco use for children and creates a perception that tobacco is easily obtainable and a social normality. Sadly, we heard Mary Scanlon, who has made so many positive contributions to health debates, almost support the status quo. She should reflect with her colleagues that the Tories were wrong when they opposed the smoking ban and they are wrong today to oppose the measures proposed in the bill. What Mary Scanlon did not point out about Saskatchewan was that measures applied there have had no impact on retailers, which have not had to close. It is sad that JTI and other tobacco companies are putting scaremongering adverts into magazines such as the one that I am holding up to warn retailers that their livelihoods will be threatened by the measures in this positive bill that will improve the health of the Scottish people. Jurisdictions that have enforced tobacco bans at the point of sale have seen a marked decrease in smoking prevalence among young people. As the BMA pointed out, there has been a marked decrease in Iceland, for example, from 17 per cent to 10 per cent in only five years. Recent research has shown that 13 per cent of 13-year-olds and 10 per cent of 15-year-olds purchase cigarettes illegally from vending machines. It is a disgrace that cigarette vending machines have been commonplace for so long and it is irresponsible to allow them when we would not allow vending machines that sold other deadly products such as knives or fireworks. It seems that a ban, which incidentally is supported by 56 per cent of the population, is the only way to curb such illegal purchases. Other systems such as tokens and proof-of-age cards have been found wanting and many youngsters have found it only too easy to cheat them. It is therefore essential that we follow many of our European neighbours. It is our moral duty to press forward with any and all measures that reduce the number of smokers and smoking-related deaths in Scotland. No one chooses to become addicted to smoking, but innocent and misguided experimentation is only a short step from an early grave. It is essential that we protect future generations so that the huge number of people who die every year from smoking is reduced in the future.

The First Minister will be aware that, over the past eight years, there have been 24 fires and leaks at the Hunterston nuclear power station in my constituency. The most recent incident happened in May, when 2,600 litres of low-level radioactive effluent was accidentally released into the Clyde. Does he share my concern about those incidents, the lack of public disclosure and the potential threat that the incidents pose to human health and the environment? Will he reassure my constituents that the Scottish Environment Protection Agency will work closely with HM nuclear installations inspectorate and British Energy to ensure that there are no further incidents at Hunterston?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

Presiding Officer, the matter does not involve primary legislation. Will you reflect on that when you consider the way in which the cabinet secretary made the announcement? The Scottish statutory instrument in question is no different from the hundreds of other SSIs that have been made each year over the past decade, not just in relation to education but in relation to local government, health, transport and every other devolved area. For example, in 2006—when Margaret Smith's party was part of the ruling  Labour-Liberal Administration—some 616 such SSIs were made, including: the Teachers' Superannuation (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2006 (SSI 2006/308); the Education (Student Loans) Amendment (Scotland) Regulations 2006 (SSI 2006/316); the Education (Assisted Places) (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 2006 (SSI 2006/317); and so on. The SSI in today's announcement is no different from those.

Does the cabinet secretary agree with Colin Borland of the Federation of Small Businesses? Referring to the small business bonus scheme, he said to the Finance Committee: "Recent FSB research shows that, for one in eight recipients, the scheme made the difference over the past 12 months between sinking and swimming. That is significant, particularly if it were to be extrapolated across the whole economy."—[ Official Report , Finance Committee , 5 May 2009; c 1180.]

Will the cabinet secretary confirm that it is vital to continue the scheme, and how much extra will he have to find next year to fund Angry Kerr's extortionate private finance initiative schemes?

I express my sadness, disappointment and anger at the forthcoming closures of the Diageo Port Dundas and Kilmarnock bottling plants. The closure of the latter will undoubtedly have a negative impact on many of my constituents and on Ayrshire as a whole. As every sensible person knows—many members have reiterated the point today—the closures are outwith the control of the Scottish Government. Diageo is a private company that has made a decision based purely on corporate gain. The Scottish Government may criticise such a decision, attempt to persuade Diageo that the plants should remain open and even produce alternative proposals, through the hard work of the task force and all those across the party divides who contributed to it, but there is nothing to stop Diageo moving any of its operations elsewhere. As Willie Coffey said, last year Diageo raked in more than £2 billion of profit during the worst recession in decades. As we have heard, such profits are due in no small part to one of its biggest-selling brands—Johnnie Walker—which is continuing to grow, and to the workforce that is dedicated to making it. However, Diageo is demanding even more. I have been disappointed by the speeches of some Conservative members, who have repeated the myth that the Kilmarnock plant is not cost effective or efficient. If the plant is not efficient, that can only be the fault of the company for failing to invest some of the huge profits that it has made over many years in continuing to stay ahead of the game. Given that Johnnie Walker is the world's best-selling whisky, I fail to see how the argument that the plant is inefficient and that Diageo must be competitive can be sustained. The jobs in Fife are welcome, but they offer little solace to the people of Ayrshire and Glasgow who are directly affected by the closures. Jobs losses will not be limited to direct employment: jobs in ancillary industries and in the wider economy, from retail to transport and recreation, will all be adversely affected. Three quarters of the job losses will be indirect, because every person who is directly employed in the whisky industry supports at least three other jobs.

The important point is that the bulk of the employment would have remained in Kilmarnock. I pay tribute to the task force for its hard work. It presented ideas that would have turned around the situation, to the ultimate advantage of both the company and the workforce. I agree fully with the many members who have said that Diageo must mitigate the closures' impact on the workforce. In contrast to Derek Brownlee or Iain McMillan of the Confederation of British Industry, I do not believe that a Scottish workforce fighting for its jobs discourages inward investment. A nation with a bit of smeddum is likely to be more dynamic and productive than one that meekly accepts whatever comes its way. I agree with Robert Brown that the likelihood of changing the minds of Paul Walsh and company may always have been small, but it was important that everyone did what they could to engage with the company. Unfortunately, as John Park highlighted, even from the beginning the company did not keep its workforce fully informed of its proposals, which is to be deeply regretted. For many years, Ayrshire has suffered economic decline relative to the wider Scottish economy. We have heard about pits in Fife, but pits in Ayrshire have also closed and much of the county's manufacturing has been lost in recent decades. To make Ayrshire more attractive to employers and to stimulate economic growth, we need to invest more in its infrastructure and skills. The Johnnie Walker closure will reverberate around the entire county. I am therefore pleased that the cabinet secretary will press Diageo to honour its obligations to the workforce. In his eulogy to Diageo, Ted Brocklebank did not mention its lack of real consultation of the workers concerning its intentions, which shows the lack of a moral dimension to the company's approach. I hope that it will learn from that. Ross Finnie again made a significant contribution, as he did in the members' business debate on the subject. Corporate greed, rather than competition, appears to have been Diageo's priority. Such decisions make it difficult for companies' supply chains and others to know where they are from year to year, as was highlighted by Rob Gibson. One might also argue that the company abandoning its Kilmarnock heritage could adversely impact on its profits, given the support from around the globe for the campaign against the closure. On 14 January last year the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism, Jim Mather, held an economic summit in North Ayrshire, which I helped to organise. I am sure, as Cathy Jamieson has said, that another summit—this time, a pan-  Ayrshire summit—is needed to examine how we can take the Ayrshire economy forward following the sad news.

I am aware that some of the minister's officials are in Dalry in my constituency today to discuss training requirements with DSM Nutritional  Products (UK), which is one of the largest private employers in North Ayrshire and which I visited with Mr Swinney. One of the most important economic development projects in North Ayrshire is, of course, the Dalry bypass, which is in the strategic transport projects review. Does the minister intend to move that project forward? Does he agree that investing in the bypass would have been much easier if Ms Oldfather and her colleagues had not voted to squander half a billion pounds on the Edinburgh trams project; if the Prime Minister had not reneged on the promise that he made at the Dunfermline West by-election to fund a new Forth bridge; or if this Parliament had been given the borrowing powers to enable investment in more large-scale infrastructure projects over a longer period of time?

The children's hearings system is unique to Scotland, combining justice and social welfare. It has proven to be extremely effective and something that we should cherish. However, as with many systems, when humans enter the equation, flaws can emerge. A prime example is the Miller case, which highlighted the need to provide children who met specific criteria with free legal aid. In 2002, that issue was dealt with by providing said legal aid. More recently, a similar issue was highlighted. It is surely a matter of natural justice that the most vulnerable people in our society should obtain free legal representation if it is difficult for them, perhaps because of mental incapacity, to fully or effectively participate in a children's hearing. There are two main reasons for that. The first is that, as outlined on the Scottish Government web page about the children's hearings system: "The participation of the child and family members (or 'relevant persons') in discussing the best course of action is seen as essential in allowing all issues bearing on the child's welfare to emerge and in enlisting the support of children and families for the measures decided upon." Surely denying free legal representation to relevant persons who are incapable of participating fully in a hearing would breach that fundamental aim of the hearings system. Secondly, by not providing free legal representation to the aforementioned relevant persons, the hearings system would be operating in direct contravention of the European convention on human rights, including, as we heard in the committee, article 6, on the right to a fair trial; article 8, on the right to respect for private and family life; and article 14, on the prohibition of discrimination. I am sure that members agree that denying human rights for a moment longer would be an insult to the proud tradition of Scots law and the hearings system itself. For those reasons, an extension of the 2002 rules should grant not only children but other relevant persons free legal representation should their individual circumstances merit it. I am aware of scepticism about this change in the hearings system, which we have heard about in some depth this afternoon, and which some argue is both legalistic and challenges the original ethos of the entire hearings system. In my view, such claims are wholly inaccurate. If a child or parent was able to obtain their own lawyer to represent them at a hearing, they could do so. There have always been lawyers in children's hearings.  Since 2002, there have been state-funded lawyers for some children at hearings, and research has shown that that has had no negative impact on the ethos of the robust children's hearings system, which is strong enough to accept a change that will impact on significantly less than 1 per cent of cases. Qualitative research notes that lawyers attending hearings respect its non-adversarial nature, while noting that panel chairs have the authority to insist that that ethos is protected. Furthermore, given that legal representation is already allowed where a parent, child or other relevant person can pay for it, refusing to provide free legal representation for those who genuinely require it but cannot afford it would, in effect, exclude Scotland's most vulnerable adults from fully and effectively participating in hearings and would lead to decisions affecting their families being made on the basis of affordability. Given that, by law, the issue had to be resolved as quickly as possible, adequate consultation took place with statutory consultees. In addition, I understand that Mr Ingram offered on no fewer than three occasions to meet members of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee to brief them. However, that was not communicated to members by the convener of the committee. The hearings system was operating in contravention of the ECHR, which could not continue. It was essential that we acted to address the problem. In doing so, we have also protected and enhanced the fundamental principles and original ethos of Scotland's unique and valued children's hearings system.

I congratulate David Stewart on securing this debate on an issue of great importance for many families throughout Scotland. As we have heard, type 1 diabetes is a particularly unpleasant, completely unpreventable, condition. Many sufferers are subject to symptoms such as extreme tiredness, anxiety, weight loss and persistent thirst, and life expectancy is reduced by 23 years, on average. Although the condition is not preventable, a strict regime that includes regular planned exercise, a carefully planned diet, regular blood glucose testing and multiple daily injections of insulin can allow sufferers to lead as normal a life as possible. I imagine that everyone here agrees that that cannot, by any stretch of the imagination, really be considered to be a normal lifestyle, however. Looking around the chamber, I am well aware that the vast majority of members do not have a carefully planned diet or take part in regular planned exercise—I certainly do not—never mind  devoting large portions of the day to regular blood testing and insulin injections. Colleagues will agree that any measures that can improve the standard and expectancy of life for type 1 diabetes sufferers in Scotland should be taken. It is vital that awareness and knowledge of insulin pump therapy is increased throughout Scotland. Jenny, aged 11, lives in Fairlie in my constituency. She is insulin-dependent type 1 and has been since the age of three. Jenny has been on a basal-bolus regime since she was seven, which involves an average of six injections a day. As members will appreciate, a child who lives with 2,000 injections a year would absolutely love to have an insulin pump, which requires only a set change every three or four days. While she was living in England, Jenny's parents asked her consultant whether she could have a pump. He said no. Because she co-operated with respect to her care and kept excellent control, she did not meet the criteria. That is equal to someone being told that it is only if they do not give a damn about their care and let the disease spiral out of control that they will be considered for the best type of treatment. Thankfully, Jenny has continued to co-operate on her care. She asked again this year about the possibility of a pump, at Crosshouse hospital. Again she was denied. She did not meet the criteria. That insult was compounded with the closing comment, "It's only a few injections," as if a child having six injections a day has no right to seek better alternatives. Not everyone who suffers from type 1 diabetes is eligible for the treatment, but the benefits for those who are eligible are dramatic. Although regular insulin injections work, it is difficult to achieve a perfect blood-glucose balance, which can lead to further health problems. Insulin pumps remove the element of chance by providing precise and adjustable dosing, which in turn leads to a greater quality of life and greater life expectancy. The number of patients who receive insulin pump therapy varies dramatically, as David Stewart pointed out. Like Cathy Jamieson, I am a member for the area that is covered by Ayrshire and Arran NHS Board which, as we have heard, provides pumps to—the figure is, frankly, embarrassing—0.1 per cent of patients. Only two people in the health board area receive insulin pump therapy. In Tayside NHS Board, the rate is 4.2 per cent. Funding for treatment is equally varied. Ayrshire and Arran NHS Board allocates funds for a mere three new pumps per year, Lothian NHS Board has a budget of £382,000 for insulin pump  therapy, and Dumfries and Galloway NHS Board and Highland NHS Board have no separate budgets for the therapy.

I am delighted to hear that. I was contacted by constituents about the issue only this week. If that redesign is taking place, I hope that people whose children need insulin pump therapy will be told about it and able to access the therapy as soon as possible. Funding is difficult to come by, of course, and the initial cost of insulin pump therapy is greater than the cost of treatment by multiple daily injections, but David Stewart elucidated well the point that embracing the technology is an investment in the health of our nation. Insulin pump therapy is a sensible and ultimately cost-effective method of treating sufferers.

I will finish on that point, then.

I am delighted that a referendum bill is included in the programme for government. As someone who will in two weeks' time have been a member of the SNP for 30 years—I joined when I was three—I am pleased that we are at last being given an opportunity to put the half-baked shambles of Calman behind us and present Scots with what could be a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity. The referendum bill will provide the framework for the conduct and mechanics of a fair and democratic referendum, which is a concept that seems to fill some Opposition members with dread, given their obvious hostility to giving the Scots a voice on a subject in which they have had no direct say in more than three centuries. In recent months, a load of nonsense has been talked by opponents of that democratic choice. We are told that it is the wrong time because of the recession, but why should Scots be denied a vote on their constitutional future just because of Labour's chronic mishandling of the UK economy? Those siren voices were hardly demanding a vote during times of growth, and no one seriously believes that there will ever be a right time for those who wish to hold Scotland back. Nevertheless, we will be more than pleased if Opposition members confirm their support for a referendum when Labour's recession ends. No? I didn't think so. Recession is just another excuse.

I am in two minds about whether to accept the member's intervention, given the convoluted diatribe that we heard this morning, but I will give him a chance, as he is the only Liberal who sat through all of this morning's deliberations.

People vote for political parties for a whole host of reasons. They do not vote for or against the SNP on that issue alone, as the member knows fine well. What are our opponents afraid of? They are afraid of defeat, obviously, and that Scots, who are fed up with being thirled to the union for so long, will do what so many other nations have done in recent decades and vote to take their—our—rightful place in the world of independent nations. Of course, campaigning for independence and a yes vote will not be easy. Opposition parties in Scotland, bankrolled from the south and backed by activists from across the border, will once again tell Scots that they are too poor, too wee and too stupid to do what people in other nations do as a matter of course: run their own country. Newspaper editors, who are taking orders from their overseas proprietors and mindful of the gongs, baubles and seats in the Lords that tantalisingly await those who devote themselves and their publications to the unionist cause, will trip over themselves to declare that civilisation will end if Scotland votes for independence and equality of status with other European nations. On polling day 2007, The Sun railed hysterically that Scotland would "Wake up to a living nightmare" if the SNP won the Holyrood election. That is pathetic. More recently, The Sun said that anyone who supported independence should be "locked in a lunatic asylum!" Ludicrous comments like that will no doubt be considered measured by the standards that we can expect during a referendum campaign. North and south of the border, business magnates and union barons from those establishment organisations, the Confederation of British Industry and the Trades Union Congress, will tell us of the abyss that awaits a Scotland that is free to steer its own course in the world. Indeed, a truly David-and-Goliath struggle awaits the SNP and those of other parties and none who see independence as the key to unlocking our nation's full economic, social and cultural potential. While the Opposition parties have only contempt for the Scots and wish to limit our horizons to a Parliament with fewer powers than the Tynwald, we in the SNP believe that our people will indeed vote for independence if they are given a chance. That will be despite the all-too-predictable scare stories, which will range from people losing their pensions to people being unable to visit their  granny in Newcastle or watch "Coronation Street"—all those stories undoubtedly lie ahead.

I yield to a "Coronation Street" watcher.

That will be a matter for future Parliaments and future referendums. My son will be 17 when the referendum is held. Is the member trying to say that, if this fails, never in my son's life will he be given the opportunity? The First Minister has said that the proposal would certainly not be brought back, I think, within a decade, but who knows what will happen in 20 or 30 years' time? However, we are campaigning for victory for independence and not for second best for Scotland—that is, if our people are given the opportunity. It is utterly shameful that Opposition politicians seek to deny that. As Labour and the Tories take their orders directly from their bosses in London and always put UK interests first, their stance is to be expected. The Liberal Democrats—who should be sued under the Trade Descriptions Act for having that as their party name, having abandoned liberalism yesterday and democracy today—have the most perfidious position of all. They oppose independence on behalf of some hazy form of federalism where Westminster still rules the roost. We accept that that is their view, albeit that we disagree with it, but to deny Scots the chance to have their say after three centuries when every single poll year in, year out makes it clear that there is a clear majority for a referendum regardless of how individuals would vote is, frankly, despicable. It shows Lib Dem principles to be not so much threadbare as absent. It is time for the Lib Dems and the other parties to reflect on their inflexible and undemocratic position and do what is right. Ministers have made it clear that the referendum question will ultimately be decided by the Parliament and that the proposed question will be fair and easy for voters to understand. The current economic climate only reinforces our conviction that independence provides the flexibility to respond in Scotland's best interests to the challenging economic circumstances.  Following the publication of the Calman commission's final report, the First Minister and the constitution minister Mike Russell stated that the Scottish Government was happy to consider any proposal for an additional question and that that would be discussed as the bill went through Parliament. Opposition parties, sadly, have not responded to that offer. It is time that they did.

I congratulate Willie Coffey on securing this valuable debate on an issue that is of great importance to people not only in Ayrshire and Glasgow but throughout Scotland. Willie Coffey  has been at the forefront of the campaign: he has lived, breathed and slept the Johnnie Walker fight for months now. I have been involved to a lesser degree as one of three MSPs—including Willie Coffey and John Scott—who, along with Des Browne MP, attended the petition launch on 3 July. I marched through Kilmarnock on 26 July with colleagues of all parties and helped to collect 1,358 signatures in North Ayrshire against the proposed closure. In Kilwinning, Largs and Saltcoats, folk queued up to support the Kilmarnock work force—not just locals, but lovers of Johnnie Walker from Canada, Australia, France and Luxembourg who were shocked at this turn of events. Scotland has a long and proud tradition of whisky production, which is envied and enjoyed the world over. The industry is synonymous with our nation, and its heritage and exceptional quality is second to none. Since 1933, whisky has been defined and protected by law, which emphasises that for whisky to be labelled Scotch whisky, it must be produced and matured in Scotland for at least three years. It has also been given European Union protected geographical indicator status, which assures consumers that what claims to be Scotch is the genuine article. That is the same status that is afforded to other world-famous produce, such as champagne and Aberdeen Angus beef. It is no coincidence that the maintenance of such strict guidelines, coupled with an adherence to traditional techniques and specialist knowledge, all of which ensure unparalleled quality and excellence, mean that Scotch whisky has consistently been one of our greatest and most successful exports, which now accounts for more than £4 billion annually. Scotch is regularly responsible for a quarter of all UK food and drink exports, and Johnnie Walker is the most successful of all. Why does Diageo, which is a company that made profits of more than £2 billion this year alone, wish to tamper with what is clearly—excuse the pun—a winning blend? The Scotch whisky industry has already lost nearly 1,400 jobs over the past decade. There have been knock-on effects for those who work in the industry—there are 41,000 in Scotland, of whom more than three quarters are employed indirectly. Further job cuts would have catastrophic effects not only for the industry but for Ayrshire—perhaps 3,000 jobs may be lost in the county—which already has an unemployment rate that is higher than the Scottish average. To allow the proposed closures to go ahead would be to betray a hard-working and committed  workforce that often includes more than one generation of the same family and that has made Johnnie Walker the highly profitable global brand that it is today. Every business must work hard to remain competitive; no business does that by forgetting its roots. Moving the bottling of Johnnie Walker from Kilmarnock would not only impact on the workers who were thrown on the scrapheap; it would have negative implications for the overall image of Scotch whisky, which in turn would be undesirable and self-defeating for Diageo. Although the carrot of 400 jobs in Leven has been dangled as part of a divide-and-rule strategy, it is scant consolation to the Kilmarnock, Hurlford and Port Dundas workers. There is an implied threat from Diageo that jobs could ultimately leave Scotland altogether. In previous years, whisky producers attempted to cut costs by bottling the produce abroad. Ultimately, exported produce became vulnerable to adulteration and contamination, not to mention competitors using the far superior Scottish produce to bulk up their local brew. Surely the prospect of sullying the name of Scotch whisky, which trades on its proud heritage, tradition, excellence and quality, is not a risk worth taking and it could only have negative repercussions for Diageo. Article 7(1) of the draft Scotch Whisky Regulations 2009 produced by the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, which are due to come into force on St Andrew's day, state: "A person must not label, package, sell, advertise or promote a drink in any other way that creates a likelihood of confusion on the part of the public as to whether the drink is Scotch whisky." Surely if malt whisky cannot be branded Scotch unless it is bottled in Scotland, the legislation should be extended to include all whisky that seeks to be labelled "Scotch". Finance secretary John Swinney has established a task force to build the case to reverse Diageo's proposals. The task now is to take the evidence received from the consultants to build an alternative proposition, which Scottish Enterprise will take forward for discussion with Diageo. The focus of that alternative will be to protect employment at Port Dundas, Kilmarnock or Hurlford, subject to rigorous preparation by Scottish Enterprise, which is working with trade unions and local authorities. Diageo must stick to its word and await the alternative business proposal to be put forward by the Scottish Government before it makes any decisions. I am hopeful that we can still persuade the company to work with us to secure a successful future for Ayrshire and Glasgow.

To ask the Scottish Executive what impact it considers the Tobacco and Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Bill will have on the number of children taking up smoking. (S3O-7526)

Is the minister aware that the number of cigarette brand variants has increased by 44 per cent since overt tobacco advertising was outlawed? Does she agree that that demonstrates that the tobacco industry will seize on any ambiguity that it can find in legislation? Can she assure the Parliament that regulations accompanying the bill regarding cigarette storage in shops will not leave loopholes for the tobacco industry to exploit in its continuing attempts to replace smokers who have passed away as a result of using tobacco products?

You talk about having stronger home rule, with which I think everyone in  the chamber agrees. Do you share my view that no powers should be returned to Westminster?

He is a Tory councillor.

I thank the Calman commission for preparing the Opposition parties' response to the SNP Government's national conversation. The commission's report outlines many potential adjustments to Scotland's current devolved state, many of which should be implemented without delay. The SNP's primary concern will always be that the Scottish Parliament should have the powers to meet the needs of the Scottish people. It will come as no surprise to members that I can see Scotland's potential as a nation and the overwhelming benefits that would come with independence. Our agenda has always been to deliver for Scotland. I regret that unionists appear to share that agenda only when they have been backed into a corner by electoral defeat and it is politically expedient to do so. None of us should pretend—as David Whitton did—that the Calman commission would have existed if there had been no SNP victory in 2007. Des Browne said that he saw no need whatever for a review of the Scotland Act 1998, and Gordon Brown supported that view. We now see more clearly than ever that only a vote for the SNP is a vote for positive constitutional change. On the subject of voting, it is curious that the unionist cabal that established the commission is reluctant to put the Calman recommendations to the people. It is entirely predictable that the unionist parties will oppose a referendum if it is proposed by the SNP, but why will they not seek the will of the people for their proposals? Do they fear that the people of Scotland will not rejoice as they sell our country short? What happened to the sovereignty of the Scottish people, the proclaimed DNA of the Scottish Constitutional Convention and the claim of right, which Nicol Stephen talked about? It has been suggested that the Calman report is bold and radical, but if anything it is rather timid  and represents a wasted opportunity. Heaven forbid that democracy should get in the way of plans to provide a sop to Scotland's ambitions. The fiscal proposals in Calman appeared in no party's manifesto and were opposed by Labour at the most recent election. The people of Scotland—not a commission, not Iain Gray's boss Jim Murphy, and not Westminster—should have the final say on constitutional change, but their voices will not be heard. Let the odds and ends be delivered today; let the people decide on greater autonomy tomorrow. I remind members that the Calman commission was initiated with a specific political agenda: the shackling of Scotland even more tightly to Westminster control, as David McLetchie made clear. Therefore, the commission's non-consensual recommendations should be subjected to due process. The proposals should be considered in a wider context of ideas, given that the commission admitted that it ignored a gamut of topics that it was not thought politically expedient to consider. It has been revealed that the so-called independent expert group was banned from speaking out on the proposals, to make the public think that the report is unanimous. On Friday, members of the group and local economists were permitted to speak out clearly on the ill effects of the fiscal proposals, which came as no surprise, given that the proposals were made with only Westminster's needs in mind. Members of the expert group have spoken out about political manoeuvring and lack of consideration behind the scenes. How could Scotland be accountable if a natural increase in tax revenue as a result of a well-managed economy would be taken back through a reduced block grant? What happened to Tory and Labour horror at the prospect of the tax man dealing with different tax regimes north and south of the border if a local income tax were to be introduced? It is interesting that there has been no mention of powers that Calman recommended be returned to Westminster, such as powers in relation to charity law—a proposal to which the voluntary sector and numerous organisations are utterly opposed. I hope that unionist politicians who speak in the debate will address that. We should accept the Calman proposals that would take Scotland forward, but not those that would take us backward. Why did former Labour ministers call the Calman proposals "incoherent"? Unionists claim that allowing Scotland to lower corporation tax would provide no net economic benefit. Is there no world outside the UK? Would not we benefit through additional investment from overseas?  Scotland deserves better. Such issues should be considered as part of a conversation in which varying points of view are heard, rather than masked, in order to block Scotland's ambitions.

If Pauline McNeill had been listening she would know that we accept proposals that would take Scotland forward, but also think that we can go much further. As well as the commission's seemingly predetermined fiscal recommendations, I note its implication that Scotland is uniquely incapable of managing an uneven oil-revenue stream, despite Norway having shown the way in that regard. The commission hand-picked figures from "Government Expenditure and Revenue in Scotland" reports to show years of budget deficits in Scotland, but I suspect that if the SNP was not riding high in the polls, the commission's analysis would have shown annual surpluses. The commission used deficit figures to justify the alleged benefits of the union, but the figures represent the failure of the union. If oil revenues are so unpredictable and inconsequential, why does Westminster's grasp tighten with each passing day? Page 262 of the report says: "depletion can be counterbalanced by investing sufficient revenues either in an investment vehicle such as an oil fund or in long term capital investments." Iain Gray grossly misrepresented that in his woeful speech. The report also says that "Substantive borrowing and investment powers could enable ... revenue variations to be mitigated." When will Westminster gain confidence in Scotland's people? I will answer the point that Robert Brown made in his intervention on Mike Russell. Despite having fewer than 200,000 souls between them, the Crown dependencies of the Isle of Man, and on Jersey, Guernsey and the other Channel Islands enjoy full fiscal autonomy, social security powers and control of their immigration and energy policies. According to the commission, managing all that is beyond the ability of Scots. Those islands are entirely self-supporting and receive no subsidies from the UK, although they total among them only the population of Aberdeen and lack the vast natural resources and industry that we enjoy. The SNP wants only equality for Scotland—the equality that other European nations take for granted—and not this dog's breakfast. Why do the commission's toffs and placemen and their  backers in Parliament have such a catastrophic lack of faith in the Scottish people that they offer us only crumbs from the table? The commission recommends retaining the Barnett formula until a needs-based formula is introduced. We have long proposed such a formula. However, Scotland needs no lessons in our dependence on the union. Scotland needs full fiscal autonomy as an independent state. Let the people decide.

Ooh.

I congratulate John Park on securing the debate and on his excellent opening speech. Today, we remember and celebrate Anne Frank's life and we welcome the establishment in 2008 of Anne Frank Scotland as the new education programme for the Anne Frank Trust UK. The altruistic work that the organisation carries out in Anne's memory is heartwarming, inspirational and poignant. The trust works under four clear and separate headings. The first is major public exhibitions. Its travelling exhibitions are a highly effective way of  drawing people to Anne Frank's story and the contemporary social issues that are connected with it. The second heading is schools and communities. Positive voices is a project that the trust launched in 2006 and that is designed to deliver Anne Frank's story to schools and youth clubs. It targets in particular communities that suffer from deep divisions, and its success in tackling those divisions has increased with each passing year. The third heading is work with offenders. The trust has visited more than 40 prisons in a little over five years. That work entails displaying exhibitions, running workshops and allowing the prisoners and staff to hear a Holocaust survivor tell his or her story. The final heading is awareness raising. The trust is committed to breathing life into Anne Frank's story so that her memory continues to flourish and keeps inspiring future generations. Undoubtedly the mission of the Anne Frank Trust UK is commendable and should be supported here in Scotland and throughout the United Kingdom. I will relay to members some of the comments that have been made regarding the positive voices project by quoting from a document that was given to members earlier. Iain Campbell, headteacher of St Margaret's primary school in Polmont, said: "As far as the exhibition is concerned ... this was a tremendous success for the school. The timing of the exhibition which coincided with parents' evenings allows us to open the event to the parent community who attended in force. The pupils who acted as guides came back to school on both evenings and really enjoyed showing parents around. These particular pupils not only gained considerable knowledge of the Anne Frank story but gained in personal and social skills by being guides. Five classes attended the exhibition and teachers felt that they gained a great deal from it which allowed further discussion in class. Parents who visited the exhibition spoke very positively of the experience and thought the guides had done an amazing job. One parent took time to write in to say how moved she had been and how important she felt the exhibition had been for the children reminding them of atrocities of the Second World War. I would like to thank you for this opportunity as I strongly believe we all gained a great deal from it." Anne Frank Scotland works closely with young people and delivers an important message about understanding positive citizenship and human rights, which undoubtedly provides a valuable service to Scotland and its citizens. Anne Frank Scotland has proved to be a tremendous success in Glasgow, Edinburgh and  Fife. One of the first major exhibitions that it undertook was a major, month-long workshop programme at Celtic Football Club's learning centre. More than 2,000 students took part in the project and developed a key understanding that every form of racism and discrimination is wrong and cannot be tolerated. Contemporary issues relating to those matters were also discussed. Proposed plans for the coming year include a month-long programme at Porthlethen library and Portlethen academy; maintaining the great work that is being carried out in Edinburgh, Fife and Glasgow, while simultaneously working harder in areas of higher need; and continuing to develop the role of Anne Frank ambassadors and seeking funding opportunities. I, for one, welcome and support the expansion of the programme throughout Scotland and fully expect the positive message to be embraced by all Scots. The centrepiece of Anne Frank Scotland and the Anne Frank Trust UK is the moving assortment of memorabilia entitled, "Anne Frank: A History for Today". The exhibition traces Anne's incredible life from her childhood to early teens, set against the background of the rise of Nazi power and the persecution of the Jewish people in the Holocaust. Implicit in the exhibition are the themes of racism, ethnic cleansing, genocide, bullying and anti-Semitism. The most powerful element of the exhibition is that it challenges viewers to look for ways to resolve differences without violence and to learn about human rights laws and standards, which are outlined by documents such as the United Nations' Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It challenges viewers to implement that understanding by taking an active role in their communities and in government. The exhibition is admirable and moving and I look forward to the Scottish Parliament hosting such an event. The Anne Frank declaration is a message of hope, truth and positive human endeavour. It is a most worthy document and I had no hesitation in signing it. I am confident that all colleagues feel the same way. Anne Frank graced this world with her presence for only 15 short years before dying of typhus in Bergen-Belsen. During her short life, she endured more traumatic experiences and harrowing journeys than any of us could possibly fathom, as did many other Jewish children during the war—more than 1 million of whom perished. After her family and the four others hiding with them were betrayed, they were sent to Auschwitz before being sent to Bergen-Belsen a few weeks later. Only Anne's father Otto survived the war. Her sister Margot, her mother Edith and the other four people who shared their Amsterdam hiding place for 25 months were murdered.  Anne Frank's diary has been translated into 67 languages and is now one of the world's most read books. She is remembered for her literary skills, courage and resilience. That is testament not only to her, but to the entire human race and the undeniable truths that out of the dark comes light, and that the human spirit can tolerate any evil that is thrust upon it.

To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to support the financial services industry in Scotland. (S3O-7365)

Does the cabinet secretary agree with the statement that was made by John Campbell, the chairman of Scottish Financial Enterprise, at the launch of FiSAB's annual report last week? He said: "we need to remind homegrown, City of London-based, and international companies of the benefits of choosing Scotland as a financial services centre from which to do business. We do, after all, continue to have many top-class companies within our industry, who are internationally acknowledged as such." Will the cabinet secretary comment on the recent merger between Clerical Medical and Scottish Widows, which kept the Scottish Widows name because market research found that "Scottish" was still a strong brand name among finance customers?

I welcome the cabinet secretary's statement—in particular, the announcement of extra support for new entrants. How many new entrants does he expect will benefit from the scheme over the next two years and to what extent will it help to revitalise Scotland's agricultural sector?

I congratulate Peter Peacock on securing this debate, which is on an issue in which I have long had an interest. I, too, had intended to lodge a motion on the subject, before Mr Peacock's covered it admirably. In children's books and commercial logos, bees are renowned stereotypically for their happy, human-like, smiling faces—they are an important part of children's literature and our culture. They are also fundamentally important to the Scottish environment and economy. The steady decline in bee populations is, therefore, of great concern to conservationists, field naturalists, farmers and gardeners. It is primarily a consequence of loss of extensive flower-rich habitats and fragmentation due to increasing intensification of land use for agriculture, forestry and development. As we have heard, the varroa mite makes bees more susceptible to deadly viruses and is now resistant to treatment. If bees become infected with the mite, it will kill 99 per cent of a colony within four years. Three British species of bumble-bee are now extinct, with a further nine species listed as endangered. As we have heard, at one time the great yellow bumble-bee was widespread across Britain. In the past 50 years, the population has declined by 95 per cent, and the species now resides only in the north and west of Scotland,  mainly in the Hebrides, Orkney, Sutherland and Caithness. Also of concern are neonicotinoid pesticides and climate change, both of which have been mentioned. As a result of their dependence on an abundance of diverse flora, bees are key indicators of the health of the environment. If there is a large bumble-bee population, it is highly probable that there will be significant populations of other wildlife. DEFRA recognises that "bees make an important contribution to the sustainability of the countryside, contributing both to agriculture and horticulture", not to mention biodiversity. Bees are crucial for pollinating vital crops. As we have heard, approximately 35 per cent of our diet depends on crops that are pollinated by bees. Furthermore, there are approximately 30 commercial bee farmers in Scotland whose business is completely dependent on the bee industry. I confess that I have often thought that I fancy being a bee farmer when I retire. The decline in honey-bee populations has not only resulted in a shortage of honey but jeopardised the pollination of commercial fruit and vegetables. The honey that bees produce not only is a healthy substitute for refined sugar but has antibiotic characteristics. A survey conducted last year by the British Beekeepers Association revealed that nearly one in three of the UK's 240,000 beehives did not survive the winter of 2007 and spring of 2008. BBKA president Tim Lovett expressed his deep concern at the 30 per cent death rate, which contrasts with the usual 5 to 10 per cent and will have a serious impact on the economy. It also places at further risk the Government's campaign for members of the public to consume five portions of fresh fruit and vegetables a day. The chief executive of the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council, Professor Douglas Kell, has warned: "Without effective pollination we will face higher food costs and potential shortages." The director of the Wellcome Trust, Sir Mark Walport, adds: "The devastating effect that this decline may have on our environment would almost certainly have a serious impact on our health and wellbeing." I fully support the announcement that the Scottish Government will contribute £500,000 to the UK Government's project to research and identify the prominent threats to bees and other insect pollinators. That funding will be available to researchers across the UK under the living with environmental change partnership, which involves the Scottish Government, the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council, DEFRA, the Natural Environment Research Council and  the Wellcome Trust. The project is undoubtedly critical and requires our support. In the words of Richard Lochhead MSP, the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment: "The impact these insects have on our rural industries, such as the soft fruit sector, and on plant biodiversity across Scotland cannot be under-estimated. Any reduction in numbers could have catastrophic consequences". I fully support the four strategic outcomes that are proposed in the honey-bee health strategy in Scotland, although I take on board John Scott's comments. I will not cite Albert Einstein's declaration, to which Peter Peacock has already referred. I will close with a reflection on Rupert Brooke's poem "The Old Vicarage, Grantchester", in which he asks: "Stands the Church clock at ten to three? And is there honey still for tea?" We must ensure that the answer to Brooke's poem is an emphatic yes.

Feartie.

Does the minister agree that the Calman commission, whose 15 members include six peers and three knights of the realm, is hardly a representative cross-section of Scottish society; that a commission that specifically excludes the noble aim of Scottish independence has damaged its democratic credentials; and that the national conversation is a more open and inclusive way of addressing Scotland's constitutional future?

As members are aware, Trinity Mirror management in London is seeking, in effect, to merge the Daily Record and the Sunday Mail , with the loss of a quarter or more of their journalistic workforce in Scotland. On 24 February, Trinity Mirror announced a 30-day consultation on up to 70 redundancies among editorial positions at the Daily Record and Sunday Mail  newspapers, with 60 people immediately affected. There are 276 editorial staff at the Daily Record , the Sunday Mail and their sister titles The Glaswegian and Business7 . Thirty-six people applied for voluntary redundancy and a further 24 were at risk of compulsory redundancy on 8 April. Others who may have been interested—particularly older, longer-serving employees—have been told that their pensions will be cut by between 30 and 50 per cent. One person who has been with the company for 48 years, man and boy, is expected to accept a 52 per cent cut in his pension. Such action can surely be considered not only reprehensible, but a breach of contract. The Daily Record and Sunday Mail are still highly profitable. Those iconic Scottish titles contributed greatly and disproportionately to the £145 million profits that Trinity Mirror enjoyed last year, being responsible for more than £23 million between them. There is, therefore, no pressing need for any redundancies, and one must conclude that the recession is being used as cover for far-reaching and unnecessary action by the company.  Such a drastic reduction in the number of journalists, with the loss of some of the newer members of staff who are the cheapest to sack—journalists who thought that they had a good career in front of them—can only be to the detriment of both titles, reducing their quality and circulation and, ultimately, their independence and sustainability, and diminishing their ability to cover important Scottish matters, including those that are debated here in the Scottish Parliament. I grew up with the Sunday Mail and, indeed, the Sunday Post , both of which are fundamental to Scotland's identity and culture. When I was a boy, my father faithfully bought the Daily Record and my mother bought the Sunday Mail . When my father passed away, my mother continued to buy the Sunday Mail but never the Record . Why? Because, although they are superficially similar in style, both papers are quite different, have different features and writers and focus on different issues. Although considerable overlap undoubtedly exists in readership, any thoughts that Trinity Mirror might have of creating synergies by effectively merging the titles is misplaced and is likely to lead to fewer and fewer readers, which will, in the long run, undermine their viability. Shoehorning the staff into one team, despite the different cultures, could also cause difficulties, at least in the short to medium-term. Management proposals include the introduction of a new editorial production system immediately following the redundancies. Of course, there has been only a minimum consultation period for the staff. The new software will require the greatly reduced number of staff members to undertake extensive training; that guarantees a major increase in stress levels, as we have seen following the introduction of similar models at The Herald , BBC Scotland and in regional and local newspapers. The National Union of Journalists submitted alternative proposals to management, which included savings through a reduction of around 50 posts—all by voluntary means—and suggested that it would co-operate with the introduction of the new system and negotiate over new shift patterns to meet production needs. The proposal would allow the company to review the situation once the system is up and running and seek further genuine redundancies that might be created by the supposed efficiencies of the new software. The NUJ chapel at the titles believe that this is a worthwhile and sensible compromise to avoid further industrial action and allow a partnership approach to the changes that are required by the business. However, nobody can possibly support the withdrawal of enhanced pension provision from some employees or the intransigent, bully-boy tactics of management.  The Scottish National Party stands fully behind the journalists of the Sunday Mail and Daily Record , and my colleague Sandra White and I addressed a public meeting of staff and journalists at the Broomielaw last Friday. On Saturday, the SNP's spring conference supported the journalists. In response, Jeremy Dear, the NUJ general secretary, said: "I thank the SNP, other Scottish politicians, the Scottish TUC and trade unionists across Britain and Ireland for the magnificent support they have already given to this dispute." The dispute, I should add, is unnecessary and has been brought about exclusively by management. The expressions of support for the staff seem almost to have fallen on deaf ears, with the company taking a hard line against its staff. Originally, it opposed arbitration and, after meeting the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service, it budged not one iota. That has forced an escalation of the dispute, with a 72-hour strike beginning at midnight. We are all aware that the newspaper industry must adapt to reflect the changing environment, as I said in my speech this morning. However, newspapers can survive in the long term only by investing in quality and staff, not by slashing costs and laying off employees whose hard work brings in the readers, the advertising and the profits. The Scottish Government has demonstrated its willingness to mediate. That was confirmed again this morning by Jim Mather—who held a newspaper summit in February at Glasgow Caledonian University, which brought together editors, owners, academics and trade unionists—and by Mike Russell in question time this afternoon. Paul Holleran, the Scotland organiser for the NUJ, who is with us in the gallery, told Westminster's Scottish Affairs Committee on 31 March that 250 journalistic jobs were lost last year in Scotland, with a further 190 being lost so far this year. Should the journalists lose this dispute, Scotland will be the poorer, with other companies taking it as a green light to impose ever more stringent cuts in staff numbers and to create poorer working conditions that will result in increased stress on the remaining workers. Journalism has a proud tradition in Scotland, providing desirable, well-paid jobs that make a significant contribution to the Scottish economy and a lively contribution to our culture and our politics. We in the SNP have never been big fans of the editorial policy of the Daily Record and the Sunday Mail , but we defend their right to have a view that digresses from ours. Government and Opposition should be kept under scrutiny by our  media, and influenced by them in taking up campaigns and raising important issues. The erosion of employment and autonomy is a deeply regrettable loss to Scotland and to the democratic process. Politicians can be held to account only by newspapers that have experienced and knowledgeable staff, who have the time to work on stories and to get to know politicians and what we do. Devaluing the quality of newspapers that are as significant to Scottish life and as important to our national fabric as the Daily Record and Sunday Mail will only diminish Scotland and all of us. I urge Trinity Mirror group to think again.

I am sure that the minister agrees that the compulsory redundancies that the Trinity Mirror group has imposed on Daily Record and Sunday Mail journalists are totally unacceptable. Will he and other ministers continue to press Trinity Mirror to negotiate with the National Union of Journalists to ensure an early resolution to the dispute?

I am surprised that the motion focuses so heavily on the Daily Record and the Sunday Mail , given that I have secured a members' business debate on the crisis at those newspapers for later today. However, I am pleased that the Opposition has chosen the subject for debate, given the lack of enthusiasm among Labour members of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee for my suggested review of the newspaper industry. The Scottish National Party stands fully behind the workers of both Newsquest and Trinity Mirror. Nevertheless, as I have only four minutes in which to speak now and given that my members' business debate will take place later today, I will focus on the wider issues relating to print media. We are all aware that the newspaper industry must adapt in order to reflect the changing social environment. However, newspapers can survive in the long term only by investing in quality and in staff, not by slashing costs and laying off workers. The circulation of many local and national newspapers is falling year on year yet, paradoxically, newspapers have never been so popular, especially among young people. The problem is that fewer news consumers are paying anything for the information that they obtain, as much of it comes from the web. Newspapers traditionally earn their revenue from three sources: news-stand sales, subscriptions and advertising. However, by putting all their eggs in the one basket of advertising, focusing particularly on web-based advertising that is unlikely to be profitable in the short to medium term, many publications have cut their own throats, especially in the current recession. In addition, traditional ads have tailed off due to the property and vehicle sectors being hit hardest by the credit crunch. A few newspapers currently charge for their online content, but it is possible to do so only if a publication has content of sufficient quality and interest to attract online subscribers who are willing to pay for what they read, whether through micro-payments—say, 5p for an article and 20p for a full day's edition—or by paying £4 for a month's web access. Such a system can be  used for every medium, from magazines to cookbooks, and offers increased revenue for traditional newspapers. The key to all of this is, obviously, good-quality journalism. The short-sighted, short-term approach of Newsquest and the Trinity Mirror group is ultimately self-defeating. The industry cannot be turned around by relentless cost cutting, by increasing the stress under which journalists work and by giving them an uncertain future. Where does the solution that I am suggesting work? Everywhere from Europe to Japan. The number of daily newspaper sales is higher in Japan than in the United States, which has almost three times Japan's population, despite similar levels of internet penetration. Innovation and journalistic quality and creativity are fundamental to the success in Japan. By March 2006, Rotterdam-based newspaper NRC Handelsblad , an old-fashioned afternoon daily, faced rapidly declining year-on-year sales. Rather than go under, it launched nrc.next —a flashy, vibrant morning edition of the afternoon newspaper's best content along with analysis and features written by young journalists and aimed at prosperous young readers. At €1 it is not cheap, but it looks and feels cool. Despite competing against four free dailies, it now sells 90,000 copies a day in Rotterdam—exceeding by 10,000 its launch target—and makes €3.3 million in profit on sales of €25 million. Last year, 60 of the United Kingdom's 1,300 local and regional newspapers went bust. What is the answer there? Ensuring that a newspaper that purports to represent a locality does just that. Such newspapers should be based in the communities, should not cover too wide an area and should keep their stories interesting and a must for local news. In my constituency, Arran, with a population of 5,000, has two weekly newspapers. The Arran Banner has an astonishing circulation of 3,500 copies on the island—the highest circulation per capita of any newspaper in the world—and The Arran Voice has a circulation of just under half that figure. Both newspapers are lively and completely different, addressing different sectors of the island's population. The Arran Voice , which was launched less than two years ago, stimulated The Arran Banner to improve its content dramatically. The Arran Banner subsequently invested in new technology and took on an extra journalist. Local newspapers are a vital community resource, and they allow many journalists and others in the industry their start. Print media journalism has a bright future in this country if it is allowed to be innovative and creative—and trusted to be so—by the newspaper proprietors.

It is a pleasure to follow such a positive and thoughtful speech from Robert Brown. Prevention—[ Interruption. ] Sorry, I was interrupted by Mr Rumbles, being rumbustious as usual. Prevention is better than cure, and it is essential that, rather than control problems after the fact, we use tools to stop lives being blighted by ASB in the first place. As Johann Lamont rightly said in June 2004: "If one confronts a problem in one's local community, one owes it to the community to implement solutions in a logical manner. One should examine the problems rather than address them from a pre-determined set of views that one brings to them. One should work with the local community to see what the solutions are."— [ Official Report , 10 March 2004; c 6455.]  The framework tries to do exactly that. In case anyone has got the wrong impression, enforcement powers in the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004 will be enhanced in the areas of premises, closure orders and vehicle seizure orders. We are building on the work of the 2004 act rather than detracting from it. As we have heard in previous debates, the SNP is recruiting more than 1,000 additional police officers in order to tackle antisocial behaviour directly. Labour promised no extra police in its manifesto, and it is the party, if any, that is the soft touch—if one wants to use that phraseology on law and order.

There was no mention in the Labour manifesto of any additional police; the manifesto made it clear that any additional expenditure would go on education. Mr Baker cannot have it all ways. The Tory line today is a slap in the face of the experts who drew up the strategy, including the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland, the Society of Local Authority Chief Executives and Senior Managers, Victim Support Scotland, the Crown Office and the Chief Fire Officers Association Scotland. The ASB framework recognises the fundamental problem of  prevention. The Tories failed to suggest any constructive alternatives, and I was disappointed that Bill Aitken's contribution was all rhetoric. I expected a lot more from him. Let us consider the people who support the framework. We have heard about Harry McGuigan, COSLA's spokesperson for community wellbeing and safety. He said: "I wholeheartedly endorse this new Antisocial Behaviour Framework—it's a valuable resource, which underpins a positive new approach, supported by successful practice from around Scotland and further afield." Labour MSPs might want to discuss that issue more with their council colleagues, given what seems to be a gulf in approach between them. Chief constable Norma Graham of ACPOS and Fife constabulary said: "I welcome this new Framework." She went on to say that its adoption "will help deliver long-term, sustainable solutions. Prevention rather than cure." David McKenna, chief executive of Victim Support Scotland, said: "We very much welcome this modern strategy towards better, safer communities throughout Scotland. Together, and it is together, we can rid Scotland of the blight of anti-social behaviour." David Hume, SOLACE community safety spokesperson and chief executive of Scottish Borders Council, said: "I am delighted to endorse this Antisocial Behaviour Framework ... The evolution of the Framework benefited hugely from the active contribution of practitioners, policy makers and experts working in the public, private, community and voluntary sectors." There is more, colleagues. Neil Turnbull of the Chief Fire Officers Association Scotland said: "The Chief Fire Officers Association (Scotland) are fully supportive of the Governments review of antisocial behaviour ... The inclusive nature of the consultation adopted in creating this new strategy ... will undoubtedly lead the way for other government and multi agency reviews in the future." Jim Sweeney, chief executive of YouthLink Scotland, said: "It is with pleasure that I endorse this new Antisocial Behaviour Framework." He went on to say that it "will help us reduce antisocial behaviour and counteract the demonisation of young people ... I commend this approach to you." Andrew Girvan of Action for Children Scotland said: "We welcome the publication of the Review of Anti Social Behaviour legislation. The review process has been inclusive, robust and evidence based. We fully support the  greater emphasis on approaches based on early intervention and prevention ... We also welcome the intention to ensure that when enforcement measures are used, support measures will also be put in place."

I realise that, in using these quotations, I might put some of my colleagues who follow me at a disadvantage, as they will not wish to repeat them all. The point of quoting those people is to emphasise that the framework is not just something that the Scottish Government has cobbled together—working with the Liberal Democrats or others. It represents the genuine view of many organisations that have to work at the coalface.

Before I let in Cathie Craigie, I will quote what she said in 2004: "The Communities Committee highlights the need for community involvement and discussion and sees mediation and youth work as being necessary options for communities. I agree totally with that, as do local authorities."— [ Official Report , 10 March 2004; c 6464.]

One might ask what the Labour-controlled North Lanarkshire Council is doing about it, but I will tell the Parliament about some of the things that the Government is doing: there is £11 million from the cashback for communities initiative; there is £1.6 million to support the community initiative to reduce violence, which will target 55 gangs that are prone to violence and knife crime in Glasgow's east end; and the Government is spending £120 million on tackling alcohol misuse. As we know, alcohol plays a significant role in violence in many of our communities.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I realise that you only came into the chair a few seconds ago. Question 10 was specifically about North Ayrshire and, although I had been waiting since 2.15 to ask a supplementary question, the Presiding Officer instead took a question from my colleague Mr Coffey, who does not represent North Ayrshire. When questions are asked about a specific area, is not it appropriate for members who represent that area to be given priority in asking supplementary questions, especially when that supplementary is to do with the member's constituency?

To ask the Scottish Government, in developing the details of the town centre regeneration fund, whether it will include plans to inform local communities about how they can apply for funding. (S3O-6423)

The minister will be aware that, from Whiting Bay to Wigtown and from Largs to Lerwick, the Tories have been encouraging people in every community in Scotland, big or small, to nominate their community for an award from the fund via a Tory party website. Does he agree that that is irresponsibly raising false expectations of what the scheme can deliver and that it will have no bearing on how funds can be distributed?

I, too, congratulate Bill Butler on securing the debate and Drumchapel table tennis club on its 20 th anniversary and its tremendous success over many years. I start on a somewhat sour note, because I take issue with Bill Butler's comments about the parliamentary team's performance. If I did not have a dodgy shoulder and had not hurt my leg a couple of days ago, I am sure that I would have delivered the decisive victory on behalf of my colleagues in the Scottish Parliament. I consider what happened this afternoon to be but a tactical setback, rather than the humiliation to which Bill Aitken referred. It is clear that Terry McLernon is the driving force behind the club. He told me something that is almost so obvious that it has probably escaped some members. Table tennis is a fantastic sport for Scotland because it can be played in all weathers—it is an indoor and inexpensive sport. One wonders why more people do not play table tennis. I am pretty sure that, with modest support—whether from the Scottish Government, local authorities or agencies—table tennis could and should take off much more in Scotland than it has in recent years. Of course, it is a growing sport. North Ayrshire has clubs in Beith and Dalry and, just a few short weeks ago, I took my two sons to a club in West Kilbride. I hope that the sport will develop and continue for the future. We have heard some of the reasons why that should happen. Table tennis gives young people a tremendous opportunity to engage with one another and with adults in a way that is positive for their health and their lifestyle. Frank McAveety touched on the intrinsic value of sport, which is an important point to develop. Sport has a value in itself—it is not just something that is done for other reasons.  Another great aspect of Mr McLernon's work is how he has encouraged other organisations, such as Drumchapel LIFE, Skyform, Glasgow City Council and Strathclyde Police to get behind the club. We look for that multi-agency and co-operative approach when we try to encourage clubs. As we saw today in room M1.22, a table tennis table can fit into one small corner. My two assistants—James Stewart from Millport and Katie Tanner from California—had a go at playing. Katie did pretty well, but she explained that she has a table tennis table in her house, which was somewhat cheating in comparison with the rest of us. However, she did California no harm as part of our effort. Although the Drumchapel table tennis club went easy on us, the club members are serious about their sport. They want not just to participate, but to bring back glory for themselves, their club, Glasgow and Scotland. I wish the club all the best for the future. It is a tremendous asset to Drumchapel and to Glasgow and it is the kind of organisation that we want to encourage for the future and the present. As Mr McAveety said, what matters is not just 2014, but the here and now and giving people something to indulge in and enjoy regularly. I thank Bill Butler again for his energy and enthusiasm in dragging us all down for this afternoon's table tennis and for making the debate happen. Of course, I also thank Terry McLernon and all the young people who are in the public gallery and who did so well this afternoon.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to encourage the deployment of junior doctors to work and train in Ayrshire and Arran. (S3O-6339)

I am sure that the cabinet secretary will accept that there are concerns that the Ayrshire and Arran area is not getting its fair share of junior doctors. The health board has raised its concerns about that directly with me. Perhaps the bright lights of Edinburgh and Glasgow attract more junior doctors than they should. Does the cabinet secretary agree that it is important, particularly for the development of specialist services in areas such as Ayrshire and Arran, that those areas not only get their fair share of junior doctors but get the cream of the crop on occasion, rather than those people always going to Glasgow and Lothian?

Zero. Zilch. Nil. Nada. That is the precise number of additional police officers that Labour promised in its 2007 manifesto. Indeed, the statistics that were released on 3 March on police officer quarterly strengths show that police numbers were in decline in the first two quarters of 2007, before we came into office. Despite that, we are on track to exceed our target of 1,000 extra police officers. If Labour did not promise a single extra police officer in its manifesto, why is it suddenly feigning interest? As we heard from the cabinet secretary, the SNP Government has also successfully dealt with the significantly higher than expected numbers of police officers who are leaving the force through retiral, resignation or ill health. Labour did nothing to prepare for that. Labour must apologise for misleading voters on police numbers. I am sorry that Mr Baker has decided that Labour will not do that today. He has consistently told voters that we have broken our manifesto pledge even though there is no evidence to back that up. Voters have been deliberately misled. It is great that Labour wants us to hold on to our manifesto commitments, although it is a shame that that does not apply to our commitment to an independence referendum.

The information that Mr MacAskill required was not available. It is available today, and Mr Baker has already heard it. As for the Liberal Democrats, in 1999, I asked the then Minister for Justice, Jim Wallace, what plans he had to increase the number of police officers. His response was that increasing the number of police officers does not reduce crime—a lawyer and politician who seemed to think that the police have no deterrent effect and do not reduce crime by catching criminals. We heard a rather bizarre intervention from Mr Rumbles, who said that the previous coalition introduced 138 officers to Grampian in eight years but that we are only introducing 98 officers in four years. Apart from the fact that on an annualised basis that represents more officers, the 98 officers will be in addition to the 138 that he mentioned. Mr Kelly made similar points in his speech. I say to him that the previous regime may have introduced 1,500 officers when it was in power, but we are adding to that. Labour and Liberal politicians seem to be unable to comprehend that. Of course, Labour did invest in additional police officers. I recall that, when Parliament met in Glasgow, Angus MacKay went on television to announce that £10 million had been found to fund 300 additional police officers. That was great news, but he did not say that in that year, non-domestic rates would for the first time be imposed on police buildings. The sum that was raised was £10 million a year. There were 16,234 police officers when we took office. As the cabinet secretary has made clear, an additional 441 officers are already in post. In one town—Largs—in my constituency, five additional police officers started on the beat in December. This year, they will provide 10,000 additional hours of policing for the people of Largs, which will help to reduce crime and the fear of crime. What would have happened if Labour was in power? We should consider what is happening south of the border, where police numbers are falling, as detailed in The Times on 24 February. Recorded crime in Scotland has fallen to a 25-year low, and violent and drug-related crime is already low. All eight Scottish police forces recorded less crime in our first year in power than in Labour's last year. Funding for the police is at record levels. In 2008-09, it will reach £1,082 million, increase to £1,115 million in 2009-10 and to £1,150 million the following year. Since we took office, Labour has repeatedly, and tediously, accused us of breaking our manifesto promise. If anything, ministers should be commended for their Stakhanovite overfulfilment on the four-year plan. That has come despite the necessity to find for police and  fire service pension commutations an extra £55 million that should have come through under Barnett consequentials. We have heard little from Labour politicians about that because they never want to criticise their bosses in London. The SNP met police pay in full. We gave them the full 2.5 per cent increase while the police down south got only 1.9 per cent. The feeble excuse from Labour's London bosses was that the measly £27 million that was involved would stoke inflation. How hollow that silly comment now sounds. It came from a United Kingdom Government that will put VAT up again by 2.5 per cent in January and which put 2p on fuel duty in December. Of course, Labour members will never give the SNP credit for anything. If we invented a cure for cancer and brought it to Parliament, their visceral hatred of the SNP and what we stand for, which is to give Scots more control over their own national life—shock horror!—their instinct would be to vote against it. I commend the cabinet secretary's amendment.

The minister talked about the need for quality broadcasting; Pauline McNeill and David Whitton talked about funding. Given that £180 million of the £320 million that is raised each year in Scotland from the licence fee heads south to subsidise BBC London, what discussions does the minister plan to have with the BBC and Lord Carter, to ensure that the bulk of that money is retained in Scotland, to boost production of more and better-quality programming and to support the establishment of a new £75 million digital TV channel?

It is desperate stuff from the Liberal Democrats this morning. They morph daily into the Scottish Socialist Party, demanding funds without any inkling of how much money would be required or where it would come from. I well recall that when the now ermine-clad Jim Wallace, a former leader of the Lib Dems, was questioned as to why his party broke its 1999 election pledge to abolish tuition fees, he replied that it was "just election rhetoric". The same party is now sanctimoniously lecturing us on student hardship, barely a month after abandoning its barking-mad plans to cut £800 million annually from the Scottish budget. That is frankly shameful.

On that point, why not?

We are already making progress. We have abolished the graduate endowment tax, which Margaret Smith voted to bring in. I dare say that she has had a conversion  on the road to Damascus in this session of Parliament, but it was her party, along with the Labour Party, that helped to bring in that tax. It is somewhat rich for the Tories to talk about hardship; they were the ones who brought in the loans that have caused so much hardship among many students. As we recall, the Tories fought three Scottish Parliament elections pledging to abolish tuition fees, before abandoning that pledge as soon as they had the opportunity. Labour, as so often, also has a brass neck. We have heard no apology whatsoever for the fact that Labour brought in the graduate endowment tax and tuition fees in the first place. I should focus my attention on Labour and the Conservatives, because I understand that the Liberals are going to offer us the possibility of a coalition in a couple of years. Perhaps we should be a lot nicer to them.

No, I do not think so either. The Lib Dems surrendered to Labour on the graduate endowment tax in exchange for a measly four of the 22 ministerial portfolios on offer at the time. They obviously forgot that it is normal for the smaller party in coalitions to have disproportionate weight, not the larger party. We have heard a lot about whether there is a shortage of discretionary funds, but the point that members must accept is that the SNP substantially increased the funding—to £16.1 million, which is an increase of 14.6 per cent, over two years.

I will be happy to take an intervention from Claire Baker in a second, but she and her colleagues should accept that one of the reasons for increased hardship in society is the mind-numbing incompetence of the United Kingdom Labour Government. It has caused many problems through its mismanagement of the economy and through the abolition of the 10p tax rate, which benefited students who worked part time.

Per capita, it is three times more than south of the border. In England, where the Labour Party has an overall majority, up-front student funding for new students is being cut in 2010, because of £200 million overspends. If Claire Baker's party had a majority in this  Parliament, I do not doubt for a single second that we would see exactly the same policies being enacted in Scotland. Of course, her party will never get an overall majority here. A headline on the front of Holyrood magazine says "Growing in Opposition"—shrinking, I would say. The Scottish Government has already abolished the graduate endowment tax, replaced loans for part-time students with grants, increased helper support for disabled students by 60 per cent, and trebled career development loans—

—from £1,200 to £3,600 per year. Presiding Officer, the previous speaker got five full minutes. I took two interventions, and got four minutes and two seconds.

Aye, thanks. With friends like you—

When I was at university, we did not have loans—we had grants. What happened to those grants? Who brought in the loans?

Will the member give way?

We said that we would deliver 1,000 extra police officers by the end of the parliamentary session and I expect us to do that. We have delivered 441 additional officers in less than two years, so there is no reason why we cannot reach 1,000. I am sure that the projection will show that we are on course to do that.

This somewhat sterile debate started with a dreary droning diatribe from Johann Lamont. From what we have just heard from Cathy Jamieson, it seems as though it will not get much better from the Labour benches. I turn to the smaller parties first. It is a wee bit rich of Murdo Fraser to talk about broken promises. I remember the first devolution referendum in 1979, when the proposal was passed by a small majority but defeated because of Labour's infamous 40 per cent rule. The Tory party promised to introduce a better devolution bill, but it completely reneged on that and, as a result, we had to wait 20 years for the establishment of the Parliament, which the Tories fought against. If we are talking about broken promises, that is a biggie. In the 18 years in which Murdo Fraser's party was in power, it de-industrialised the country. I worked in the steel industry, and when Labour came to power in 1974 there were 27,000 steel workers. By the time the Tories came in, the figure was down to 11,000, and by the time they left office, it was in the hundreds.

The last time I took an intervention from Lord Foulkes, he did not return the compliment when he spoke immediately after me, so I will certainly not take any interventions from him. I will take one from Mr Fraser.

We have a Labour Government in power in the UK. As we know, every Labour Government in history has increased unemployment and debt. It looks as though Gordon Brown's Government will follow the Labour tradition. If we wanted to consider what the Liberal Democrats have done in power—I mean real power, not jumping on Labour's coat tails, as they did for eight years—I am afraid that we would have to go back to the days of Lloyd George and Asquith. I do not want to go back that far. It is appalling for Cathy Jamieson to talk about the health service. She ignored the fact that, in Ayrshire, a £53 million hospital is to be built in Irvine to deliver new mental health services and that the budget is increasing from £497 million  when Labour was in power to £564.5 million. By my arithmetic, that is a 13 per cent increase in two years. Cathy Jamieson should also recall that Labour promised to spend any additional money on education, not on health, so she does not seem to know the content of her party's manifesto. The SNP will deliver 30 per cent higher expenditure on the central heating programme by the beginning of the next financial year and more than 400 extra police officers. Police officers in my area tell me that, when Labour left office, the training centre at Tulliallan was so run down that people could not get into it. It took some time to build it up again, but a couple of weeks ago about 70 probationers came out to my constituency to ride shotgun on the buses with senior officers because Tulliallan was packed with the number of trainees that we are putting through it. We will reach our target of 1,000 extra police officers. Members mentioned what Stirling Council and other councils are doing. We abolished ring fencing so that local councils can take their own decisions and, frankly, if Cathy Jamieson is unhappy with what local councils are doing, she should take that up with those councils. We have not introduced the proposal made by her party under its previous leader for a 3 per cent year-on-year cut in local government budgets; instead, we have allowed councils to reinvest savings. If anyone talks about the paucity of the settlement that the Scottish Government has delivered, they should think about what has come from Westminster. Let us consider how Labour did, not in the first two years of its term in office, but in four years. The Sunday Times published an analysis of Labour's broken promises in its first four years. The pledge to provide a nursery school place for all three and four-year olds and the promise to promote intervention on early years education to improve literacy and numeracy were not delivered. The recruitment of 1,000 additional teachers was not delivered. Every child in Scotland was to have access to an after-school club, but after four years fewer than one in 10 children could access a club. Labour was to halve the number of deaths from coronary heart disease and cut deaths from cancer by 20 per cent—again, that was not delivered. There was a promise to set and monitor targets to speed up treatment and shorten waiting times, but the waiting list increased by 10,000 and waiting times increased by 30 to 35 days. Labour pledged to free 60,000 children from poverty in its first term in office, but child poverty actually increased over the period to 310,000 children. Members will love this next broken promise as it is a classic: a continued fall in council taxes coupled with high standards of service. What actually happened, of course, was a 42 per cent  increase in four years. Labour promised to speed up the operation of the courts system, but the number of crimes and offences soared by 38,000 and the number of convictions plummeted by 29,000. Of course, we have all seen the chaos that has been delivered by the UK Government in the past couple of years as a result of the global recession that the UK played a major part in creating. I want to talk about the referendum. The Liberal Democrats want us to break a manifesto pledge on holding a referendum, which is an ironic call to make in a debate that is allegedly about breaking manifesto pledges. How bizarre is that? We all know about John Farquhar Munro's position on a referendum but, according to Richard Cook, the Tory candidate for the Westminster seat of East Renfrewshire, five Tory MSPs also support a referendum. Perhaps Murdo Fraser should take the shackles off those colleagues of his. We should have a referendum on independence—there is no reason why we cannot have one. Yesterday, we found time to debate the 200 th anniversary of Louis Braille—and why not? Yesterday also saw the Tories lodge a motion about a driving centre in Wishaw and Labour lodge one about raising money for sick kids in Edinburgh. Those are laudable topics, and we have plenty of time to debate them and similar issues, with a focus on the recession. There is no reason why we cannot have an independence referendum in order to deliver a better future for Scotland through its re-emergence as an independent sovereign state.

Will the member take an intervention?

Our coasts and seas provide food from fisheries, energy and mineral resources, routes and harbours for shipping, tourism and recreation opportunities and sites of cultural and historic interest, meeting many economic and social needs, particularly in rural and island areas. At the same time, they contain distinctive and important habitats and support diverse species that we need to protect, conserve and enhance. The sea is suffering. Human intervention in that vast ecosystem has led to devastating effects on the environment, and evidence of pollution and overexploitation abound. Fish that once seemed an inexhaustible resource are now in decline almost everywhere. Globally, 90 per cent of large predatory fish, such as tuna, swordfish and shark, have gone. In estuaries and coastal waters, 85 per cent of large whales and 60 per cent of small whales have disappeared. Many smaller fish species are also in decline. Indeed, most familiar sea creatures, from albatrosses to walruses and from seals to oysters, have suffered huge losses. All those losses happened fairly recently. Cod was caught off Nova Scotia for centuries, but its systematic slaughter began only after 1852, and its biomass is now 96 per cent depleted. The killing of turtles in the Caribbean started in the 1700s, and their numbers are down by 99 per cent. Shark hunting in the Gulf of Mexico, which began only in the 1950s, has depleted the number of sharks by 45 to 99 per cent, depending on variety. The marine bill will contain a section to reform the Conservation of Seals Act 1970, which is generally agreed to be ineffective and unenforceable. The shameful act of Jimmy Stewart, who clubbed 21 grey seal pups on Shetland, merely shows a blatant disregard for marine wildlife and maintaining the ecosystems of Scotland's oceans. Seals should have the same status as other piscivorous marine mammals such as otters, dolphins and porpoises. The UK Marine and Coastal Access Bill provides the tools that are needed to designate and protect a network of marine conservation zones. It places a duty on the UK to exercise powers to establish a network of sites to assist in the conservation or improvement of the marine environment. The Scottish equivalent is the marine protected area. The co-ordination of MCZs and MPAs between the Scottish Government and the Westminster Government will form an ecologically coherent network of protected sites. MPAs will enable better protection of the marine environment. They can be established for a multitude of reasons—for example, to protect a  certain species, to benefit fisheries management or to protect full ecosystems, rare habitats or nursing grounds for fish. They can even protect historical sites such as shipwrecks. In other countries, MPAs can be very large, such as the Great Barrier Reef, or very small, such as the Dry Tortugas in the Florida Keys. They can help to conserve the diversity of rare or threatened representative species and habitats, such as the rare fanshell and the ocean quahog clam and seagrass and maerl beds. No-take zones are MPAs with specific restrictions. In them, fishing is banned to allow ecosystem regeneration. NTZs enable the local ecosystem to recover from the effects of overfishing and other damaging activities such as scallop dredging. Scotland's first no-take zone was created in Lamlash Bay, on the Isle of Arran, in my constituency. There, scientists will investigate biodiversity and the benefits of leaving the seabed to regenerate naturally without disturbance. The Community of Arran Seabed Trust—COAST—worked for 13 years to build bridges between islanders, fishermen, Scottish Natural Heritage and the Scottish Government's marine directorate. COAST was formed to redress the dramatic collapse of marine life around Arran's shores and in the Firth of Clyde, drawing on positive examples of similar schemes from around the world, including those in the Isle of Man, Lundy island and New Zealand. The NTZ seemed a final step in that endeavour, and the cabinet secretary played a fundamental part in its delivery. However, there remain concerns that management of the NTZ and the MPAs will be in the hands of inshore fisheries groups, with conservation no longer at centre stage. I seek assurances from the minister that erosion of the conservation imperative will not happen. The Arran NTZ will have long-term benefits for marine wildlife, research and the tourism economy. Protected populations of commercial species such as lobsters and scallops will also help to replenish the stocks in surrounding areas, thus benefiting fishing communities. The inhabitants of small rural and island communities often depend on several sources of income to survive, and the level of income is generally much lower than in the cities. Few towns and villages depend wholly on fishing, but small, often single-handed, fishing businesses are part of the fabric of a local community. Although not exclusively, those businesses tend to be the creel boats and divers who collectively offer the most sustainable and environmentally friendly methods of fishing. With the strategic siting of no-take zones taking into account local knowledge, those fisheries will benefit from zoning.  Most of our understanding of the oceans and seas has been gathered during the past 50 years, and it is vital to include that knowledge and understanding in marine planning. In order to bring our systems up to date, the plans and frameworks should consider the welfare of both wild and farmed animals. The plans must also include no-take zones, highly protected marine areas and fishery protection zones, which include no-take zones. With 130,000 square miles of sea soon to be under Scottish control, there is room for a strong fishing industry and a number of strongly protected marine areas.

I congratulate Nanette Milne on securing the debate on a motion that has the support of some 28 members of different parties in the Parliament, which demonstrates people's concern about the issue. I also congratulate Roseanna Cunningham on her much-deserved elevation. There are approximately 8 million seabirds, of 25 species, in the United Kingdom. About half of them are in Scotland—indeed, for four species, some 95 per cent of the population of the British isles is in Scotland. Seabirds are a more significant issue in Scotland than they are in other parts of the British isles and Europe. The census figures for 1970 to 2000 seem to suggest that there is less cause for concern, because populations that fell between 1970 and the 1987 census bounced back, but, as Nanette Milne said, the decline since 2000 has been much more serious. There are several major factors in the decline. Food availability is clearly a major  influence on breeding performance, as Nanette Milne said eloquently, and it is affected by, for example, the commercial fishery and climatic fluctuations. Two thirds of seabirds in the North Sea in summer are thought to feed to some extent on fishery waste, and the abundance of commercial fishing discards has been linked to population change in some species. Of course, commercial fisheries—in particular the sand eel fishery—can have a substantial negative impact on food availability. Predation is an issue in areas where birds breed. Rats, feral cats and American mink can have a severe impact on breeding and adult survival. Over the years, many projects have attempted to eliminate rats and mink, and there have been attempts to cull or remove hedgehogs, which prey on eggs. Drowning in nets is also a problem. Monofilament drift nets, which are no longer really used, caused a big decline in auk species such as puffins in the 1980s. Chronic oil pollution and illegal discharges have a greater impact than occasional accidental spills, and pesticide residues and other toxic chemicals have been implicated in population crashes. Work that has been done throughout the world has shown that the plastic bags that are discarded by the billion are found in high levels in dead seabirds, including in Scotland. Culling, egg collection, hunting for feathers and sport also have an impact. We are not talking about just a Scottish problem. I lodged a motion on seabirds on 3 January 2008, not on Scottish seabirds but on the albatross, because 19 of the world's 22 albatross species are being driven to extinction, for example by long-line fishing, which is completely unnecessary. There has therefore been a severe impact on our seabirds across the world, but work is being done to try to improve the situation. For example, the sea eagle project, which is about returning our most magnificent bird of prey to our coasts, has had some success. As has been said, we must emphasise in the forthcoming marine bill the need to consider seabirds and try to ensure that a significant amount of the additional 130,000 square miles of sea area that we will have to look after is dedicated not just to fishing but to conservation. Climate change is of course a major issue. Everyone—from Scottish Natural Heritage to the RSPB—is concerned about changes to sea temperature and other issues that impact on biomass and zooplankton, which in turn impacts seriously on our seabird populations. We should remember that some species are more resilient than we perhaps imagine. For example, the significant long-term decline that we see in the  number of cliff-nesting birds is not always seen in species that nest elsewhere. I add my support to that of others for Nanette Milne's motion. I hope that minds are focused on what we can do to improve the life expectancy of our seabird population and the health of breeding populations so that the populations that we see now will exist for future generations.

To ask the First Minister what impact new United Kingdom visa rules for international students will have on Scotland's universities. (S3F-1449)

As the First Minister is aware, more than 58,000 overseas students study in Scotland. Based on the experience in the United States post-9/11, the Labour Government's plan to introduce new and incredibly complex visa rules could cost Scotland's universities up to £50 million a year, which is why Universities Scotland has expressed serious concerns. Does he agree with Universities Scotland that scaring away overseas students "with complex regulations would be madness for our economy and madness for our society", and that "With America opening its doors to students again, and many other countries stepping up recruitment strategies, this is the worst possible time to tie the hands of Scottish universities recruiting overseas"?

Hugh Henry, who is no longer in the chamber, spoke about the need for vision and originality without giving us any of either. This is not about reinventing the wheel; it is about learning from experience and successes elsewhere. Early years provision has, in the past, often been seen as almost a side issue in the push for increased labour-market participation. Early years education has been treated to mean expanding schooling to younger children through a formal curriculum that supports later learning. To begin education in a less formal sense, at a younger age, through creative play, is also vital. I am heartened by the number of members, including Robert Brown and Robin Harper, who touched on that point, as did the cabinet secretary. Unfortunately, the debate has been taken up by issues concerning Renfrewshire Council. I wonder whether the cabinet secretary can confirm whether what is being planned for Renfrewshire is similar to what already exists in North Ayrshire. The Minister for Children and Early Years has mentioned this, but I will reinforce the point: according to those plans, a headteacher of a primary school is also the headteacher of a nursery school.

I see the ministers nodding in assent. That policy is being delivered by Labour-controlled North Ayrshire Council, an area that I represent. I do not know why there is so much humbug on the issue.  At the heart of the framework is a desire for investment in early years to be focused on building success and reducing failure. That means a shift from intervening only when a crisis happens, to a policy of prevention and early intervention. Furthermore, it means providing a supportive environment for children and families and the earliest possible identification of any additional support that might be required. The framework empowers children and parents to succeed by building relationships between Government community groups to break the cycle of poverty. I was heartened to hear the cabinet secretary's remarks about maternal and foetal health during pregnancy, which we must also focus on. Last week, I attended the launch of a new breastfeeding initiative in Kilbirnie in my constituency, where only 7 per cent of mothers breastfeed. Any support that we can give to expectant mothers and women who have just had children is welcome. The early years framework provides an action plan for helping each child so that, as he or she grows, they can contribute back to the community. The chief executive of Children in Scotland, Dr Bronwen Cohen, supports the framework. She said: "Scotland's youngest citizens require everyone's support. With reprioritisation of resources, this new framework will offer an important opportunity to offer more effective help to Scotland's often hard pressed families and ensure we get it right for every child." Parents' interaction with children in the first year of life is critical in developing relationships and in laying the foundations for positive physical and mental health development. Effective engagement with parents is an important first step in addressing problems, but the parents who are most in need are often the least likely to access services. Children in homes with high levels of parental stress, neglect or abuse are more likely to have poor health outcomes, to be unemployed, to have criminal convictions and to have substance misuse problems by the time they reach adulthood. Improvement of the early years experiences of such children is crucial for improving child protection and reducing risks. Therefore, the early years must be a central element of the Scottish Government's strategy for regenerating communities, reducing crime, tackling substance misuse and improving employability. Investment in early years education has a positive impact on the entire community. The Nobel prize-winning economist James Heckman has set out an economic case showing that the rate of economic return on early years investment is significantly higher than that relating to any other stage of the education system. That  point was touched on by my colleague, Aileen Campbell. Indeed, I recall attending a crime prevention seminar in Edinburgh back in 1995—it was the day after Roseanna Cunningham was elected to Parliament for the first time—on a 25-year study of 30,000 children in Chicago that showed that, for every $1 spent on child care, $7 was saved subsequently on criminal justice matters. A successful school, pre-school and home environment is critical to enabling young people to reach their full potential. Key elements in delivering an economically successful, socially cohesive and—I dare say—happier Scotland are learning skills, wellbeing and equality. On that point, we have heard a lot from Labour members about what they allegedly achieved during all the years in which they were in power. However, I seem to recall that a United Nations report on children's wellbeing stated that, of the 21 countries that were examined, the quality of life that was enjoyed by Scotland's children came 21 st . That was after more than a decade of the Labour Party being in power, so Labour members seem to have been struck with a bit of selective amnesia. If children are educated in a way that empowers them to succeed, they will have a greater sense of wellbeing. Scotland's first skills strategy highlights that the early years of a child's life lay the foundations of skills for learning, life and work. Our investment in young people shows that the Government's true priorities are to improve the standard of living and quality of life for all. We have also heard talk about a reduction in the number of nursery schools. However, as I have mentioned on previous occasions—I should say that my wife is a teacher and a Glasgow City Council councillor—between 2004 and 2007, with Labour in power in Glasgow, Holyrood and Westminster, Glasgow City Council cut 64 teachers. Therefore, the Labour amendment is nothing but hypocrisy. Many actions have a local and national component for which input is required from a range of partners, including the Scottish Government, local authorities and community planning partners. The purpose must be to provide elements whereby communities can change deeply rooted philosophies rather than merely implement superficial programmes. Co-operation between Government and communities allows goals to be reached and success to be attained. The historic concordat enables the Scottish Government and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to work together with a variety of partners to develop the framework. That represents a new approach to developing policy in partnership and recognises that different areas  have different needs. That approach moves away from the previous centrally driven and inflexible approach, which did not deliver what was required. Local partners now have a great deal of flexibility in implementing the framework. The removal of ring-fenced budgets allows them to spend funds in ways that are more effective for individual communities. Expenditure on early years services is already significant: £300 million is spent on pre-primary education and child care, £700 million is spent on the early stages of primary education, and £350 million is spent on maternity services. When we add in all the other expenditure on health and social work services, at least £1.5 billion is currently being spent. It is important that that focus is maintained—

Ms Alexander sheds crocodile tears about the level of resources available to Renfrewshire Council to spend on education. In her now infamous hungry caterpillar speech, she deplored Scottish National Party targets on efficiency savings, claiming that the public sector—

—was fatter and should therefore slim down faster than the United Kingdom with its 3 per cent year-on-year cuts. What impact would such year-on-year cuts have on local government and education in our schools?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made regarding its commitment to provide humanitarian aid for the people of Gaza. (S3O-5829)

Does the minister agree that it is vital to ensure that such aid reaches those who are most desperately in need? Can she advise the chamber of the safeguards that are in place to ensure that that happens? What humanitarian assistance is the Scottish Government providing to other areas of conflict in the world at this time, such as the Congo and Sri Lanka?

It was good to hear so many consensual, or almost consensual, speeches following the cabinet secretary's speech, in which he discussed building on the secure foundations that the Scottish Government laid last year. I commend the UK Government for the additional £230 million that it will enable the Scottish Government to spend in the forthcoming financial year. We have concerns that that might be followed by £509 million in cuts in the following two years, but at least it will be good while it lasts. The move will mean additional money for housing and for tackling fuel poverty and that we will be able to do more for people who lose their jobs. We will also be able to invest more, particularly in infrastructure. I listened closely to Andy Kerr's speech and noticed that he wants the Scottish Government to take action similar to that being taken by the UK Government. We would like to do that, but I do not believe that we have the power to cut VAT or that we have control over interest rates. If we had the £2.5 billion borrowing consent that Northern Ireland has—even though it has barely a third of our population—we could go a long way further.

I accept the member's point, but he spoke specifically about taking action similar to that being taken by the UK Government. He also talked about in-year flexibility, which was an important point. I hope that Mr Kerr will support my view that the £1.22 billion that the Treasury is withholding from Scotland—not from the SNP Government—should be released. Part of that money is the threatened loss of £400 million of council tax benefit money if Scotland abolishes the unfair council tax, should the Parliament vote for it. That is the case despite post-devolution Treasury documents that state that the money—the Scottish block—is an integral part of Scotland's funding arrangements.  Also included in the figures is £120 million of Barnett consequentials from the £1.2 billion spend from the reserve on prisons south of the border. It is clear that increases in spending on prisons south of the border generate 100 per cent Barnett consequentials. Scotland has lost £342 million from its budget because of changes in the health baseline that the Chancellor of the Exchequer made when he introduced the comprehensive spending review. Some £184 million has been withdrawn from lottery funding for good causes to fund the London Olympics, and we have heard about the threatened loss of £165 million in Barnett consequentials because of London Olympic regeneration spending. There was also a loss from the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs of £8.1 million in compensation for farmers and crofters when Gordon Brown postponed the election in October 2007. There is potential for Scotland to obtain more resources so that we can deliver more effectively for the Scottish people. What can I say to comrade Brownlee except, "What a wonderful speech"? Let us be honest, though—what about that desperate load of nonsense from Jeremy Purvis? Frankly, it was utterly pathetic and dreadful. How can a party talk about cutting £800 million from the budget, which will cost thousands of jobs, without having the guts to say exactly where those cuts will be made, how many jobs they will impact on and how many people will lose their livelihoods? We have heard two Liberal speeches already, but I hope that Jeremy Purvis will address the key question today in his winding-up speech. We have heard whining, greeting and girning from the Liberals about wanting more money for the Borders, more money for housing, more money for this and more money for that. They want more money to be spent everywhere, but not only will they not say where it will come from, they want to cut £800 million. Then Jeremy Purvis says that the £230 million in additional resources will make only a 1 per cent difference. If he adds that to the £800 million that he wants to cut, it is £1 billion. With the Liberal Democrats, it is like going back in a time machine to 1970s students unions and listening to bearded sandal wearers debating. If they continue in that vein, they will go the same way as their Social Democratic Party allies of former years—into political oblivion. If people do not believe that, let us look at what happened last year in Glasgow East when Robert Brown said that they were Labour's main challenger: the Liberal Democrats won 4 per cent of the vote. In Glenrothes, they won 2.5 per cent of the vote—in a county where they have four of the 10 first-past-the-post Westminster and Scottish Parliament seats. In my constituency, in a council by-election  last December, they won 3 per cent of the vote, although it did not help that their candidate was photographed with his pet horse for his election leaflet. The Liberal Democrats still appear to be in the huff about not being in coalition government. Both the Labour Party and the SNP now know that we do not need them any more; we can have minority Administrations without the Liberal Democrats and their fantasy economic politics. They are in a moribund party that makes the days of Nicol Stephen and Ming Campbell look like halcyon days compared with the new era of Tavish Scott and Nick "Who?" Clegg. We have an opportunity today to move forward on a budget that will deliver—within our settlement—the best possible deal for the people of Scotland. We must approve it so that we can do that. We cannot possibly continue with nonsensical arguments about cutting budgets with no detail of where they should be cut, and I do not want to hear any more carping from the sidelines. The SNP, the Labour Party, the Greens and the Conservatives have big issues to debate and discuss. I would like the Liberals to get on board, but if they will not, perhaps they should stay silent instead of wearying us with a winding-up speech that will again seek—

Disband.

The Scottish Government's high ambitions for Scotland demonstrate our confidence in the talents and potential of Scotland's people. Scotland's education system is widely regarded as one of the best in the world, as was confirmed by the OECD in its report on Scottish education, which was published in 2007. However, there is a certain amount of blurring and overlap at some qualification levels, which everyone, including the OECD, agrees needs to be addressed. We must ensure that our qualifications system helps to deliver the values, purposes and principles of the curriculum for excellence. The qualifications for which young people aim should be flexible and should be designed to offer pathways to further or higher education, employment or training. The Government's consultation noted that in some schools there is an increasing trend towards offering intermediate qualifications instead of standard grades. In East Renfrewshire, as Kenneth Macintosh knows, standard grades were abolished some years ago. The approach stretched pupils and raised attainment levels. The OECD report, which we debated last year, showed that Scotland is outperformed on literacy only by Finland, Korea and Canada and on numeracy only by Finland, Korea and the Netherlands. On scientific literacy, only Finland, Korea and Japan do better than Scotland does. Scotland does consistently well on the OECD's programme for international student assessment, on the quality of head teachers and on our impressive system of near-universal, high-quality pre-school education. Our approach to teacher induction is also regarded as world class. Nevertheless, significant challenges remain. There is a wide achievement gap between pupils, which is strongly linked to socioeconomic status and inequalities in relation to participation in upper secondary school. Highers and advanced highers continue to be held in high esteem and a substantial majority of respondents to the consultation supported the retention of those qualifications. Last month, UCAS announced that from 2010 it will increase its tariff scores for Scottish qualifications that are gained by university applicants, which demonstrates the improved standing of our qualifications in comparison with other United Kingdom qualifications.  The new generation of qualifications that will be created as part of the curriculum for excellence will establish a coherent, flexible and enriched curriculum for everyone who is aged from three to 18. Standard and intermediate grades will be replaced by a single new qualification. In addition, baccalaureates in science and languages will be available for sixth-year pupils, so that pupils can receive a separate award for taking a cluster of subjects, which will encourage them to strive. Standard grade foundation level will be removed, because access 3 provides certification at level 3, and new awards in literacy and numeracy will be available. Increased flexibility will help to meet young people's needs and encourage pupils to bypass lower qualifications and sit highers from S4. Respondents to the consultation expressed concern about the timescale for the introduction of new and revised qualifications. Their concerns have been addressed by the announcement that a further year will be allowed for implementation, which will give teachers more opportunity to undertake high-quality preparatory work. Most respondents welcomed the proposals to reduce the complexity that currently exists at levels 4 and 5 and supported the suggestion that the new qualification should reflect the structure of intermediates and the inclusive approach to certification of standard grades. The new qualification will be unit based. Each unit will be assessed separately, and there will be an external examination. Short-term goals increase pupils' motivation by giving them more visible objectives and making learning more manageable. Almost all respondents welcomed the increased focus on literacy and numeracy and were in favour of introducing literacy and numeracy awards at levels 3 to 5. A majority thought that young people should be assessed for the awards at the end of S3. Universities Scotland welcomed the proposed updating of qualifications and said: "We believe that the inclusion of the values outlined in ... the academic curriculum will produce a better rounded student in the future. We also believe that the flexibility being introduced will work to the benefit of many young persons who may develop academic strengths at different points in their school or college career. We recognize that the existing Advanced Highers are well regarded at present and already include the values which the review is intended to embed in the system." The Association of Directors of Education in Scotland said that moves to simplify the assessment framework at S4 would be welcome. Skills Development Scotland said of the proposal to extend the period of study for highers and advanced highers:  "the greater the flexibility the greater the reach to engage learners. It also allows some time for reflection on learning ability and styles which can be critical in future learning and career decisions. This is in keeping with the spirit of Curriculum for Excellence and having a degree of personalisation which works at the pace of the learner." The Alliance of Sector Skills Councils believes that the proposals would offer "valuable flexibility", help to "stretch" pupils and provide an "opportunity for individual learners to progress and achieve at the pace that suits them." ADES has a "clear and consistent position" on the proposals and welcomes "the flexibility and the possibilities for personalisation" in planning that they offer. However, its view is that there would be "practical difficulties in implementing these proposals in the short term." The cabinet secretary has taken that view on board. The Federation of Small Business supports "greater flexibility in the examination process" and says that "There could also be benefits for employers in terms of hiring new employees ... through the academic year." Scotland's colleges support learners moving forward at their own pace and are "comfortable with the proposal for Highers to be taught over 12 or 18 or 24 months".  The Times Educational Supplement Scotland of Friday 2 January quotes Ronnie Smith, the general secretary of the EIS: "Mr Smith praised Education Secretary Fiona Hyslop for her 'commitment and leadership' in pushing ahead with the new curriculum, and also for reacting quickly to concerns and delaying implementation for a year. 'I think the level of engagement with stakeholders is very good,' he said. 'I think she's shown herself to be quite sensitive to some of the messages coming through.'" On the baccalaureate, David Cameron, the director of children's services at Stirling Council and chairman of ADES, said: "ADES is delighted that the Scottish Government is taking such a positive approach to ensure high level provision in, and hopefully, take-up for Sciences and Languages. We would be very interested in working with SQA and the Scottish Government to consider these proposals particularly as part of the wider discussions around Curriculum for Excellence." Professor Emeritus Richard Johnstone OBE from the University of Stirling said: "The Baccalaureates will be a great boost primarily for students in the upper secondary school but there is a good chance that students at earlier stages in their secondary education will also find the prospect attractive. The proposal gives students a great opportunity not just to  enhance their learning of particular languages but also to integrate their language-learning with the learning of other things which they have chosen to study." Dr Tom Shepherd, the chairman of the Scottish life sciences alliance, said: "The new Baccalaureate in Science is an exciting development that will raise the profile of science in schools, reflecting the key role of science in the future economic development of Scotland. This initiative will motivate and recognise the achievements of science students; it will foster the connections between different scientific disciplines, a key factor of modern applied science; and will ease the transition of students to the international opportunities that a science career can provide." I urge members to support the motion.

I congratulate Des McNulty on securing this fascinating and important debate. Sarah Boyack spoke about being contacted by local congregations: Fairlie parish church in my constituency has an eco-congregation, and this afternoon I received a signed petition from 47 parishioners urging me to participate in the debate. I am delighted to do so. Churches are at the heart of our communities, and it is vital that they play a role in protecting our planet from the potential ravages of climate change. The eco-congregation Scotland programme strives to help Christians find ways to protect the environment, and it focuses on helping Christians to spiritually align their beliefs with their actions while protecting the environment. An eco-congregation provides ideas that churches can use to reduce their own footprint, as well as finding ways to help the community reduce its impact and helping to make a difference in the ecological impact that is made by communities in the United Kingdom. In Scotland alone—as Des McNulty said—the eco-congregation programme includes 200 churches from nine denominations that are actively trying to reduce the negative impacts that our lifestyles can have on the environment. The organisation connects different congregations and different denominations with the shared goals of linking everyday environmental issues with Christian beliefs, taking action to reduce current ecological destruction, and changing the local and global community. Members who looked at the back of the chamber earlier will have seen the document "Africa - Up in smoke? The second report from the Working Group on Climate Change and Development", which has a foreword by Archbishop Desmond Tutu. The report points out that, although the west and the developed world are responsible for much of the ecological destruction related to carbon output, it is often poor countries, communities and societies such as those in Africa that bear the brunt of climate change. The eco-congregation programme provides a network for churches in the same communities to come together and agree on environmental issues. The building of communities that are  dedicated to protecting the environment is a big step forward in the movement towards a greener Scotland.

I agree. In fact, a number of members have made exactly that point. Conscientious communities can go a long way towards changing the indiscriminate and wasteful use of finite resources and disregard for the environment in general that exist in the world today. When a community becomes environmentally aware, more people take public transport, recycle and conserve energy, and the community becomes increasingly environmentally friendly. Small changes might not seem to make a difference, but if they are made in every community in Scotland, they cannot help but change our use of resources for the better and have a positive impact. I am pleased that Fairlie parish church received a second eco-congregation award this year. As Malcolm Chisholm pointed out, only six congregations have achieved a second award. The award was presented at a special eco-service in the church, during which a short Christian Aid film on climate change was shown and 27 signed postcards on the European Union climate change legislation were gathered to send to MEPs. The award recognises churches that integrate environmental issues with the practice of their religion and make a realistic impact on the environment. Fairlie parish church has done that by actively campaigning for beach clean-ups and recycling and contacting its elected representatives about forthcoming climate change legislation. In its efforts to protect the environment and leave a minimal carbon footprint, Fairlie parish church also helped its community to become the first Fairtrade village in Scotland. That parish is just one example of the positive impact that the eco-congregation programme can have on a community and the environment. As environmental issues are discussed openly throughout Scotland and beyond, better solutions to problems will be found, as will different and more varied sources of energy. The two issues go hand in hand. Some forms of fuel will become increasingly expensive as reserves dwindle. We continue to use fossil fuels rather than renewable  energy because it appears that a better, more practical and affordable solution is not available to us at the moment, particularly for transport. However, technical innovation coupled with the raised awareness in communities that the eco-congregation programme helps to bring about will help Scotland to find and implement realistic, affordable solutions to the energy and environmental problems that we face. Reducing carbon emissions will not only propel Scotland into more environmentally friendly sources of energy but move the whole country towards healthier lifestyles. Eco-congregation Scotland is helping not only to protect the environment but to create a better quality of life here in Scotland. It helps to develop camaraderie among congregations through efforts to protect our environment, and it will lead to much more fulfilling lives for all those involved.

I congratulate Marlyn Glen on securing this important debate, particularly at this time. HIV is truly global in scale. About 25 million people have died of the appalling disease HIV/AIDS since it was first discovered about a quarter of a century ago. Despite the discovery of antiretroviral drugs, many people still die of it, throughout the world. At the beginning of the epidemic, HIV was diagnosed in relatively few women and young girls. Today, more than a quarter of a century later, women account for more than half of all new HIV infections. Around the world, around 15.4 million women are living with HIV. The problem is  even more dire in sub-Saharan Africa, where nearly 60 per cent of people living with HIV are women. In some sub-Saharan countries, young women aged between 15 and 24 are more than three times as likely to be infected as young men of the same age. In many such cultures, women have no power to insist that their male partners use condoms during sex or remain sexually faithful. Abstinence is not a viable option for women who are married, who are at risk of sexual violence or who hope to become pregnant. As a result, a crucial strategy is the development of microbicides, which can prevent HIV transmission, but the terrible truth is that in the less developed parts of the globe being female and marrying poor are often the most significant risk factors in acquiring HIV. In India, a mostly Hindu society that for thousands of years considered one fifth of its members to be untouchable, discrimination and ignorance have a particularly unpleasant significance. Of the country's estimated 2.5 million cases, many are women who belong to several hereditary prostitute castes. Although some of those women are apparently not unhappy with their lot, many are wretched sex slaves who are pimped by their neighbours. AIDS haunts them all. In Karnataka there still exists the now illegal tradition of temple prostitution. In ancient times, its practitioners included the daughters of royalty, who were dedicated in childhood to service the devotees of the goddess Yellamma. The modern lot almost all belong to a single caste of illiterate dalits who are distinguishable from run-of-the-mill village prostitutes only by an early entry into their career and therefore a high probability that they will contract HIV. Nearly half of these so-called slaves of God are believed to be infected with the virus. India's regulations against sodomy and soliciting are another ugly local feature. By criminalising gay sex and prostitution, they have blocked many sincere efforts to quell the virus. In Bangalore, for example, one in five gay men has HIV and many are male prostitutes who are perpetually terrorised—and periodically raped—by the police. Of course, as Marlyn Glen said, many diseases such as malaria and tuberculosis are concomitant with HIV/AIDS. As TB is the most common serious opportunistic disease in people who live with HIV and remains a leading cause of death, including among those who have received antiretroviral treatment, an increasing awareness of TB/HIV is vital. We must support more evidence-based policies and activities to address such issues and address and increase understanding of barriers to implementing evidence-based policies, particularly in India and sub-Saharan Africa where, as I have mentioned, prejudice is very strong.  Back in the developed world, approximately 1 million people in the United Status have HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, but 250,000 of them do not know that they are infected. In September, the Centres for Disease Control and Prevention recommended that all Americans between 13 and 64 be routinely tested for HIV. Such tests would not be compulsory, but those who visited clinics would be tested if they did not refuse to be tested. As Marlyn Glen said, Scotland has its own problems. Although they are not on the vast scale of those that I have outlined in other countries, they are still very significant, particularly to the families who are affected. Given that as many as 40 per cent of gay and bisexual men who are HIV positive are unaware that they are infected, the Scottish Government has a role in ensuring that HIV awareness is raised and testing is increased. I have received the Scottish Government's report card from HIV Scotland—

I will conclude very soon, Presiding Officer. The report card shows that although the Government has done a lot of good public awareness work, a lot more needs to be done. It shines in its leadership—it gets an A-plus—but it gets a C-plus for education. We have much to do if we are to promote awareness in Scotland and do our bit in reducing HIV/AIDS across the globe.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it plans to extend the national concessionary fares scheme and to which groups. (S3O-5017)

Does the minister agree that the Scottish Government's clear intention via the review—to extend concessionary fares—should act as a signal to the Labour Party that it is time to stop frightening old people into believing that the national concessionary fares scheme is at risk?

I congratulate my colleague Stuart McMillan on securing the debate. As he said, last Friday, I was delighted to stand in for my colleague Stewart Maxwell and officially open a prestigious, new £600,000 state-of-the-art showroom for luxury boats at Largs yacht haven on the Clyde coast. Sadly, I was forced to drink a glass of champagne before being coerced into having my photo taken  with one Chick Young Esq. Nevertheless, it was a positive occasion. The purpose-built facility is owned by Euroyachts and is the first of its kind in the UK. It represents an optimistic outlook for the sport of sailing and the economic benefit that it generates in Scotland, even in these pessimistic and uncertain times. Euroyachts is a family-owned business that was set up by Ronnie Scott and continued by his children, Ilya and Angus. It has sold luxury boats throughout Europe for more than 50 years. The new facility demonstrates the company's confidence in the robustness of the leisure boat business. The company is excellent, renowned and forward-thinking and will go from strength to strength, creating and retaining local employment. Of course, Scotland attracts recreational sailors by providing some of the best and safest sailing in the world, and it is great to see the sport flourishing in such a high-profile way. Largs, in my constituency, has the largest marina north of the Solent, and it has been a flourishing yachting centre for many years. It also hosts the Scottish Sailing Institute. I am delighted about the rapidly growing Ardrossan marina, which could have up to 1,200 berths. I also have sportscotland national centre Cumbrae in my constituency, as well as various piers, jetties and facilities in Fairlie, Cumbrae and elsewhere. With the Clyde's natural assets and uniquely spectacular environment for recreational boating, sailing will continue to gain popularity. I would like to touch on one area that has not been mentioned but which should be. There is no doubt that Glasgow winning the 2014 Commonwealth games is hugely significant for the city and Scotland as a whole. It will allow Scotland to show the world how well equipped it is to host major international sporting events. That is why areas that are beyond Glasgow's boundaries are keen to participate in that exciting occasion and demonstrate their sporting facilities, which are complementary to those of Glasgow. The Scottish Sailing Institute and the sportscotland national centre Cumbrae are keen to host water-based exhibition events during the 2014 games, and I am glad that Stewart Maxwell, the Minister for Communities and Sport, is listening as I speak. The fact that those venues have already been considered as hosts of water-based events at the 2012 London Olympics is testament to their well-established international renown as first-class sporting centres that have hosted international competitions and regattas of the highest standard, which they will no doubt continue to do.  I am aware that Olympic events such as canoeing, kayaking, rowing and sailing will not be formally included in the 2014 games, nor will other recognised water-based sports, such as power boating, surfing and water skiing, but I believe that every consideration should be given to including water-based sports as exhibition events in 2014, as that would provide a great opportunity for the Commonwealth games to be innovative in its sporting choices and would allow Ayrshire to fully participate in games that are scheduled to be held just up the road. As members know, Ayrshire is famous not just for its excellent scenery but for its friendly people. Hosting exhibition events in Largs and Cumbrae would not only attract more participants, visitors and investment into Scotland but help to consolidate the games' legacy across the west of Scotland and into Ayrshire. Sailing should be at the heart of such games. We have a tremendous opportunity to do something that has never been done before at the Commonwealth games. Stuart McMillan rightly mentioned the income that sailing generates for Scotland. My proposal would be a tremendous boost for Scotland, and it should be given serious consideration.

I congratulate James Kelly on securing this important debate, and the Parkinson's Disease Society on the energetic and informative way in which it has lobbied members. It is important that all staff who work in hospitals and care homes have a better understanding of Parkinson's and of why the timing of drugs is crucial. In response to parliamentary questions that I asked earlier this year, the Scottish Government provided an estimate that between 5,100 and 15,350 people in Scotland may live with Parkinson's disease—about 10,000 is the likely figure. As yet, there is no cure for the disease. Those who live with it can only hope to control the symptoms through medication or therapy. Although the cause of Parkinson's is still unknown, we know that the degeneration of nerve cells in people with the disease contributes to a lack of dopamine, which is an essential hormone and neurotransmitter in the brain. The medication that Parkinson's sufferers take stimulates the production of dopamine, enabling the brain to connect the body's movements and carry out other functions. Because of the need for a fairly consistent level of dopamine in the brain, it is necessary for medication to be taken regularly. If medication is late, the brain may not have enough dopamine to carry out basic functions such as controlled movement, speaking or eating. The severity of the symptoms that arise from not taking or receiving medication on time depends on how advanced the disease is in the particular patient. Parkinson's is unlike other diseases with which there is the flexibility to take medication within a window of time. With Parkinson's, medication needs to be taken in a precise dose at a precise time. It is essential that people with Parkinson's who have to go into hospital can continue their strict treatment regime during that time even if they are suffering from concomitant illnesses. If nursing staff cannot provide Parkinson's patients with medication on a time schedule that is suited to the patient's needs, the hospital must make provision for patients to self medicate. Parkinson's can be managed only if medications are taken consistently. Parkinson's affects the brain, which leads to symptoms that are individual in presentation. Given the variety of symptoms that may be exhibited, people with the disease require different treatment regimes. As the Parkinson's Disease  Society has made clear in its get it on time campaign, it is essential that Parkinson's sufferers receive care that is specifically gauged to their individual treatment regime. Some people with Parkinson's are afraid to go into hospital when they are ill because of fears that their medication may not be provided or that they may not receive it properly. As Mr Kelly touched on, Parkinson's disease nurse specialists are the main source of support for people with Parkinson's. Nurse specialists provide clinical monitoring and can adjust prescriptions as Parkinson's progresses. However, Scotland does not have enough nurse specialists to enable those who live with Parkinson's to have one closely scrutinising their care. With the support of such a nurse specialist, people with Parkinson's have a guarantee that, if they are hospitalised, they will be given the proper medication, on time. They can rely on that if they have such specialist care. Unfortunately, my health board—NHS Ayrshire and Arran—has only one Parkinson's nurse specialist, Paula Hewat, who I understand does a sterling job. However, in the main, she works in the south of the county and not in my constituency of Cunninghame North. She cannot possibly cover all of the up to 700 patients in the health board area, not least because of the area's geography. Another specialist colleague is urgently required to meet the Parkinson's Disease Society's optimum ratio of 300 patients per specialist. Mr Kelly mentioned that in his speech. Unfortunately, Parkinson's disease nurse specialist Hewat's two-year contract is due to expire on 31 March 2009. If the patients in her care are not to suffer unnecessarily, her contract must be extended. Nurse specialists work with hospital staff to ensure that the needs of patients with Parkinson's disease are not overlooked. It is imperative that provisions to allow Parkinson's patients to self medicate while they are in hospital are implemented and that efforts are made urgently to provide more Parkinson's disease nurse specialists. In its get it on time campaign, the Parkinson's Disease Society is promoting education on the potentially severe consequences that result if people with Parkinson's do not receive their medication on time. As Mr Kelly said, the campaign also offers practical suggestions that range from pill timers and alarm clocks to more effective systems for hospital patients to use to alert staff. Parkinson's disease nurse specialists can be helpful in educating local hospitals and other nurses on the need for on-time medication. They can also provide the necessary follow-up to  ensure that Parkinson's sufferers get the care that they need and deserve. [ Applause. ]

I welcome the statement. As the cabinet secretary knows, concern has been expressed that people who live in remote and island communities have not benefited as they should have from previous schemes to cut fuel poverty. How will the new energy assistance package redress the balance to ensure that people who live in such communities maximise the support that is available to them?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Is it appropriate for a member who was not even here to listen to the statement to come in at the end, after the questions on the statement, and raise a point of order about the content of the statement?

To ask the Scottish Government how patients in Ayrshire and Arran will benefit from having a directly elected NHS board. (S3O-4738)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that democratically accountable health boards are fundamental to an effective health service and to delivering for patients? Will she confirm that had elected health boards been in place a couple of years ago, some unfortunate proposals, such as the suggested closure of vital accident and emergency units, would not have required her direct intervention?

I think that I said aggressive.

I thank the 30 members from all five political parties who signed the motion, which has enabled me to bring to the chamber an issue that has not had the attention it deserves. Most of all, I thank Lynette Findlay, Geraldine McDevitt, Esme Griffiths, Nurse Lindsay Clark—Scotland's only specialist lupus nurse—and Karen Allan and her colleagues in the Strathclyde lupus group, who are in the public gallery, for providing me with so much background information on the mysterious and complex auto-immune disease of lupus. "Lupus" is Latin for wolf. It is supposed that the disease was named lupus in the mid-19 th century because the commonly presenting facial rash and ulceration resemble a wolf bite. However, the rash is often butterfly shaped, so the disease's name might have as its basis "luoue", the French word for a butterfly-shaped mask that was worn at masked balls. Lupus can be fatal. Former First Minister Jack McConnell, who unfortunately cannot be here, reminded me that his friend Ali Abbasi died as a result of lupus. Lupus causes the immune system to turn against parts of the body that it is designed to protect. Its most common form is systemic lupus erythematosus—SLE. There is no cure, but lupus  can be treated effectively with drugs. Lupus is characterised by periods of illness that are known as flares and by periods of remission. Understanding how to prevent and treat flares helps sufferers to maintain better health. Many more women than men have lupus. It is difficult to estimate how many people in Scotland have lupus, because its symptoms vary widely and its onset is often hard to diagnose. Estimates range from 1,000 to 5,000. The cause is unknown: genetic, environmental and possibly hormonal factors are likely to combine to cause the disease. Each person with lupus has slightly different symptoms that can range from mild to severe and which might come and go over time. The symptoms include painful or swollen joints and muscle pain, fever, red rashes—commonly on the face—chest pain, hair loss, pale or purple fingers or toes, sun sensitivity, oedema in legs or around the eyes, mouth ulcers, swollen glands and extreme fatigue. New symptoms may appear years after the initial diagnosis, and different symptoms can occur at different times. In some people, only one part of the body, such as the skin or joints, is affected, while others experience symptoms in many parts of their bodies. Just how seriously an individual is affected varies from person to person. Systemic effects can impact on the kidneys, lungs, central nervous system, blood vessels, blood and heart. Diagnosing lupus can be difficult. It may take months or even years to piece together the symptoms. Geraldine, a lupus sufferer, told me: "I was diagnosed with SLE 20 months ago, but had a difficult route to diagnosis. I began with severe headaches, losing concentration and low mood. My GP suggested antidepressants and counselling (neither really helped). A few months later I developed a rash on my face and chest. My GP thought it might be acne and gave me antibiotics. The rash worsened and I developed severe night sweats, loss of appetite and fatigue. My GP then said it was Flu! I became increasingly ill, the roof of my mouth was full of ulcers and my GP thought it was shingles. A blood test showed I was anaemic, leucopoenic, thrombocytopoenic and my ESR was through the roof. I had a chest x ray to rule out TB. Circles appeared on my fingers and soles of my feet, my hair was thinning, I had swelling under my left arm, I slept all day and night and couldn't eat. Viral studies were carried out, I saw all the physicians and had no diagnosis, was reverse barrier nursed and put on IV antibiotics. A dermatologist looked at my rash, took more blood tests and a skin biopsy. Walking was difficult. SLE was eventually diagnosed. My diagnosis journey took eight months." That is a typical and painful story from someone who did not have a switched-on general practitioner who could pick up on basic indicators from examination or questioning and run blood tests before referring the case to a rheumatologist. Quick diagnosis and treatment can limit or stall the level of impact that the disease can have.  Esme, a constituent of mine, told me: "I am unable to plan too far ahead as I wake up in the morning in great pain, particularly in my joints, especially my hands (causing me great frustration as I am a keen embroiderer and handicrafts enthusiast—the pain and lack of feeling limits me sometimes for days from doing any of this type of work), and feet (I sometimes have difficulty in walking). Often my toes are numb but at the same time they cause me great pain. One point I want to make is that I am regularly told how well I look—the disease does not show itself like a broken arm! I am on constant medication, and will be for the rest of my life, there is a constant battle to balance my medication so that my liver and kidneys are able to function. I am pleased that this almost unheard of disease is being raised in the Scottish Parliament and only hope that NHS Scotland can channel more funding and research in to trying to find a cure." A correct diagnosis of lupus requires knowledge and awareness on the part of the doctor. Treatment is tailored to individual needs and may change over time, so it is important that patient and doctor work closely together and take an active role in managing the disease to prevent flares, treat them when they occur, minimise organ damage and reduce complications. Development and maintenance of a good family and community support system is also important. The prognosis is far brighter than it was even 20 years ago. It is possible to have lupus and remain active and involved with life, family and work. As research efforts unfold, there is hope for new treatments, improvements in quality of life and, ultimately, a way to prevent or cure the disease. Experience in patient assessment and management of their care is imperative, and because joint pain is so prevalent in SLE, interested rheumatologists are usually the medical staff who are involved in co-ordinating care and seeking assistance from relevant specialists as needs require. Recognising the need for services to go beyond the medical model, Lupus UK provided funding for a specialist nurse in 2006. This post, which is held by Lindsay Clark, provides support for patients in north Glasgow and Lanarkshire at Glasgow royal infirmary and Hairmyres hospital, providing clinical service support, undertaking assessment of patients' needs, implementing person-centred care plans and evaluating their impact. After feedback from lupus patients, carers and clinicians, the service has been developed to include a much-needed telephone advice line offering specialist advice. The sustainability of the post is cause for concern because current funding ends in March 2009, with recurring funding still to be secured. I believe that the Scottish Government should help to make the post sustainable, provide a similar post in the east of Scotland and look to develop a national centre of excellence in Scotland, like that of the St Thomas Lupus Trust in London.  Lupus has been greatly neglected in Scotland over many years, no doubt because of lack of understanding and because many lupus sufferers are perhaps reluctant to come forward and talk about their condition. We have an excellent opportunity here today to ensure that awareness of the disease is enhanced tremendously, and to move forward to provide better care and treatments for people with this awful disease.

I speak as a member of probably the world's most corrosive species: our own Homo sapiens, which originated in Africa and entered Scotland only in the past 10,000 years or so, after the ice finally melted. Indeed, if we go back far enough, every species currently in Scotland is invasive, so we are considering a matter of degree. I found the two previous speeches somewhat depressing. I do not agree with John Farquhar Munro that once man has exterminated a species it should not be reintroduced. There should be a balance between humanity and the natural world, and we should discuss the basis of that balance rather than allow one species to eliminate another and make the world a poorer place. We have heard about Japanese knotweed, which was introduced as an ornamental plant only to spread triffid-like across the land. It is a particularly nasty invader, which can reproduce from a sliver the size of a thumbnail. It has been suggested that the sap-sucking psyllid leaf louse—the bête noir of Japanese knotweed—be imported to deal with this pest, saving a fortune in potentially damaging weedkiller. If the Greens had bothered to show up for the debate, I am sure they would have told us how environmentally sensitive that would be. However, I believe that we should adopt a precautionary approach when we consider introducing yet more species into our environment. After peeking at my speech, my colleague Roseanna Cunningham plagiarised something that I was about to say about cane toads, but I will deal with the topic in more depth. Cane toads were introduced into many regions of the Pacific and Caribbean as a method of agricultural pest control. Their failure to eliminate the sugar cane grub in Australia was notable. From a mere six pairs, their numbers multiplied to some 200 million. When indigenous predators and predators that had been  introduced by Europeans in the previous two centuries, such as dogs and foxes, attacked the cane toads, they were killed by the toad's toxins. Ultimately, insecticides had to be used to control the grub, so although it might seem more environmentally sensitive to introduce one species to eliminate another, I caution that it can create greater difficulties and result, eventually, in weed killers having to be used. In my constituency, we have the mink, which is a semi-aquatic, carnivorous mammal. As Jamie McGrigor mentioned, mink were introduced for their fur, but have since escaped and caused devastation on Scotland's western seaboard. Action should be taken to further reduce the numbers of that non-native species; if possible, it should be eradicated. Mink prey on fish and other aquatic life, as well as small mammals, especially rabbits. Rabbits were introduced into this country only in historic times, during the Norman conquest of England, after which they migrated north. The framework that we are discussing is important, because there needs to be increased awareness and understanding of the risks and adverse effects that are associated with non-native invasive species. We must be more vigilant. There also needs to be a greater sense of shared responsibility on the part of Governments. In Scotland, there are 988 non-native species. The climate has reduced the number of such species here relative to the figure south of the border, where there are 2,271, but climate change might make Scotland more attractive, with the result that more non-native species move north, so continued vigilance is necessary. Butterflies, marine molluscs, migratory birds and plants are likely to be affected by climate change and impacted on by invasive species. The introduction of non-native invasive species causes great problems in our aquatic ecosystems, as Mr Hume described in great detail. It is not just a question of dealing with the sexier examples, such as mink; we need to deal with less distinctive species. The guiding principles of the Convention on Biological Diversity emphasise that preventative measures are better than cure. It is important that we detect non-native species early. I think that it was Peter Peacock who talked about America being careful about non-native apples. When I went to Australia, such was the fanaticism of the efforts to prevent yet more species from entering the country that I felt that if I had had explosives or heroin I would have been allowed to walk through customs, whereas if I had had a golden delicious I would immediately have been arrested and thrown to the ground. That shows how sensitive that country is to something that has the potential to  devastate its environment and economy. We should be equally vigilant here. Of course, there must be sufficient operational capacity and resources for the Scottish Government, working in partnership with the UK and other devolved Administrations, to ensure that we can identify invasive species and rationally assess the risk that they pose. Some of those species might be benign, but we must take a long-term view. A wide range of organisations are carrying out migration control work, which I trust will continue for the benefit of all.

The cabinet secretary recognises that a healthy distribution of supply teachers is essential to ensure that our schools can cope with almost any staffing issue, including illness, training needs, maternity leave and retirement. What is being done to ensure that there is a sufficient number of supply teachers in primary schools and across all subject areas in secondary schools throughout Scotland?

I whole-heartedly congratulate Michael McMahon on securing this important debate. Although heart failure is a common clinical syndrome, especially in elderly people, a diagnosis is often missed. A detailed clinical history is crucial and should address not just signs and symptoms of current heart failure but signs that point to a cause of heart failure, such as coronary artery disease, hypertension or valvular heart disease. It is estimated that heart failure affects 60,000 people in Scotland and that there are some 7,000 new cases each year. The syndrome is a frequent cause of hospitalisation among the elderly and is responsible for between 5 and 10 per cent of all hospital admissions. The clinical syndrome of heart failure manifests when cellular respiration becomes impaired because the heart cannot pump enough blood to support the metabolic demands of the body or when normal cellular respiration can be maintained only with an elevated left ventricular filling pressure. There are many approaches to the evaluation and medical treatment of heart failure. Treatment options include investigative drugs and devices, cardiac resynchronisation therapy using bi-ventricular pacemakers, implantable cardioverter defibrillators and cardiac transplantation. However, there are issues to do with palliative care, as Michael McMahon said. Heart failure produces greater suffering and is associated with a worse prognosis than is the case with many cancers, but patients with heart failure find that little time is given to considering their quality of life. Palliative care for heart disease sufferers is an essential element of a holistic approach. We need to ensure that patients with heart failure are treated no worse than, and are given the same priority as, patients with cancer. All patients with heart failure live with uncertainty and the possibility of sudden death. The opportunity to discuss such issues should be available at all stages of care. Communication  about heart failure can be even more complicated than communication about cancer, because most people with heart failure do not understand the causes or prognosis of the disease and rarely discuss end-of-life issues with their professional carers. Heart failure nurses need advanced communication skills training, because they have to communicate complex and distressing information. They also need the skill to judge how much information a patient wants and how to discuss sensitively end-of-life issues and patient care requirements. A study concluded: "Patients with cardiac failure rarely recalled being given any written information, had a poor understanding of their condition, and, in the absence of chest pain, did not connect symptoms like breathlessness and oedema to their heart." British and North American studies of patients with heart failure showed that patients' levels of psychological distress are comparable with those of patients with cancer. In one study, major depression was identified in 26 per cent of patients and minor depression in 32 per cent of patients. Another study showed that depression about heart failure was associated with a mortality rate that was two and a half times higher, and admission levels after one year that were three times higher, than was the case for patients who were not depressed. General practitioners, cardiologists and other physicians play an important role in the assessment of psychological needs and the referral of patients and carers. They also have an important role in the prescription of appropriate antidepressant measures. Palliative care involves the assessment of support needs of patients and carers, information for patients, co-ordination in and out of hours and across boundaries, basic levels of symptom control and open and sensitive communication. Patients with heart failure and their carers should have access to professionals in the heart failure team who have palliative care skills. Suboptimal care of the dying is thought to be due to the failure of staff to recognise or acknowledge impending death. It is also thought to be due to the lack of education and training on care of the dying. In heart failure, the dying phase is known to be difficult to recognise. In 2004, the World Health Organization published guidance on the expansion of palliative care services. In its report, the WHO said: "It is unrealistic to expect the wider emerging needs for palliative care to be met by expanding the workforce of specialists in palliative care. It is more likely that a solution will be found by expanding the knowledge and skills of health professionals generally." There is a role for specialist care. However, it is important that more professional health care  workers, social workers, benefits advisers and people who support carers should be able to provide sympathetic support to patients who suffer from heart failure, which will affect many people in Scotland in the months and years to come.

A fortnight ago, the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee took evidence from Blair Jenkins on the Scottish Broadcasting Commission's final report. I asked him whether it was the case that, given that a TV licence costs £139, some £320 million is raised annually in Scotland. He said that the figure is about £300 million and that BBC expenditure in Scotland is some £140 million. Thus, some £160 million or so in licence fees heads south every year to those subsidy junkies in London. Although no one would argue that every penny that is raised in Scotland should be spent in Scotland—at least, not under the current UK structure—there is clearly enough of a surplus for Scotland to get the £75 million or so that is required for a new Scottish channel. The Tory amendment is therefore somewhat spurious when it states: "further work needs to be done on a suitable funding model, which ensures a substantial private sector input so that the cost does not fall wholly on the taxpayer". Although I commend Ted Brocklebank for tilting at the windmill of a new commercial or hybrid channel, I doubt that the market could support it at a level that would ensure an enhanced quality of programming for Scotland.

What we want in Scotland is quality and not quantity. We have heard about places that have endless numbers of channels with poor quality programming, and we do not want that in Scotland. According to Mr Jenkins, the BBC employs perhaps 1,100 to 1,200 people in Scotland out of a UK total of perhaps 24,000 employees. The gap in expenditure in Scotland compared with the metropolis means that hundreds of Scots with talent, skills and ambitions have to either leave Scotland to fulfil those ambitions or stay at home and have them frustrated. Many of us—perhaps all of us—received a briefing from 29 media companies that includes a number of points that they wanted raised. They state: "the main priority for us is spend in and from Scotland." They also state: "We believe the Broadcasting Commission has laid the foundations for the recovery that our industry so badly needs." In evidence to the committee, Mr Jenkins said: "One consequence of the steep decline in network television production in Scotland in recent years is that a great many people have relocated—not just people on the creative side, such as directors and writers, but people with technical skills, such as those who work in post-production or make-up for drama. Understandably, people have moved to other parts of the UK where they can make a career and a living. We need to plug the gaps in traditional production skills."—[ Official Report , Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee , 24 September 2008; c 1468.] Mr Jenkins also pointed out, in paragraph 36 of the executive summary of the SBC's report: "The Commission has not heard a convincing explanation of why it should take as long as 8 years to achieve the goal of 8.6% of productions being commissioned from Scotland." I take on board what Margo MacDonald said about Scotland's cultural identity. The matter is not just about figures and statistics, but 8.6 per cent would certainly be a tremendous starting point. The report goes on to say that waiting until 2016 rather than 2012 represents "a deficit Scotland can no longer afford." Of course, £20 million a year is a start, but it should not be our destination. Certainly, 2016 is too far in the future, and waiting until then is not  acceptable. Channel 4 and Channel 5 chronically underspend in Scotland, possibly by as much as £50 million a year between them. As Mr Jenkins pointed out, there is no reason why a commitment cannot be made, at least by Channel 4, to close the gap by 2012. Pauline McNeill, who has clearly been got at by the Labour thought police, as her two varying articles in today's Scotsman show, quoted paragraph 5 of the report's executive summary, stating: "Scotland has undoubtedly benefited from being part of the overall broadcasting ecology of the UK". What she did not add, although it is stated in the same paragraph, is: "Scotland has always been rather marginalised within this generally successful UK framework and that needs to change." Pauline McNeill also stated in her second article in today's Scotsman : "Scottish audiences are able to watch some of the best television programmes in the world, from Life on Mars to Coronation Street and Channel 4 News . This is worth protecting". I agree, but I do not know what she is getting at. Perhaps the Labour spokesperson will confirm that when they sum up. Those programmes are not under threat. There is almost an implication that they would be under threat in an independent Scotland, but the United Kingdom broadcasts umpteen programmes to the United States and other countries and I do not believe that that would change if there was a constitutional change in the future. Of course, one would hope that dross such as "Big Brother" would become a thing of the past in an independent Scotland. As Mr Jenkins said in his report, "There are now global audiences awaiting those with global ambitions." Quality programmes made in Scotland are what we all want to see. In response to a question from me, Mr Jenkins added: "It is much easier to construct a model for broadcasting in an independent Scotland than it is to construct a model of devolved broadcasting that is fully consistent."—[ Official Report , Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee , 24 September 2008; c 1467.] I agree with that. However, regardless of the constitutional future, when it comes to broadcasting, the needs of the viewers, quality programmes and viewers' involvement in programmes and services will always be paramount.

Is locking up everyone who is caught on our streets with a knife a practical solution?

Does the minister share my concern that between 2004 and 2007, Labour-controlled Glasgow City Council—with Labour in control of the Scottish Parliament—cut 61 nursery teacher jobs in Glasgow? That was a reduction of more than 25 per cent, in a city that has the highest deprivation and the lowest educational attainment, and which spends a lower share of its budget on education than does any other local authority. Does that not show Labour's blatant disregard for the overwhelming educational research that shows that better outcomes are achieved by directing resources to early years education?

We see a total lack of alternatives in the woeful attempt at a motion from the Tories. They say that we need a reasoned debate, but where are their alternatives? We have Murdo Fraser, now champion of the students in Scotland. Perhaps he feels a bit guilty  because the Tories reneged on their eight-year policy of abolishing the graduate endowment tax. He also talked about the Federation of Student Nationalists: he might be thinking about his own radical student days, when he was a member of the smash the national health service wing of the Thatcherite Federation of Conservative Students. What has been disappointing about the Tory contributions so far is a total absence of any discussion about the impact on health of excessive drinking. Only recently, we saw the report that said that 2 litres more per head of pure alcohol is drunk in Scotland than in England, and for every extra litre there is a 30 per cent increase in the probability of liver disease. That is a major health problem that we have to deal with. I was surprised by Mr Lamont's speech. He spoke about the six-week Armadale trial but—funnily enough—did not mention the six-month Stenhousemuir trial, which produced much more detailed evidence, including evidence of a significant reduction in antisocial behaviour. One organisation that has not been quoted—I thank Gail Grant of the British Medical Association for providing this information, which I understand was sent to all MSPs—is the BMA. BMA Scotland's briefing states: "In the BMA's survey of members, 97% of doctors said that stricter enforcement of age restrictions, particularly for off sales, was an important factor in reducing drinking amongst young Scots." The briefing also points out: "A 2003 survey published by the Scottish Executive found that 49% of 15 year olds reported buying alcohol for their own consumption. Indeed, most purchases made by people over 18 for underage drinkers are reported to be made by those aged 18-21." On many occasions, the 18 to 21-year-olds are fuelling the underage drinking culture that besets our nation.

I do not accept that that will make a significant culture change, but I believe that the current law should be enforced. We should consider how likely it is that people will pretend that they are a given age. It is much easier for 17-year-olds to pretend that they are 18 or 19 than it is for 20-year-olds to pretend that they are 22 or 23. I believe that a three-year shift in the age limit will make a significant difference to the amount of alcohol that is sold to young people.

If people do not believe me, they should look at what happened in the United States of America. During the Vietnam war, the fact that young men going off to fight could not buy a drink was used—as the Tories have used it today—as an argument to reduce the age for drinking in several US states. Within a decade, many states had to raise the age to 21 again because the change had resulted in more antisocial behaviour on the streets of US cities and a significant increase in the number of people who were killed in car accidents. Since America raised the drinking age to 21 again, there has been a significant reduction in alcohol abuse. People should understand that drinking patterns for life are set very young. If people cannot get alcohol at a young age, they are less likely to develop alcoholism. We need to consider that 6,500 young Scots under the age of 18 are hospitalised each year because of drinking. Indeed, in the previous debate, Jamie Stone mentioned that his son had been a victim of that. We are trying to do something positive. We are not doing this for populism—like the Tories, who are languishing at the bottom of the polls—but to try to improve the health of the people of Scotland.

We want to reduce antisocial behaviour in our communities. We want to allow 18 to 21-year-olds, who are often the victims of—

I welcome whole-heartedly the minister's statement and the two visits that he has made to my constituency to discuss the inquiry with local people. Does he agree that the exclusion of Arran and the Cumbraes in my constituency when the crofting counties were established has brought about an unfortunate anomaly? When will the Scottish Government right that historic wrong?

I, too, congratulate Murdo Fraser on securing this interesting and important debate. The "Scottish Red Squirrel Action Plan 2006-2011" was produced in 2006 by a working group that comprised SNH, Forestry Commission Scotland and the Scottish Executive. The previous Administration and the current Administration have addressed an important issue. The grey squirrel is not the only invasive species. Japanese knotweed, mink, and hedgehogs in the Western Isles are all invasive species, but of course humans are the most significant invasive species and our impact on the environment has been greater than that of all other species combined. We know that there might be 160,000 red squirrels. There might be as many as 50 million to 60 million grey squirrels in the British Isles, so it is unrealistic to consider eradicating the species. It would be unrealistic to attempt eradication even in Scotland, given that grey squirrels could simply move over the border while people's guards were down. A better approach is to dedicate to the red squirrel specific areas, which I hope could be controlled by buffer zones of about 3km. That was suggested in the action plan. I do not have memories of red squirrels from when I was a boy, because I am a lot younger than most members. However, there are a number of red squirrels in my constituency. On the island of Arran there are no grey squirrels and there is a healthy population of reds. I hope that if the pressure on red squirrels south of the border continues in future years, a reservoir of red squirrels could perhaps be used to repopulate some of the rural areas. As members have mentioned, some species that were formerly extinct in Scotland have been reintroduced: the osprey in the 1970s and, more recently, the sea eagle and the European elk. There may be an opportunity to do that in the future. We must preserve not only the red squirrel, but the biodiversity within the species itself. It is not only the grey squirrel that is undermining the red squirrel, but habitat destruction and fragmentation of population, which must be addressed. Priority woodlands, stronghold sites and islands are the best places in which species can thrive, with the caveats that I mentioned in relation to biological diversity.  Immunocontraception is an excellent idea. Many years ago, it was used in Venice as a way to try to control the pigeon population. The fruit fly, drosophila, was controlled in Florida by the same method. There, it was done by releasing vast numbers of sterile drosophila, which is slightly different from the proposal here, but within a year that parasite had been virtually wiped out. Support is needed from the Scottish Government, and that has to be embedded. We do not want something that might be neglected by a future Administration in five or 10 years' time. We do not want to save the red squirrel for 50 years, only for it to become extinct in 100 years. We have to consider how we deal with the issue, not just in the short and medium term, but in the future. Many years ago, I made my first visit to the wildlife park at Aviemore, which is a reservoir of species that used to inhabit Scotland, such as the bear, the wolf, and Przewalski's horse, which is now very rare indeed. I hope that we do not have to add the red squirrel to that menagerie in future years.

I, too, welcome the GP extended hours scheme but I have concerns about how it operates. A health centre in my constituency is open by only an extra 50 minutes a week. Although it sees patients during that time, it does no screening, it does not issue repeat prescriptions and it does not even allow people to make appointments. The Scottish Government's payment of about £2.95 per patient per year is a considerable sum for less than one hour's extra consultation a week. Are we sure that we are getting value for money from the scheme? If not, what can we do to ensure not only that we get value for money but that patients get the service they need and deserve?

I, too, commend my colleague Keith Brown for securing the debate. I am pleased about the formation of a cross-party group on veterans. I, too, will be a member and will attend the inaugural meeting next week. Scotland has a long and proud military history, and the names of Scotland's historic regiments are known around the world: our soldiers, sailors, airmen and airwomen have served with great distinction and honour. Over many centuries a disproportionate number of Scots has served in the British armed forces. However, at a time when UK armed forces are engaged in combat operations in Iraq and Afghanistan, and are deployed in various peace missions around the globe from Serbia to the Falklands, there is a need to look again at the services that are provided for our personnel when they are stationed in Scotland and are accessing public services for which the Scottish Government and local authorities have responsibility. When brave men and women leave the armed forces and settle in Scotland, they should be able to access services that are adaptable and responsive and that meet their needs. The health and wellbeing of all Scotland's people is, of course, a priority. However, for certain groups and individuals in society, there are significant barriers to achieving that. For some people who leave the armed forces, health issues can take many years to become manifest and, as has been touched on, may not be obviously linked to their period of service. I am pleased that the Scottish Government extended its priority treatment scheme to all veterans, including reservists, as of 29 February this year, which means that any veteran who needs treatment as a consequence of his or her  service is entitled, based on clinical need, to priority treatment in the NHS. That goes beyond what is available in England, where reservists are not entitled to priority treatment. A partnership of the MOD, Lothian NHS Board and veterans organisations, including Combat Stress, is undertaking a pilot project to provide services for veterans who experience mental ill health. Service personnel and their families should retain their existing position on the pathway of care when they are obliged to move in Scotland. In addition, we must ensure that veterans who lose limbs on active service receive from NHS Scotland state-of-the-art prosthetics similar to those that are issued by the MOD's defence medical services. To ensure that the armed forces are given fair treatment, the Scottish Government will give them priority access, alongside tenants of social rented housing, to shared equity schemes under the low-cost initiative for first-time buyers—LIFT. That measure will assist in retention of serving forces personnel by allowing them to get a foot on the housing ladder, where that is sustainable for them. People who leave the armed forces can be vulnerable to homelessness, particularly when they leave in a relatively unplanned way or have little prior experience of being responsible for their own home. I am pleased that Scottish homelessness legislation ensures that applicants who are vulnerable because they have left the forces will be treated as having a priority need for accommodation. Current arrangements in Scotland for assessing entitlement for grants for adaptations already disregard all war pensions and associated mobility supplements when testing the resources of grant applicants. However, account is taken of income from savings that could include compensation in the form of lump-sum payments, although the payments themselves would be disregarded. The Scottish Government is consulting on proposals to abolish the test of resources and award a grant at a minimum rate of 80 per cent, rising to 100 per cent for applicants in receipt of particular income replacement benefits. I welcome that. Local authorities will have discretion to increase the grant award to above 80 per cent for applicants who are not entitled to 100 per cent. Service personnel whose sacrifice has resulted in an injury need not only sympathy but real support, and they have an on-going requirement for adapted housing. Further work must be done with Scottish social landlords to ensure the allocation of such housing to veterans. I believe that the provision of concessionary bus travel for injured veterans is vital. As previous speakers pointed out, not all veterans are older people. I am pleased that the forthcoming review of the Scotland-wide free bus travel scheme for  older and disabled people will consider extending the scheme to veterans. I look forward to seeing the Scottish Government's response to that consultation. There may be greater benefit from closer working between local armed forces personnel and local authorities in Scotland. I believe that they have many mutual interests. Perhaps some work can be done in that area through community planning partnerships, as part of the historic concordat. We need a coherent package of support for our armed forces personnel and veterans. I look forward to the Scottish Government delivering that, with co-operation from all parties across the chamber.

I am sure that the minister agrees that the majority of people who are worried about nuclear power are concerned about the creation and disposal of nuclear waste. Labour's 2007 manifesto said: "Scottish Labour will work to resolve how nuclear waste can be managed and disposed of safely." I know that Labour's manifesto has apparently been torn up this week—

Are we any closer to the safe disposal of nuclear waste?

Will Ardrossan, a port in my constituency that has excellent rail links, be considered as the Ayrshire port of first choice, should additional ferry services to Ireland or Kintyre be introduced?

Does the cabinet secretary agree that one of the difficulties in implementing the class size reduction policy is that there is wilful opposition from, for example, Labour-controlled Glasgow City Council which, despite a £15.3 million underspend, refuses to invest in reducing class sizes, even in deprived communities, and places hostility to the SNP Government ahead of the educational future of children in Glasgow?

Workforce planning many years ahead is difficult, and primary schools know that particular difficulties exist. However, we should not be too hard on the former Lib-Lab Executive, which six or seven years ago decided the number of people who would apply to university to be teachers in 2002, begin their bachelor of education degree in 2003, graduate in 2007 and complete their probationary year last June. Decisions about the number of undergraduates who would enter the one-year postgraduate diploma in education course and graduate this year would, of course, have been taken in 2004. Scotland has been haunted by teacher shortages for decades. I recall that there were 59 children in my primary 1 class and that, at secondary school, I had no science teaching until my third year. A Labour Government was in power then. Even now, there are shortages of primary teachers in some local authority areas, where local authorities have recently had to look for teachers overseas. That is why some pre-probationers are paid a £6,000 bounty to train wherever they are needed. There are also shortages of teachers to teach some secondary school subjects, such as maths, English and physics.

I am afraid that I do not accept that. We know that 100 or more teachers apply for jobs at some schools. That has always been and always will be the case at the best schools. However, if teachers applied for jobs at 10 schools and each of those schools received an average of 50 applications—some schools receive many fewer applications—that would mean that five teachers were applying for each job rather than 50. In addition, new vacancies are continually being advertised; indeed, some 539 have been advertised in TESS in the past three weeks alone. Projections far into the future on the number and geographic spread of teachers who will retire, the number of undergraduates who might drop out of their courses and budgets are difficult to make. However, the TESS of 29 August estimated that 3,359 teachers will be needed this year and that 3,426 will complete their probationary year—a 98 per cent fit. Perhaps the number of new teachers who will be required will be more or slightly less than that. This is not an exact science. However, I am pleased that, according to the General Teaching Council for Scotland, 93 per cent of the  2007 cohort of probationers have now found work. That is due partly to the SNP Government's full funding of 300 additional teachers last autumn, which is now included in baseline local government funding. Some councils are, of course, playing games. In Glasgow—one of only two Scottish councils under outright Labour control—despite the £15.3 million underspend in the previous financial year that I mentioned earlier, and despite the urgings of the SNP opposition, not a single penny extra was committed to education and to reduce class sizes, even in the most deprived parts of that city. That is despite Glasgow City Council's level of educational attainment being the poorest of any local authority and its having the lowest proportion of spend on education. Some 25 per cent of its total budget has been committed to education, compared with 47 per cent of the budget of East Renfrewshire Council, which has the highest level of attainment. It is curious that Labour and the SNP are in the administration there. Many Glasgow parents try to send their children to East Renfrewshire. We know that Labour in Glasgow places a low premium on education, because it dispensed with 61 nursery nurses between 2004 and 2007, when the Labour Party was in power in Glasgow, Holyrood and Westminster. A little more common sense and a little less hysteria—particularly from Rhona Brankin—are required when it comes to teacher numbers. In The Herald last week, Rhona Brankin ludicrously declared that Labour had provided "An additional 53,000 teachers since 1997." Given that there is roughly that number of teachers in Scotland, is she seriously suggesting that Scotland's education system truly began only in 1997, as its year zero? I now wonder who those mysterious men and women who wrote on the blackboard at the front of my classrooms were. The Scottish Government has established a working group on teacher employment. I look forward to reading its findings when they are published in October and to significant progress being made over the coming year.

Is the member aware of the fact that Labour-controlled Glasgow City Council had a £15.3 million underspend last year but refused to put an additional penny into its education services?

I thank the committee for an excellent report and for coming to the island of Arran in my constituency to take evidence. In that regard, I thank Mr Rob Gibson, Mr Gordon and the committee clerks, in particular. People who do not use ferry services have been mentioned, but over the past 29 days I have been to Arran six times and to Cumbrae twice—I am becoming what is called on the islands, on which I have some 6,500 constituents, a ferry lowper. We have heard about RET and political expediency. If political expediency is being deployed I would like some of it to come my way, as I am the member with a wafer-thin majority of only 48 votes. Alasdair Allan has a thumping majority of 687 votes, despite having an electorate that is a third the size of mine. I would like to think that if politics had been involved, the minister would have given an RET scheme to my area rather than to Mr Allan's. The fact that my area did not receive such largesse is perhaps a tribute by the minister, the SNP leadership and possibly even the great helmsman himself to my ability to retain the constituency. Displacement has been mentioned, but I am not too convinced by the argument that has been deployed; I do not think that many people will cancel their day trip to Millport in order to nip up to Stornoway for the day. Many issues affect my constituency. All the ferry routes to and from Arran are essential and need to be enhanced. Even though the island is becoming increasingly popular as a tourist destination, it is served by only two main routes—Brodick to Ardrossan and Lochranza to Claonaig. Given its location, it could be a stopping-off point for new routes to Kintyre and/or Ireland, and a gateway to points north and south, such as those on the Highland whisky trail. The timetabling of services to Arran is not optimised; islanders believe that the Brodick to Ardrossan run should be cut from 55 minutes to 40 minutes, which is quite possible and well within the capacity of the MV Caledonian Isles. That would allow a much more frequent service to be provided. The Lochranza to Claonaig ferry is greatly valued on Arran, probably because it is very rarely disrupted by adverse weather, which had an impact on the Brodick to Ardrossan route on 95 occasions during the past year, but it is very small and can take only a few vehicles and a dozen passengers. A bigger boat is needed, and islanders would like to see an enhancement of the service in winter.  CalMac officials have stressed how the lack of capacity and infrastructure on Arran limits the number of travellers and vehicles that can arrive on the island. Infrastructure is therefore of key importance, as is the Ardrossan rail link, which needs to be exploited more. There are concerns at ScotRail's lack of flexibility if the ferry from Brodick arrives late. Charlie Gordon touched on integration with buses and trains. I note from the report that only 5.8 per cent of people who responded believe that it is good. The anomaly whereby Transport Scotland integrates buses and trains but not ferries should be ended. Ferries should be included. The port of Ardrossan is not currently fit for purpose. It requires substantial investment if it is to become a port of refuge during poor weather. It must become an all-weather port with a deep linkspan. Also, the young Scot discount, which gives young people one third off bus and train fares, should include ferry fares. Young people currently receive only two return tickets per year. Of course, it is expensive to take cars to and from Arran and Cumbrae and island residents need a discount. On Cumbrae, where most islanders already benefit from free fares because of the large elderly population, there is a view that other islanders should be entitled to much greater discounting of tickets, particularly for cars. Islanders are not necessarily keen to see more cars on their islands—bicycles yes, cars no—but they believe that there should be a reduction in the price. CalMac is losing out on a possible revenue source because many residents who commute—approximately 80—leave their cars in Largs overnight, which is less secure, rather than pay a small fee to travel. Des McNulty took my name in vain, so I have to respond to some of his comments. I really cannot let him get away with some of the nonsense he talked about Labour's alleged proposal to reduce ferry fares by 40 per cent, which of course was not done during the eight years in which Labour and the Lib Dems were actually in power. As I recall, during the three months of the Scottish Parliament budget process for 2008 to 2011, not one Labour MSP, Des McNulty included, tried to amend the budget in committee or in the chamber to implement that fantasy 40 per cent reduction, let alone say how it would be funded. The 40 per cent thing was a back-of-the-envelope attempt to hold on to the Western Isles. The Labour party did not realise that the Cunninghame North seat was at risk—shame on them—and CalMac was neither told nor consulted about the 40 per cent decrease. Earlier this year, Mr McNulty got himself into something of a fankle regarding a supposed price hike. He said in The Herald that it was shameful  that prices on the Clyde went up more than 20 per cent. What he did not know, and what was pointed out to him, is in the following quotation from Hugh Dan MacLennan, CalMac's director of communications at the time. "I simply do not understand Mr McNulty's analysis of our fares structure and I genuinely do not recognise the figures quoted. They bear no relation to anything in CalMac's books. There is no increase anywhere even approximating 20%. The 1.8% increase was announced on 10 October, widely publicised and extends across our entire network of routes ... Mr McNulty seems to be comparing winter rates before the increase with summer rates after it. This is a wholly invalid comparison. Winter rates should be compared with winter rates and likewise summer with summer". If Mr McNulty is going to get involved in fares issues, he should try to find out about what he is talking about first and then he would not make a fool of himself in public.

Will the Scottish Government consider upgrading Scotland's three regional parks to national park status? If so, when may the matter be progressed?

I warmly welcome the Scottish Government's ambitious legislative programme. One had only to look at the faces of the three candidates—Chico, Harpo and Iain Gray—who are battling to be Gordon Brown's mouthpiece in north Britain to see that it will resonate with the Scottish people. The public optimism, confidence and belief in the Scottish Government contrast—

—starkly with the collapse in new Labour support. Labour at Westminster's shockingly inept handling of the UK economy has in only a year led to a dramatic decline in living standards, with the income of every UK household falling to the tune of £2,500. That is no doubt why Labour is desperate to delay the Glenrothes by-election, despite Margaret Curran's motion of 3  July, in which she stated that the by-election in Glasgow was to be held swiftly because "the people of Glasgow East should not go without a voice for four months". It is now apparent that the area went without a voice for 29 years. By any standards, a programme of 15 bills in one parliamentary year is ambitious. The programme itself includes legislation on education, health, criminal justice, public sector reform and the marine environment. Of course, we could do so much more if we had the powers of a normal independent country. Everyone agrees that the impact of rising prices for food and energy and the credit crunch are of greatest concern to families and businesses throughout Scotland, but we do not have the fiscal levers to do everything that we should be able to do for the Scottish people. In fact, I find it obscene that we should pay the highest fuel duty in the European Union when the North Sea produces almost all the EU's oil. It is Scotland's oil, and the nation should benefit from it. Sadly, a majority in this Parliament have no faith in the Scottish people or in our ability to use those resources for our own country's benefit. However, I have no doubt that, when they are given a say in an independence referendum, the people of Scotland will vote for the normality that so many of our European neighbours enjoy.

I was just about to mention you, but you can intervene after I have done so, Jeremy. It was sad and inappropriate that Jeremy Purvis felt the need to attack the arc of prosperity—I think that he was referring to Ireland, Iceland and Norway. Is it not the case that those countries have much lower levels of ill health, much less child poverty and homelessness and a much higher standard of living than we do?

If the member considers the SNP's overall fiscal policy, he will find that we would seek a referendum on whether to move to the euro. The SNP would consider transitional arrangements, but we would put the matter to the people of Scotland. What is important is that the SNP is acting on behalf of the people of Scotland. If the Liberal  Democrats and the Labour Party had done more of that they might not be in opposition. Given that it is quite clear to the Labour Party and the SNP that the Liberals are no longer needed to provide a coherent Administration, the Liberals will no doubt be banished for ever to the political wilderness, where they will battle with the Greens for the fourth place in Scottish politics. What has the SNP done? We have phased out prescription charges, which will disappear completely by 2011. We have frozen council tax, which increased by 60 per cent under Labour and the Liberal Democrats. We have restored free education in Scotland by abolishing the graduate endowment, which has saved thousands of Scottish students £2,289. We have slashed business rates for small businesses, so that rates for 150,000 small businesses in Scotland have been substantially reduced or removed. That means that many businesses can survive and thrive, which they would not have been able to do under the policies of the previous Government. Perhaps that is one of the reasons why Scotland is starting to ride out the Labour-imposed recession better than many other nations are doing. There is also green investment in Scotland, for example in the new 45MW biomass combined heat and power plant in Markinch. We heard gloom and doom from Kenneth Macintosh and other members about budgets being cut, but Labour members' previous leader said in her hungry caterpillar speech—the infamous diatribe that we heard just over a year ago—that she wanted 3 per cent year-on-year top-sliced efficiency savings in local government. I assume that that was Labour Party policy and I am not aware that the policy has changed since the speech. We should contrast that policy with the SNP's policy of providing above-inflation increases for local government and allowing local authorities to retain efficiency savings. When people say that there is no money for class-size reductions or other local government services, they should consider how much worse the situation would have been if there had been no change in Government last year. The Scottish Government has had difficulties, in that its budget has been hit by Westminster's spiteful failure to deliver Barnett consequentials, for example in relation to prisons and police pension commutation. There is no agreement from Westminster that it would repay the £400 million that would be lost if a local income tax were to be introduced, although Cathy Jamieson has called for the money to be restored to Scotland, nor is there agreement to repay the £30 million of attendance allowance. It is clear that an attempt is being made south of the border to make the Scottish Government unpopular by starving Scotland of resources.  There has also been scaremongering. For example, during the Glasgow East by-election Labour Party members frightened old people on their doorsteps by telling them that we would abolish the concessionary fares scheme. The SNP wants to make Scotland brighter, fairer, smarter and more prosperous. This year we will work to do just that.

I thank Mr Maxwell for taking an intervention.

I am sorry—Mr Macintosh. They seem so alike to me. Is it not the case that, in the previous financial year, Glasgow City Council had a £15.3 million surplus? Despite having the lowest level of attainment and high class sizes, the Labour  administration made no effort whatever to spend some of that money on reducing class sizes.

Will Jamie Stone give way?

Like 95 per cent of Scots, I acknowledge that alcohol is a problem for Scotland. I welcome the Scottish Government's evidence-based proposals. The complexity and sensitivity of the issue are such that it has often been swept under the rug in the past, so I applaud the Government for taking important steps in the right direction. It was established recently that every day in Scotland 18 young people below the minimum age for alcohol purchase are hospitalised for alcohol-related problems—that is 6,500 young people every year. It is unfortunate that in our culture the younger a drinker is, the more likely they are to drink with the intention of getting drunk, which is evidenced by the fact that a fifth of 15-year-olds attempted to get drunk during the past week. Such indulgence leads to dependence and other alcohol-related problems later in life. As is the case with smoking, the earlier that a person starts to drink, the earlier they become addicted. I disagree with Mary Mulligan's comments about delaying the age at which people start to drink. I acknowledge that, as she said, people in their 40s are nine times more likely to go to their doctor as a result of alcohol problems, but that is often because the problem has built up over a period of many years, if not decades, and it has taken a long time for its existence to be recognised. I acknowledge, too, the comments that Mary Mulligan and Mary Scanlon made about foetal alcohol syndrome, which represented a positive contribution to the debate. Everyone would accept that alcohol abuse has significantly hindered Scotland's fulfilling of its potential. In a 2007 National Statistics report on alcohol-related death, 15 of the 20 worst-performing local authority areas in the UK were in Scotland. In my area of North Ayrshire, there have been 218 such deaths over the past five years. In addition, there have been numerous reports of Scotland's sub-par performance against other indicators—often those that have a positive correlation with alcohol consumption. I will not go into the results of the Armadale study, which has been done to death already. As Michael Matheson mentioned, a similar trial began recently in Falkirk. Thus far, as was the case in Armadale, licensees have responded to the proposals and citizens have noted a significant  decrease in antisocial behaviour. We accept that it is early days, but things are moving in the right direction. That is not surprising, given that the Scottish Government's proposals are backed by years of extensive research, as well as by independent professional bodies. Strong evidence has come from the United States, where raising the age of purchase reduced consumption levels in young people and all levels of alcohol-related problems. Over the past 25 years, since the age at which alcohol can be consumed was raised to 21, consumption has decreased in every age group. It is interesting that the US introduced such legislation not to tackle antisocial behaviour, but to reduce the number of deaths on the road. Alcohol-related road deaths are a subject that has not yet been mentioned. Since 1982, the number of 16 to 20-year-olds in the US who are killed in drink-driving accidents has decreased by a whopping 63 per cent. Even just reducing the permitted blood alcohol limit from 80mg to 50mg, as my SNP colleague Dave Thompson proposes, would prevent an estimated 65 deaths a year. Alcohol is a multifactorial problem. A conservative extrapolation of the results of the Armadale trial suggests that if the minister's proposals were implemented throughout Scotland, there would be an annual reduction of 3,700 in the number of reported assaults and of 62,000 in the number of cases of vandalism. It is easy to see how much alcohol abuse costs Scotland in cash terms, but we cannot possibly measure the human impact. We cannot afford to watch as more people's lives are ruined. That is especially true of young people, whom we have a duty to protect. It has been interesting that different age limits have been mentioned for different activities. I might be wrong, but I understood that in Louisiana, certainly until recently, someone could get married at 14 but could not have a drink until they were 21. I might be wrong about that, but there are wider variations in other societies than there are in ours. The Scottish Government estimated recently that last year alcohol was a key factor in 449 rapes or attempted rapes, 1,200 fires, 55 homicides and 31,267 minor assaults. In total, alcohol has been identified as a key factor in at least a quarter of all crime. The youth of Scotland has suffered most from the abundance and accessibility of alcohol—6 per cent of 15-year-olds report that they have had unprotected sex as a consequence of alcohol consumption and 7 per cent of them report that they have tried drugs while under the influence of alcohol. Those teenage drinkers are much more likely to develop a dependency later in life, whether on alcohol or other drugs, and to suffer  serious alcohol problems. I have three young children, the oldest of whom is 15, and I care very much about that age group. My children are coming to an age at which they will experiment with drink. The Scottish Government's proposals will have a proportionately large effect on the number of young people who are injured in drink-driving accidents. Among the 17 to 19-year-old age group, there is an average of 24 drink-driving accidents per 100 million miles driven. That figure is 50 per cent higher than that for the age group that suffers the second highest number of such accidents, and 600 per cent higher than the average figure. In the UK, members of that age group accounted for one ninth of all casualties who sustained injuries as a consequence of alcohol consumption. If applied to Scotland, that would imply that there would be 110 casualties and three fatalities in that age group each year. Excessive consumption of alcohol is not limited to particular sections of society, but its effects are most visible among younger people. Since 1994, there has been a 50 per cent increase in the incidence of drinking by 13-year-olds and a 33 per cent increase in the incidence of drinking by 15-year-olds. Those trends are unacceptable and comprehensive action is required now. It must be admitted that the Government's proposals are hardly a vote winner, and the Government must be commended for having the courage and determination to make progress on the issue. That is necessary if we are to take a stand for Scotland's youth and to build and sustain the future of our country.

I warmly welcome the many excellent provisions in the cabinet secretary's statement, especially with regard to second-stage transfer. Does she agree that, if communities are truly to thrive and to transform themselves, it is fundamental that they should be able to take housing decisions about matters that impact directly on them? Will she work to ensure that the Parkhead Housing Association and Cassiltoun Housing Association ballots are followed by many others in the months and years ahead, to ensure that the GHA gradually fades into history?

Does the minister agree that, if Wendy Alexander’s proposal for a 3 per cent top-sliced local government efficiency saving had been imposed rather than the 2 per cent efficiency saving that he has implemented, which can be reinvested, we would now be seeing real cuts in services and real job losses in our local authorities?

I congratulate Jackson Carlaw on securing the debate and on packing so much detail into so short a time.  The Holocaust, or Shoah, was undoubtedly one of the foulest crimes ever committed in human history—the mass murder of 6 million men, women and children solely because they were Jewish or part-Jewish. Jews were murdered not only in the most bestial ways but on an industrial scale and by industrial means. Half of the Holocaust's victims died in wholesale massacres, starved or were beaten to death; the others were murdered in facilities that had been built specifically for that purpose. Four extermination centres were established in occupied Poland: at Chelmno, Belzec, Sobibór and Treblinka. From 8 December 1941 to October 1943, when Sobibór was closed after an heroic revolt by prisoners, an estimated 1.7 to 2 million Jews were killed, the vast majority by gassing. The system that the Nazis perfected took prisoners directly from the trains that transported them—usually in cattle trucks—and, under the guise of sending them to shower and be disinfected, packed them into gas chambers to be asphyxiated by carbon monoxide or Zyklon B gas in excruciating pain lasting 15 to 30 minutes. The bodies of the victims were burned or buried. No work was gleaned from the victims; the Nazis, fixated on slaughter, were interested only in destruction. In total, only 106 prisoners of the death camps, who had been forced to work on the sorting of possessions and the disposal of corpses, are known to have survived the war. The names of those extermination centres are not widely known. The one that is known was the largest and most notorious of all—Auschwitz-Birkenau. It was originally built to house Polish political prisoners, 70,000 of whom were to die there, and to destroy through labour Soviet prisoners of war, of whom 10,000 perished. Auschwitz became a huge slave labour camp and extermination centre. About 23,000 Roma and Sinti, and at least a million Jewish people died there. The overwhelming majority, including the old, infirm and children, were selected for destruction immediately on arrival. The rest were killed more slowly by beating, hanging, shooting and further selections or in gruesome medical experiments carried out by Nazi doctors. The terror of people who died so horribly or survived each day in squalor, enduring back-breaking toil while knowing that their loved ones had been destroyed, cannot be comprehended. A few thousand prisoners survived the hell of Auschwitz following liberation on 27 January 1945, a date which has become Holocaust memorial day. Their testimonies have told us much of what we know today. I visited Auschwitz in February this year. It was a moving and overwhelming experience. The scale of the Birkenau site, where up to 140,000 prisoners were barracked, 774 to a  block and in full view of the crematoria, is astonishing. Stalin once callously remarked that a million deaths is a statistic, but one death is a tragedy. At Auschwitz, that is brought home directly. The histories, photographs and testimonies of individual victims tell of the suffering and torment that each and every person who was incarcerated there—murdered or survived—went through and show the enormity of the Nazi crimes and the catastrophe that engulfed the Jewish people. Auschwitz, the other death camps and concentration camps and the persecution of the Jewish people, recent and historic, cannot be forgotten if they are never to be repeated. We must recall the unwillingness of many nations, including the western democracies, to permit substantial Jewish immigration from Nazi-threatened and occupied Europe, even during the war. Scottish schools have opportunities to study the Holocaust and visit Auschwitz if local authorities and schools deem that to be appropriate. That can be done not least as part of the new emphasis on the rights and responsibilities of individuals and nations, through the forthcoming religious and moral education outcomes, which will foster the development of values, beliefs and attitudes, and through the social studies outcomes, which include the study of history. There has never been a specific fund in Scotland for visits to Auschwitz. The Scottish Government works with the Holocaust Educational Trust to ensure that children are educated on the Holocaust. The Government will provide £25,500 to Renfrewshire Council to host next year's Holocaust memorial day, on the anniversary of the Auschwitz liberation, and it has offered to provide £750,000—half the required funding—for a Holocaust museum in East Renfrewshire, should it progress. Scotland has never had anti-Semitic laws. We are a tolerant society and I hope that future generations will learn from our tolerance, which we intend to inculcate in them.

The issue of drugs is one of the most challenging problems facing Scotland. We all know the terrible blight that drug addiction  has on our communities, destroying individual lives, families and neighbourhoods. The new strategy that the Scottish Government has set out is bold and ambitious. Such a radical approach is needed if the issue is to be tackled effectively. Successive Governments at Scottish and United Kingdom level have wrestled with the problem, with laudable and well-meaning intentions. The reality is that the fight against drugs has not yet been won, so we cannot continue down the same path. The Scottish Government's shift away from harm reduction towards a greater emphasis on recovery is the right strategy for Scotland, given the failure of previous campaigns. For too long, it has been too easy to park heroin addicts on methadone indefinitely. We all know why it was so easy. It stabilised addicts' lives by removing the need to engage in criminal activity to feed their habit, and it protected them from the danger of sharing needles. However, we know from evidence-based research conducted by Neil McKeganey, who is professor of drug misuse research at the University of Glasgow, that giving methadone to heroin addicts has a 97 per cent failure rate. Three years after receiving methadone, only 3 per cent of addicts remained totally drug-free. In stark contrast, the same study showed that there was a 29 per cent success rate among addicts who went cold turkey in a rehabilitation centre. Shockingly, that shows that, in terms of recovery, methadone use is only marginally better than doing nothing at all. For a programme that is so expensive and with the number of addicts receiving methadone quadrupling in a decade to 22,000, including 714 in North Ayrshire, that is simply not good enough—not when we know that rehabilitation centres have 10 times the success rate and that 97 people died as a result of methadone in 2006. That is not the end of the story. Professor McKeganey's research also spelled out the wider social benefits of people coming off drugs. Those free of addiction are seven times less likely to commit crimes than are addicts and far more likely to be in work or education. Just to be clear, no one is suggesting that methadone does not have a place in drug treatment. Of course it does and will continue to do so, in accordance with the so-called orange guidelines. However, the ultimate goal must be recovery and for addicts to be drug free. Parking people on methadone does not do that. It simply stabilises the illness but does not cure the patient. In a way, it is like putting an alcoholic on half a bottle of whisky a day. It is time to be more ambitious—the addicts themselves deserve more.

I would love to, but I am afraid that I have little time left. We owe the move in emphasis away from harm reduction towards recovery to those who are held fast in the grip of addiction, and we owe it to their children. As many as 60,000 children in Scotland are thought to live in a family where there is drug abuse. I applaud the recognition of that in the Government's early years strategy. Part of the work is the improved drugs education programme to be rolled out both inside and outside schools, with £10 million already announced for drugs education. Parents must also be involved in the education programme if children are to be protected from the scourge of addiction. Earlier this year, I pressed the minister to provide booklets to every Scottish family to help to educate parents, in particular on drug facts, having as a councillor delivered such a booklet to every home in my ward. I am therefore delighted that the minister has taken up the suggestion and that the publication "drugs: what every parent should know" will be distributed to every family in Scotland, with the aim of informing parents as they try to discuss this difficult issue with their children. I realise that Paul Martin was not enthused by that but, as someone who has delivered such leaflets and discussed the situation with parents, I know that they can have considerable importance in educating parents. The Government's efforts to strengthen the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002, which helps to prevent criminals from benefiting from their ill-gotten gains by confiscating their assets, are a further positive step, with seized assets being used in the front-line fight against those who stalk our streets peddling drugs. That will, of course, be further reinforced by the fact that there will be an additional 1,000 police officers in place by 2011. I am optimistic that Scotland can win the long, hard fight against drugs, which is one which every MSP can back. I urge all members to support the Government's vision and motion.

Given the member's interest in vulnerable two-year-olds, will he condemn Glasgow City Council for getting rid of 61 nursery teachers between 2004 and 2007 under the Labour and Liberal Democrat Administration?

I am delighted to participate in a debate that celebrates our first-ever SNP Government, which is delivering for Scotland. I do not want to repeat the long, long list of SNP achievements of the past year—many of which were touched on by the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing—because the debate is about moving Scotland forward. Let us therefore talk about some of the things that the SNP will be doing over the next three years. For example, the SNP Government will more than double the budget for tackling drug and alcohol misuse and for investment in smoking cessation. For the first time, all teenage girls will be vaccinated against cervical cancer and more than £10.6 million will be invested in improved eye care services. The SNP Government will invest £1.47 billion over three years in affordable housing as part of a strategy to increase house building from 24,000 a year to 35,000 a year by 2015. That is in sharp contrast to the Labour-Liberal Executive, which—I point out to Mr Chisholm—oversaw in its last year a 31 per cent decrease in registered social housing builds. That was the lowest level since the Parliament began. The SNP Government will  abolish the right to buy new council houses in order to encourage local authorities to build homes again. North Ayrshire Council, in my constituency, built only five houses in 12 years. A new £25 million fund will assist councils.

Malcolm Chisholm presided over a 50 per cent increase in homelessness, from 24,000 to 36,000, which is shameful. It is quite clear that the money for council housing is to kick-start the new build. The record investment of £5.24 billion in higher and further education over three years will keep Scotland at the cutting edge of the knowledge economy. Scotland's first marine bill to protect our seas and coasts will be introduced this year. As Mr Finnie will be interested to know, the renewable energy target for electricity will be increased from 40 per cent to 50 per cent by 2020. This year, the Glendoe scheme will come on stream and will provide hydroelectric power for 250,000 additional homes. Let us not, however, think about what we in Parliament have to say; rather, let us think about what the great and the good of Scotland have to say about the SNP Administration. Let me quote some individuals who appeared in a feature headed "Reasons to be cheerful" in Scotland on Sunday on 20 April. James MacMillan, the composer, said: "I am not a natural SNP supporter, but I have to concede that their level of political efficiency and intelligence blows the other lot out of the water. Compared to the present Government, Scottish Labour looks sleazy, moronic and corrupt." John Haldane, professor of philosophy at the University of St Andrews, said: "The SNP has ... shown itself to be capable of forming a functioning minority administration. The latter achievement has swept away the 'it can't work' objection, and the SNP is now engaged in a fascinating attempt to re-envision Scottish identity. With Labour in Scotland seeming to have lost its sense of purpose, and in Westminster its ability to manage the business of government, we have moved further than could have been imagined a year ago towards general acceptance of the idea of Scottish independence. It's 'the vision thing'; and for now, at least, the vision lies with the SNP. Unless unionists can fashion an image of Britain appealing to the Scots' imagination they have no future." I do not want anyone to accuse me of bias in the debate, so I will quote Mr Sam Galbraith, former Labour minister, who said in the same article: "The SNP Government has been very poor."  Let us move on to what other people had to say. John Byrne, the famous playwright, said that "There is something in the air since they got in. Something has changed. Things feel more positive. Although I can't put a finger on anything in particular... there is just a better feeling in Scotland." The writer Janet Paisley said: "I feel a lot more optimistic about things. I think that people are now a lot more positive about Scotland. It's good that there are no more tolls on the road bridges and they have frozen the council tax. I just hope that people will believe much more in Scotland. We have so much to offer the world. Maybe we shall finally get rid of the Scottish cringe." That will perhaps not happen for the majority of members, but it might for the people of Scotland.

I am always happy to take an intervention from my good friend Mr Johnstone.

Unfortunately, I do not have access to Alex Orr's back catalogue. Mr Foulkes has expressed concerns about police numbers, so let us hear what Joe Grant, the general secretary of the Scottish Police Federation has to say. He said: "It's fair to say that the first year of the SNP Government has had the police at or pretty close to the top of its agenda. If I were writing a report card it would say 'great start, keep up the good work'". I should say to his lordship that the intention is to have 1,000 extra police by the end of this session of Parliament. Raymond O'Hare, the director of Microsoft Scotland and chairman of the Institute of Directors Scotland said: "Overall I am heartened as this Scottish Government nears its first year in office. I look forward to continue working with the SNP-led administration to enable further access, in this knowledge economy, to technologies that bring with them economic and social opportunities and great potential to transform people's lives." Bob Woodward, the chief executive officer of SMG said that "There's no doubt that Scotland is feeling more confident, more dynamic and more purposeful since the SNP Government came to power last May." Of course, numerous people have said the same. Iain McMillan, the director of the Confederation of British Industry Scotland, who is no friend to the SNP, said that  "the urgent review of Scotland's transport needs and confirmation of a raft of new strategic transport projects, including the M74 and second Forth crossing, was very welcome, as was the fresh energy applied to improving Scotland's planning regime and reducing the business rate burden on small firms." The SNP and the Government are taking Scotland forward with confidence to a new, more positive, better and more optimistic future.

I warmly welcome Mr Ewing's statement, and I congratulate him on his energetic and enthusiastic contribution to tackling Scotland's drug problem. What impact does he believe that booklets such as "drugs: what every parent should know" will have on future drug use? Does he believe that parents will be in a better position to address drugs issues within their families?

Is Lewis Macdonald in favour of a derogation for Scotland's island and remote rural communities?

I commend my colleague Alasdair Allan on securing tonight's important and timely debate. Of course, in the weeks since the motion was lodged, the figures in it have rapidly become out of date. On the isle of Arran in my constituency, unleaded petrol now sells at 123.3p per litre and—as of this morning—diesel is now selling at 140.6p per litre. An issue that should be taken into account is that, in island communities such as in those in my constituency and in Alasdair Allan's constituency, average incomes are significantly less than those on the mainland. People have further to travel, are on lower incomes and face higher fuel costs. According to figures that were provided by the Scottish Parliament information centre this afternoon, the percentage of the petrol pump price—of both diesel and petrol—that is taken in tax in the UK is higher than in all other European Union countries. Diesel is a full 24.8 per cent cheaper in Cyprus, followed by Luxembourg, Greece and Spain. For petrol, we have a 22.2 per cent differential with Cyprus, which is followed by  Malta and the Baltic states. Of course, none of those countries produces oil. To add insult to injury, on top of duty at 50.35p per litre, some 8.81p is added in VAT, so we pay tax on tax. Indeed, the Chancellor of the Exchequer is laughing all the way to the bank given that, through VAT, he rakes in roughly 15 per cent of every extra penny of price increase. The price of diesel is some 17p higher in Arran than on the mainland, which means that, through VAT, my island constituents pay more in tax than their mainland compatriots. Can that be right? I think not. The duty that road hauliers here pay is often twice that which is paid by some of their continental competitors, with the result that some of them are being forced out of business or are considering desperate measures. As the cost of fuel increases, the price of food and other goods rockets, creating inflationary pressures and making Scottish products and produce less competitive. Simultaneously, the spiralling fuel costs mean a decrease in the amount of money that our councils and the national health service have available to spend on delivering vital public services. Westminster would not give the police in England their full pay award—0.6 per cent was retained because of what were called "inflationary pressures". However, it is happy to put 2p on fuel this autumn, even though that will cause considerable additional pain for people who already have mounting concerns. Of course, it is appalling not only that Scotland has its vast oil wealth taken by the United Kingdom but that it has the most expensive fuel in the UK. That is a double whammy. I am sure that the chancellor will see sense and that the extra 2p will not be imposed this autumn. On our islands, however, greater measures are needed. Under European Council directive 2003/96/EC, from 2004 until 2010 the minimum level of taxation that should be imposed on unleaded petrol is €359 per 1,000 litres. Despite that requirement, derogations were granted to new member states and to Spain, Austria, Belgium, Luxembourg, Portugal, Greece, Ireland, France, Italy, Germany and the Netherlands. Some of those countries are completely landlocked. As Gavin Brown and Jeremy Purvis pointed out, the issue does not affect only island communities; the position of other remote and fragile rural communities should be considered. Our European neighbours want less tax to be imposed on fuel, but the UK has not yet applied for a derogation, even for Scotland's 100,000 or so hard-pressed islanders. The Scottish National Party first called for such an application to be  made in 1999, when it was turned down by Brian Wilson MP, the former Labour representative for my constituency, who was then a minister. It is not too late. I hope that the UK Government will give the matter serious consideration and will pursue the derogation that our island communities so desperately need.

I warmly welcome the minister's comprehensive statement and the publication of the smoking action plan. Astonishingly, a minority of people, particularly young people, believe that smoking's adverse impacts come more in later life. Some young women and girls wrongly perceive that smoking might even have benefits.

That might contribute to the gender gap. Can the minister clarify what specific steps will be taken to tackle myths among young people such as the those that say that smoking helps slimming, that it reduces stress and that it is not highly addictive?

I add my congratulations to Nanette Milne not only on securing the debate but on her thought-provoking opening speech. I am pleased that the health board that covers most of my constituency—Ayrshire and Arran NHS Board—is rated as very good. I hope that many lessons can be learned from its work. The augmentative and alternative communication resource provides an area-wide service to the communication-impaired population  of Ayrshire and Arran who require to be assessed for and use high-tech methods of augmentative or alternative communication. The resource is staffed by only 0.5 of a whole-time-equivalent speech and language therapist. That individual—or half an individual—is responsible for leading that specialist service throughout the entire health board area. Nevertheless, training is provided and there is support for clients, carers, speech and language therapists, and others in all aspects of AAC systems. Interestingly, AAC devices are not always expensive. The cost ranges from around £100 to, in some cases, in excess of £6,000. For a relatively limited amount, a significant number of people can be helped. As we have heard, only about 2,500 people in Scotland really require AAC devices. In the past year, there have been 41 loans of AAC equipment to people in Ayrshire and Arran. The equipment has been provided to people ranging from pre-school children to the elderly, and whose diagnoses include, among many others, cancer, learning difficulties, head injuries and cerebral palsy. The service maintains a large bank of AAC equipment that is provided on loan to individuals during the assessment period. As a result, there is little waiting time for adults or children. Over the years, a catalogue of frequently used equipment has been built up. Once an appropriate voice output device has been identified for an individual, the equipment will be provided on a long-term loan basis. NHS Ayrshire and Arran is responsible for the maintenance costs for the equipment, which is carefully tracked and well maintained. There is an opportunity for other health boards to learn from the health boards that are doing well. Best practice is extremely important. I hope that Ayrshire and Arran NHS Board will be one of the boards from which others learn. Of course, that does not mean that everything in the garden is rosy in Ayrshire and Arran. At present, the budget for AAC systems in the area is small and, as we know, there are always competing priorities. Much of the budget is taken up with renewing warranties for devices and paying for repairs. Additions to the loan bank are often made by making one-off requests for equipment to a range of committees and bidding for money at the end of the financial year. Accommodation for delivering the service is also an issue. Currently, the AAC resource is in an area of Ayrshire Central hospital in which it is not suitable to see clients. We have already heard that some people would have liked to come to the debate but were unable to do so. The situation is the same for people who try to get assessed. In  Ayrshire Central hospital, the AAC resource is on the first floor, with no lift access. The area is cramped and there is no room in which to meet clients, even if they could get to the office. That is unacceptable, given the needs of many people who use the service. Given that my assistant James Stewart suffers from severe stammering, I should mention that for people who suffer from stammering, which is another communication problem, there is a piece of technology called SpeechEasy, which is expensive. James has looked into it and advises me that the technology is available only in private clinics and costs up to £5,000. That would not help him, but it would help a number of other people who have severe stammering problems. We need to allow people who suffer from stammering to communicate more, fluently and with confidence, so that they can play their full role in society. I thank Nanette Milne for her excellent introduction and for securing this important debate.

To ask the Scottish Government what support it provides to health-based community radio stations. (S3O-3080)

As the cabinet secretary will be aware, in my constituency Three Towns FM in Saltcoats recently began broadcasting under a new five-year community licence and Garnock Valley FM in Kilbirnie recently completed its first, highly successful, 28-day broadcast. Does she agree that health-based community radio stations are an excellent and highly cost-effective way of involving local volunteers in putting over simple, straightforward health messages? Will she therefore agree to consider further how health boards and community planning partnerships can provide increased assistance to community radio for health?

I thank the cabinet secretary for his statement, which is welcome. Has an assessment been made of the impact that vulnerable child witnesses giving evidence via advance statements or videolink has had on conviction rates?

Last night, I saw the highly enjoyable Dario Fo farce "Trumpets and Raspberries" at the Royal Lyceum theatre but, from what I have heard, this premature debate outdoes the play, given the ludicrous nature of the plot, in which a dastardly First Minister and his henchman Mr Swinney secretly plot to undermine the integrity of Scotland's planning system for their own nefarious ends. I realise that Opposition politicians are excited at the prospect of creating a hazy perception of wrongdoing in the Scottish Government, even if no hard evidence is available to support such a belief. It would have been better to have awaited the Scottish Government's response to the committee report before forging ahead with the debate.

I am deputy convener of the Local Government and Communities Committee, so I had hoped to close the debate for the committee, with the aim of covering the many areas of the report on which there was genuine consensus. However, committee colleagues thought that I should be freed up to make my partisan comments, so the politically more neutral David McLetchie—if members can believe that—will close for the committee. I will focus on areas of consensus in the report, but first I am happy to allow Sarah Boyack to make an intervention.

The decision to request a debate was made before the response was given. The committee should have decided whether to go forward after receiving the response. In paragraph 182 of the report, the committee said: "The Committee notes that the Chief Planner and the Planning Minister (Cabinet Secretary for Finance and sustainable Growth, John Swinney) acted in accordance with planning laws when issuing the decision to call in the application. The Committee notes the evidence of the Chief Planner that he had decided over the weekend of 1-2 December that call-in would be the simplest solution for all parties. The Committee notes that there are no definitive criteria for call-in and that each case is decided on its own merits ... The Committee notes the evidence that the  planning minister took advice from the Chief Planner in reaching his decision." In paragraph 208, the committee said: "The Committee notes the evidence of the Cabinet Secretary that the First Minister had made no representations to him on the merits of the planning application even although it was permissible for the First Minister to do so in terms of ... the Code." I draw Mary Scanlon's attention to paragraph 214, in which the committee noted that Mr Salmond made it clear that "he had met people from all sides of the debate", and went on to quote the First Minister, who said: "Each and every one of those answers made my role as a constituency MSP crystal clear and emphasised that as a minister I am debarred from decision making on a planning application in my constituency."

I would have liked to take an intervention from the Liberal member of the committee, Jim Tolson, but he hasnae bothered to show up for the debate. The report quotes Mr Salmond as saying: "In every single phone call and meeting, I have gone through the limits that are placed on me by being the constituency MSP. No one can be in any doubt about that whatsoever." In paragraph 216, the committee said: "The Chief Executive of Aberdeenshire told the Committee that Alex Salmond always made it clear that he was talking as local MSP and not as First Minister. He did not express an opinion to the Chief Executive about the merits and outcome of the application." In paragraph 232, the committee said: "The Committee entirely accepts the right of Alex Salmond MSP in his constituency capacity to meet with anyone he chooses about an issue in his constituency." In paragraph 241, the committee said: "The Committee notes the efforts made by Mr Salmond to ensure all stakeholders were clear that he was acting as Constituency MSP for Gordon and not as First Minister. The Committee notes that stakeholders have made it clear they were aware that Mr Salmond was acting as Constituency MSP for Gordon and not as First Minister at all times." On paragraph 268, there is nothing in the report to suggest that ministers were anything other than fully mindful of and compliant with the Scottish ministerial code. Ministers will continue to operate in that way. CBI Scotland's director, Iain McMillan, who is no supporter of the SNP, backed the First Minister. He said on 14 March: "I said previously that this parliamentary inquiry appeared to be little more than a fishing expedition, and this report is  not likely to change my mind. No evidence of wrong-doing appears to have been found, despite those involved scrambling around looking for reasons to criticise." As Duncan McNeil said on the same day, "No laws were broken." During the debate Mr Kerr was asked to reflect on his comments about fiddling—

Maybe Mr Kerr was confusing Mr Salmond with his own, floundering party leader—

Not every minister is as circumspect in his dealings with Mr Trump as Mr Salmond has been. Freedom of information requests have revealed the extent of former First Minister Jack McConnell's involvement with Mr Trump.

Jack McConnell's personal assistant wrote: "He thinks he should have a telephone call with Trump." Touchingly, Mr McConnell even sent Mr Trump a birthday card and said that Mr Trump "is our most famous Global Scot and that we should continue to court him." On the call-in, Alex Johnstone said: "This is absolutely the right decision and I can only hope it is not too late. Last week's decision was, quite simply, the wrong one and does not reflect public opinion. I am delighted by tonight's developments" from the SNP. The Evening Express stated: "First Minister Alex Salmond is spot on in his assessment of yesterday's sleaze row as a descent into gutter politics" by Nicol Stephen. It continued: "It is tiresome that Nicol Stephen is hijacking attempts to get the Trump bid back on course to score cheap political points. As a North-east MSP we expect him to represent the interests of his constituents, not sling mud at the  expense of efforts to rescue the Menie proposals. Mr Stephen is hardly the one to indulge in such heckling."—

Excuse me, Presiding Officer, but I had a point of order in the middle of my speech.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I could not take interventions that I would have liked to take because time was taken up by a spurious point of order. In such cases time should be added, should it not?

Why did the councils sign up to it, then?

I, too, congratulate Mary Mulligan on securing the debate and on her excellent speech. The previous two speakers were somewhat pessimistic; in this debate we are celebrating the BID projects that are being developed and particularly the Bathgate BID. There has been much talk about whether business community expenditure will be a substitute for local authority expenditure. I do not think that will happen. It is clear that a BID is set up through a partnership agreement between a local authority and businesses in order to secure additional services that will improve the business environment. I am keen to explore the concept in my constituency, where it is more likely than not that the local authority will be enthusiastic about providing additional support for a community that is seen to be doing something for itself and dragging itself up by its bootstraps. It is about helping businesses and communities not just to survive but to thrive and to adapt to ever-changing circumstances. Small towns in particular need to be much more innovative in encouraging more specialist businesses, given the threats from supermarkets and out-of-town malls to which people drive. Empty businesses and shops in our towns are an eyesore that we have all experienced. In some small towns in my area 10 to 15 per cent of properties lie derelict, which has a severe effect on morale and makes towns less attractive not only to investors but to people who might go to live there. I hope that the pilot BIDs will be extremely successful. BIDs were first set up in Canada in 1973 and there are now 1,400 BIDs throughout the world, so I see no reason why the approach should not be successful in Scotland. I understand Mr Brown's point about a mandatory levy. However, if everyone gains, everyone should contribute. If businesses will have an increased footfall and do more trade, it is not unreasonable to expect them to contribute after the democratic process has taken place. My sister lives in Canada and I have witnessed BIDs in operation there. BIDs can install closed-circuit television cameras. I know that we want local authorities to provide cameras, but they do not always have the money and doing so is not necessarily their top priority. A wee nudge might push them in the right direction, which is all to the good. BIDs can remove graffiti, reduce vandalism, provide benches, put up hanging baskets and keep places spruce and nicely painted. Many things can be done to make the public realm more attractive and to attract people into a town, which  will help it to thrive. BIDs can help to make a town not just vibrant and viable, but safer. There is an important opportunity to create civic pride by reducing empty properties and unemployment. Mary Mulligan was right to commend Ian Davison Porter. He said: "Having a collective vision and a strong partnership, particularly one where the private sector has real input and responsibility, can help provide the drive and energy needed to deliver projects over an extended period of time and ultimately deliver a viable and vibrant town which benefits everyone." I support that. I hope that the Scottish Government will re-examine the £15,000 ceiling, which Mary Mulligan mentioned. We should try to enhance conditions and we should try to reduce the timeframe for BIDs. Frankly, 18 months to two years is too long to go through the process—people want to see results much more quickly. Along with the small business bonus scheme, BIDs could go a long way towards helping to restore some of our small towns.

The First Minister is aware of the shameful decision by Labour and Lib Dem councillors in North Ayrshire to remove wardens from sheltered housing—a decision that impacts directly on 573 elderly and often frail and vulnerable people. No consultation was carried out with the residents concerned before the decision was imposed. That contravenes North Ayrshire Council's tenant participation strategy.

Does the First Minister agree with the Minister for Communities and Sport that North Ayrshire Council has thereby breached section 54(2) of the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001? Does he concur that wardens should not be removed from sheltered housing without full consultation with residents?

I congratulate Gil Paterson on securing the debate, in which I am pleased to speak. I was, in September 2000, the first member of the Scottish Parliament to lodge a motion on human trafficking, and I moved the motion on Scottish National Party policy on trafficking at our annual conference. Since 2000, 23 members from five political parties have lodged motions in the Scottish Parliament on human trafficking, which demonstrates the strength of feeling on the issue. Trish Godman secured a members' business debate on the matter two years ago. Trafficking is a vile worldwide phenomenon that affects men and boys as well as women and girls, although women are most likely to be exploited through trafficking. Victims can be trafficked for a range of exploitative purposes and children are particularly vulnerable. The Scottish Government has substantial responsibilities under ECAT, given Scotland's distinctive care and justice systems. The internationally recognised definition of child trafficking is children being transported for purposes of exploitation within or across national boundaries. The definition includes situations in which children have consented voluntarily to travel, but were exploited on arrival. That happens frequently with adults, too. Trafficking in human beings is not only a crime but a fundamental violation of the most basic human rights. Exploitation varies according to age, gender or race. Examples include domestic servitude, restaurant and catering labour, benefit fraud, as well as sexual exploitation and underage forced marriage. Trafficked children are at risk of losing even their identity because traffickers often destroy their papers and change their names. During the journey, unsafe transportation places children at risk of death or injury. On arrival, they are likely to experience violence, abuse and dangerous working conditions that are harmful to their health and wellbeing. Correct identification and referral of victims to appropriate services lies at the heart of any system to protect trafficked persons. Under ECAT—when it is ratified—identification by competent authorities will act as a passport to a range of rights that are intended to help a trafficked person to escape from the influence of traffickers and to begin a process of recovery through access to health care, support, accommodation and legal advice. Conversely, failure to be identified will lead to a denial of basic support. In the case of people with irregular immigration status, it could also lead to  immigration detention, criminalisation and the removal to the country of origin without any assessment of the risk harm or re-trafficking on return. When trafficked persons who are reasonably suspected of having been subjected to sexual violence or sexual exploitation are interviewed to establish identification, they should be entitled to the same best-practice procedures from the police to which other victims of rape and sexual violence are entitled. For example, female victims should be interviewed only by female officers. The physical and psychological health needs and safety requirements of trafficked victims are extensive. A study was carried out at a London university into the physical and psychological health of women who had been trafficked into forced prostitution or sexual exploitation in the context of forced domestic work. It found that the women suffered numerous physical and mental health problems and that their psychological reactions were severe and prevalent, and compared to or surpassed the symptoms that have been recorded for torture victims. The symptoms included feelings of suicide, depression, hopelessness and extreme anxiety. Today's debate gives Parliament an opportunity to make a statement to Scotland, the rest of the United Kingdom, Europe and the wider world that the people of Scotland will not tolerate the trafficking of women, children and young men in our society. We must stamp out trafficking. Working together, we can do that.

I have a constituency that has extensive coastline and sizeable island and coastal communities, so I welcome this important debate on Scotland's marine environment. Current legislation on marine issues is a complex and untidy mix of reserved and devolved powers. Peter Peacock described it as "fiendishly complex". The power to legislate on marine issues is partially devolved. The Scottish Government has devolved powers over issues such as nature conservation to 12 nautical miles, licensing of deposits in the sea, except oil and gas, and coastal protection works to 12 nautical miles. It has powers over renewable energy—wave, wind and tidal—in the Scottish renewables zone, which is similar in extent to the Scottish fisheries zone, over fisheries within the Scottish fisheries zone, and over pollution control from land. It has powers over cultural heritage within 12 nautical miles, tourism, ports and planning for coastlines and for aquaculture up to 12 nautical miles out.  The mix of competences is arbitrary and unnecessarily complex and ignores the distinctive nature of Scotland's marine environment. That is why the Scottish Government seeks to have marine powers fully devolved. In early January 2008, a new task force was set up to consider proposals for legislation to protect Scotland's marine and coastal environment. That body will represent the main users of coastal seas. On Arran in my constituency, the cabinet secretary announced an important and significant initiative on 21 January. He launched the 12-week consultation on the Lamlash Bay community conservation area—which is otherwise known as the no-take zone in Lamlash Bay. It is intended to protect maerl beds—the coral-like seaweed that forms a nursery for young fish—and to promote the regeneration of marine life, including scallops. When an initiative on a similar scale took place in New Zealand, it was found that the number of scallops that were produced increased by up to 50 times. The initiative will be extremely significant for Scotland: it could be a template for zones in other parts of Scotland, allowing us to regenerate depleted marine stocks. The great thing about what happened in Arran was that it originated in the community: the Community of Arran Seabed Trust pursued the issue for more than a decade. It is significant that, as Dave Thompson mentioned, a marine bill would provide communities with the opportunity to take greater control of their lives. Scotland's fisheries zone, which is within 200 miles of the coast, covers 127,000 square miles of sea and nearly a quarter of EU waters. When the Parliament was established in 1999, it was 133,000 square miles—I recall that certain parties in Parliament voted to surrender some 6,000 square miles of Scottish seas. As the cabinet secretary said, Scotland's seas have an exceptionally varied character with wonderfully diverse geological features, such as steep cliffs, deep-sea lochs, islands, rocky reefs, sea caves, sandy beaches, machair, lagoons, salt marshes, estuaries and firths. Scotland's waters are home to at least 8,000 species of plants, invertebrates, fish, birds and mammals. That includes many species of cetacean—whales, dolphins and porpoises—and globally significant populations of some birds and animals. The cabinet secretary talked about the seal population in particular. Scottish waters are among the most rich and diverse in the world. Species such as the basking shark and the leatherback turtle are of global significance, as are Scotland's sea bird populations. In 2000, the Scottish coastal forum estimated that the annual income from marine activities in  the area between 1km offshore and 1km inland was £4.5 billion a year—not including oil, of course. Marine fish farming in the UK is confined entirely to Scottish waters and provides additional income for many fragile rural communities. The Scottish Federation of Sea Anglers estimates that recreational sea angling is worth more than £150 million a year to the Scottish economy through associated retail trades and tourism. Sea angling's future is reliant on the quality of fish stocks. Even whale watching, which people may think is not of great significance, supports some 2,500 jobs and £57 million of revenue annually. It is therefore vital that we protect our marine species, habitats and ecosystems, whether they are of Scottish or international importance, and that we have a comprehensive network of marine protected areas. It is also important that we have a statutory system of marine spatial planning in Scotland and a lead decision-making body. Through the use of marine spatial planning, we must stop the free-for-all and ensure that aquaculture, oil, gas, renewable energy, fishing, shipping and nature conservation are no longer regulated and planned separately. Issues such as energy, and particularly oil and gas, should be incorporated into any devolved settlement. On the timing of the marine bill, Mike Rumbles said he was disappointed that it was taking the SNP Government about nine months to progress the matter. The previous Labour and Liberal Administration was in power for 96 months and did not produce the consultation programme that we are moving forward with. I thank the cabinet secretary for his hard work, and wish him all the best in moving the issue through Parliament.

Judging by the experiences of the people who have contacted me, I believe  that there is still a real issue on the ground about whether people are tapping into the guidelines. It is one thing to issue guidelines; it is another matter whether people are using them on a day-to-day basis. The minister has talked about there being 3,000 presentations a year. However, somebody can have anorexia for 20 years, which is probably why the figures are so disparate. If there were 3,000 presentations a year over 20 years, that would give a total of 60,000 sufferers—and the figure could be even higher.

Let me first thank the 21 Scottish National Party, Labour, Conservative and Green members who signed my motion and made this debate possible. I also thank Professor Bryan Lask and Dr Sarah Cassar, specialists in the field of eating disorders who are both in the public gallery, and Dr Malcolm Kerr, who is a general practitioner in Arran. All those medical professionals have provided invaluable assistance in informing my contribution to the debate. Most of all, I thank my constituents from Kilbirnie who first brought this matter to my attention and who are also in the public gallery. Their 16-year-old daughter lies seriously ill with anorexia in Huntercombe hospital in West Lothian. Eating disorders are illnesses characterised by physiological and psychological disturbances in eating behaviour. Cutting-edge research, pioneered at St George's in London and at Huntercombe, has proved that 75 per cent of patients with anorexia suffer from a fundamental brain abnormality, identifiable by magnetic resonance imaging.  Anorexia nervosa is a serious psychological disorder characterised by a pathological fear of weight gain, leading to diminished eating, malnutrition and severe weight loss. Over time, the weight loss becomes a sign of mastery and control and can become both obsessive and addictive. Anorexia can be life threatening, with a mortality rate three times that of schizophrenia or manic depression. Although anorexia will ultimately prove fatal for around 10 per cent of sufferers—often after many years—other illnesses ranging from organ damage to osteoporosis are likely for those who do not recover fully. Bulimia nervosa is episodic, insatiable binge eating, often associated with fear of being unable to stop eating. Weight may be controlled by self-induced vomiting, excessive exercise and the use of laxatives, diuretics or other inappropriate medication, possibly interspersed with periods of anorexia. Both anorexia and bulimia occur primarily in young women in their teens and early 20s. Both illnesses are often triggered by issues of confidence, physical self-image and self-esteem. High-achieving young women may be particularly susceptible. The incidence of concomitant depression is high, and a third will have suffered sexual abuse at some time in their life. Although anorexia and bulimia can be fatal, thankfully the vast majority of people fully recover. However, a minority will need specialist, intensive hospital treatment. How many people suffer from eating disorders in Scotland? The BBC quotes a figure of 80,000 on its website, many of whom may have had the disease on and off for many years. Of course, many cases do not present, so numbers can only ever be approximate. The impact of an eating disorder sufferer on their family can be devastating. In the case of my constituent—whom The Mail on Sunday called "Lucy" to retain her anonymity—her family were at their wits' end after having had to fight to obtain appropriate treatment for their daughter, who is now 16. In the words of her mother, Lucy is "physically and emotionally unrecognisable" from their happy-go-lucky daughter of only a year ago. Local GPs were unable to provide the assistance that this young girl needed. Even when her weight plummeted to 5 stone 5 ounces, the family had to fight for the medical attention that their daughter needed. Lucy is now in Huntercombe hospital, along with five other patients from Ayrshire and Arran, fighting to recover. Why West Lothian? Because the only facilities available where national health service patients can be treated in hospital are at that facility—an NHS resource managed independently of the NHS—and at the Priory Hospital Glasgow.  My concerns in bringing the matter to the Parliament relate partly to the lack of hospital treatment available for eating disorders and the fact that such treatment is not available in specialist centres in other parts of Scotland such as Ayrshire—notwithstanding the fact that an NHS facility will be opened later this year in Aberdeen. Even in the community, where treatment is vital, resources are lacking. Treatment is multidisciplinary, leaning on the expertise of nurses, psychologists, dieticians, dentists and so on, and it takes place predominantly in the community. The role of GPs is pivotal. The NHS Quality Improvement Scotland guidelines issued in November 2006 are authoritative but not well known in primary care. They incorporate recommendations from the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence in England. From advice given to me, it appears that guidelines should be modified specifically for use in primary care and promoted among GPs and other primary care staff. A review of the guidelines could be expedited to ensure compliance at health board level. A specialist service for eating disorders is vital, not just to treat the most severe cases but to promote excellence in this area of medicine so that an eating disorder service can be both community based and consultant led. How should anorexic patients be treated? Treatment is complex and what is effective will vary from patient to patient. Treatment may include cognitive behavioural therapy, which challenges the patient's assumptions about body weight and image by suggesting more rational and positive alternatives such as healthy eating, monitoring one's moods, exploring healthy ways to deal with stressful situations and teaching the patient to think about food rather than weight. People who have the brain abnormality that has been identified can be treated using that form of therapy. Other important effective treatments for anorexics include family therapy but, unfortunately, there are not enough qualified therapists in Scotland to provide that essential service. Nutritional education is important, too. It is significant that children are now being taught about healthy eating as never before. Hopefully, such education will give people a more rounded view of food that will augur well for the future. For anorexics, such information enables the design of eating plans that focus on maintaining a healthy weight. It is crucial that sufferers are identified early and treated quickly and as close as possible to home. In Scotland, the core problem is the dearth of expertise and the lack of any training posts in the field. That issue must be addressed, although I  appreciate that specialists cannot be made to appear overnight. Undoubtedly, Lothian NHS Board has the most mature eating disorder services, but even its waiting lists for hospital out-patient services range from one year to 18 months. Of course, the minority of patients who need hospital care should receive that care within the NHS to ensure that primary and secondary care is integrated. Experts have told me that the £495 a day cost of treating an NHS patient in private clinics could be greatly reduced if contracts were signed with the Scottish Government. Ministers could then state expected outcomes and invest the savings in community care services to give GPs access to improved eating disorder services. Community care for patients leaving hospital is critical if patients are to be discharged earlier and relapse rates minimised. Such care must be provided to patients for up to one year after they are discharged. Anorexic and bulimic patients are mostly young, vulnerable women. They deserve to be treated early on in their illness and with sensitivity. I ask the minister to assure me that steps will be taken to ensure that that happens sooner rather than later.

I am pleased to follow such a positive speech—one with which I wholly agree. The generosity of donors and their families enables nearly 3,000 people in the UK every year to take on a new lease of life. It is important for those of us who have grown up with transplants to acknowledge that the first successful kidney transplant took place only in 1954 and the first heart transplant in 1967. I have to say that a feeling of panic came over me when I read that. I remember when the first heart transplant took place and my own mortality was exposed to me. The kidneys, the heart, the liver, the lungs, the pancreas and the small bowel can all be transplanted. Techniques are improving all the time, and soon it might be possible to transplant other parts of the body to help even more people. However, there is a serious shortage of organs and the gap between the number of organs that are donated and the number of people who are waiting for a transplant is increasing. Transplants are very successful, and the number of people who need transplants will continue to increase due to the ageing population, an increase in kidney failure due to lifestyle changes, and scientific advances, which mean that more people are now able to benefit from transplants. The number of organs that are available for transplantation has reduced for several reasons. Mr Rumbles and Mary Scanlon mentioned the issue in their interventions. Only a small number of people die in circumstances in which they are able to donate their organs and organs have to be transplanted soon after death. They usually come from people who are certified dead while on a ventilator in a hospital intensive care unit, usually as the result of a brain haemorrhage, a major accident such as a car crash, or a stroke. The number of people—particularly younger people—who die in such circumstances is falling, mainly  because of welcome improvements in road safety, medical advances in treatment, and prevention of strokes in younger people. That goes some way towards answering Mike Rumbles's question about why the number of people on the donor register is increasing but there are fewer people from whom to get organs. Many people have not recorded their wish to donate their organs, or discussed it with their family: too few people have joined the NHS organ donor register and made sure that their families know their wishes. It is important that the Scottish Government's advertising campaign covers that, as I know it will. It is important to remember that we are talking about real people and real lives. Someone who received a heart transplant said: "My transplant gave me my life back. I have seen my children grow up and was able to get back to work. I owe all this to a 19-year-old man who wanted to give someone he had never met the gift of life." Since 2002, there has been a 16 per cent increase in the number of transplants overall, a 26 per cent increase in the number of kidney transplants, and a 280 per cent increase in the number of non-heart-beating donors. The problem is that demand continues to outstrip supply. Members have not mentioned today the fact that the lack of organs for transplantation has caused some people to go overseas and undergo risky and expensive transplant procedures. I remember reading early last year—in the Daily Record , of all papers—about people who go from Scotland to Pakistan and pay people several thousand pounds to get back-street transplants. That obviously puts in danger their lives and those of the people who make the donations. We have heard that the only reason why there has been a big increase in donations in Spain—particularly in the Basque country, which has the highest donations, at four times the UK rate—is that there are more car crashes and more transplant co-ordinators. I accept that, but one point that I made in the member's business debate on presumed consent that was instigated by Lord Foulkes was on the regression analysis. In the submission that the BMA sent to all members, it gave some details that are important to reflect on: "In 2006, Abadie and Gay published a detailed regression analysis of 22 countries over 10 years taking into account a range of determinants that might affect donation rates. They concluded that 'when other determinants of donation rates are accounted for, presumed consent countries have roughly 25-30 per cent higher donation rates than informed consent countries.'" Those determinants are gross domestic product, per capita health expenditure, religious beliefs, the legislative system and the number of deaths from traffic crashes, cerebral vascular diseases and so  on. It is a red herring to suggest that presumed consent does not increase the number of organs that are available for donation. It is a question of saving people's lives. Government at both UK and Scotland level has to be commended for the work that has been done in setting up the task force. Like many others, I hope that all its recommendations will be taken on board. The Human Tissue (Scotland) Act 2006 introduced a new concept of authorisation for cadaveric organ donation, which is a phrase that is intended to convey that people have the right to express during their lifetime their wishes about what should happen to their bodies after death, in the expectation that those wishes will be respected. As someone who is strongly in favour of presumed consent, I think that we need measures to ensure that people do not worry that organs will be taken without their wishes being taken into account. However, we have to understand that the problem is acute and will only get worse. We have to bite the bullet at some point, and from chatting to colleagues I know that many members have realised that presumed consent is the way forward. We have to take on board all the report's recommendations, and we should take the earliest realistic opportunity to move to a system of presumed consent.

I congratulate Cathy Jamieson on securing this important debate. I am sure that she will forgive me for focusing most of my contribution on North Ayrshire and Corrie primary school.

I am happy to acknowledge that. I would have got to it in a moment; Cathy Jamieson has jumped a wee bit ahead of me. I have long had an interest in the rural schools issue. In March 1998, when I was a Glasgow councillor, I moved a resolution at the SNP's Stirling national council meeting that no rural schools should be closed unless for strictly educational reasons. So I am pleased that the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, Fiona Hyslop, on 11 October last year, wrote a detailed letter to all local authority education conveners, directors of education and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities education convener, stating: "This letter sets out the Scottish Government's position on the handling meantime of school closure proposals—whether or not they require Ministerial consent—in advance of our consulting on proposals for a legislative presumption against the closure of rural schools."  The letter continues: "You will be aware of our manifesto commitment to introduce a legislative presumption against the closure of rural schools." I come to Corrie primary school. A formal consultation began in January with a view to closing Corrie primary school, as well as its adjacent nursery, in the summer. The nursery is the only purpose-built nursery on Arran. Corrie primary school is a high performing school, with 100 per cent attendance levels and placing requests from outwith its catchment. In the past few months, it has had an excellent Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education report. The school is 120 years old and central to the heart of the local community, and I acknowledge what John Farquhar Munro said on that issue. The commitment of the parents, staff and pupils is such that together they raised £11,000 to build and install an adventure playground that opened on 20 August 2007. I and members of all parties believe that the decision to open a consultation was based on erroneous information that grossly overstated the capacity of Corrie primary school while underestimating pupil numbers. The closure of the school would have a devastating impact on the pupils, the parents and staff, and on the viability of the village of Corrie and its ability to attract young families with children. That is despite the fact that Arran Homes and the Housing Initiative for Arran Residents plan to build between 24 and 27 homes in Corrie and Glen Sannox during the next couple of years, including homes that will attract families and boost the local primary school's roll. Of course, it should be noted that, across Scotland, 431 primary schools have rolls of 50 pupils or fewer, so there is great concern about what will happen in Corrie, in East Ayrshire, and elsewhere. It is important that we consider the issue throughout Scotland. Should the outcome of the consultation process be that North Ayrshire Council agrees to close Corrie primary school, the consultation document will require, under the terms of the Education (Publication and Consultation etc) (Scotland) Regulations 1981, to be submitted to the Scottish Government for the consent of the Scottish ministers. I hope that in those circumstances ministers will ensure that Corrie primary does not close this summer or in the near future.

I know that if you were sitting where we are sitting, Presiding Officer, you would be very keen to take part in the debate. It is unfortunate that you are precluded from doing so. I thank John Scott not only for securing the debate but for bringing this issue to the Parliament's attention for, I believe, the first time. Sea angling's time has come, and sea anglers' passionate commitment to their sport is reflected in the fact that so many of them turned up at Parliament today to represent a very diverse group of organisations. Indeed, many were present at the lunchtime meeting to ask questions of the panel, of which I was a member. The Scottish Sea Angling Conservation Network is to be congratulated on the very comprehensive document that it produced for its lifelines event, which deals with a number of issues facing the sea angling community. I noted with some alarm that since 1970 the number of Clyde charter boats used for sea angling has declined from 119 to a mere three. Such a statistic shows the pressure that sea anglers are under.  As far as sea angling's relationship to commercial fishing is concerned, I think that there is a misconception about the fish species that recreational anglers catch. Having sea angled only once—after which I was, unfortunately, rather unwell—I am not personally familiar with some of the species caught by sea anglers, which include pollack, skate, conger eel, wrasse, tope, spurdog and porbeagle shark. I see Jackson Carlaw laughing at that. I should tell him that although I am the son, grandson and great-grandson of jolly Jack Tars, I am afraid that that gene has not been passed down to me. The Scottish Government has tried to examine the issue of recreational sea angling. In fact, it has commissioned research from Glasgow Caledonian University that commenced just this year and should address the problem that we have very little objective information on the scale, character and economic impact of recreational sea angling in Scotland. Given the jobs at stake, it is vital that we increase tourism revenues in Scotland, and the role that recreational sea angling can play in that respect, particularly in some of the fragile communities that Elaine Murray mentioned, must be acknowledged if we are to reach our target of increasing such revenues by 50 per cent by 2015. Not only has VisitScotland produced a "Fish in Scotland" brochure; it has a website promoting all types of fishing opportunities for visitors, including dedicated sections for coarse anglers and sea fishermen. However, those aspects could be promoted with a bit more gusto. We should also commend the anglers welcome scheme for providing storage boxes for rods; a daily weather forecast; freezer facilities for bait or catch; and facilities for gutting or preparing catches and for washing tackle. Moreover, the European Commission's shark action plan will be significant when it is introduced. In my constituency, proposals for a no-take zone in Lamlash Bay went out to consultation on 21 January. For 13 or 14 years, the Community of Arran Seabed Trust—or COAST—has pressed Governments of all colours on this matter, without any effect, and I am pleased that the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment has launched the consultation. Introducing a no-take zone in Lamlash could help tremendously in showing that marine conservation can work for recreational sea anglers or fishermen of a commercial bent. Recreational sea angling is an opportunity to provide all-year fishing in many areas of Scotland, especially the area that I represent—the Firth of Clyde. Members who attended today's meeting are keenly aware of how much sea anglers want to develop their sport. We recognise that recreational sea anglers can make an important  contribution to the sustainability and economic development of coastal communities.

I make it clear that I am speaking not as a member of the Scottish National Party but as the deputy convener of the Local Government and Communities Committee. I am opening on behalf of the committee because our convener is unable to be in attendance today due to a recent bereavement. The Parliamentary Bureau, at its meeting on Tuesday 13 November 2007, agreed to refer the Glasgow Commonwealth Games Bill to the Local Government and Communities Committee for consideration at stage 1. Twenty-nine individuals and organisations responded to the committee's call for written evidence, and the committee took oral evidence on the bill from witnesses at its meetings on 21 November 2007 and 16 January 2008. The committee expresses its thanks publicly to all those who provided written and oral evidence on the bill. The committee notes the report of the Subordinate Legislation Committee and asks the  Scottish Government to consider its recommendations and to lodge amendments at stage 2 where appropriate. In particular, we draw the Parliament's attention to the suggested amendments in paragraph 9 of the Subordinate Legislation Committee's report, on the definition of "games event", and those in paragraph 50, on enforcement powers. The Local Government and Communities Committee notes the contents of the policy memorandum to the bill and accepts that it provides an adequate explanation of the policy intentions behind the bill. The committee notes that the Finance Committee consulted relevant organisations and strongly recommended that the Scottish Government pursue possible lottery funding avenues to offset the public commitment of funding from Glasgow City Council and the Scottish Government. That would allow more money to be invested in grass-roots sports development in Scottish communities. However, I note the comments that we heard from the Minister for Communities and Sport in that regard. There was no dispute about the definition of "the games", but there was concern from North Lanarkshire Council, the Advertising Association, the Scottish Police Federation, Scottish Enterprise and the committee itself about the definitions of "games event", "vicinity" and "precinct". At its meeting on 21 November, the committee explored the issue of current street trading licensees, particularly those who have licences to sell the paraphernalia associated with sporting and other events and activities. The committee seeks an assurance that the position of current licensed street traders will be taken into consideration. I note that the minister said that we do not know who they are at present, but I hope that the matter will be resolved in the years to come. The committee seeks an assurance that such traders will not be financially penalised as a consequence of the games in Glasgow. The committee considers that definitions of "vicinity" and "precinct" should be provided at an early opportunity and that they should take into account the practical issues that surround games venues and events, including street trading and advertising. The Scottish Police Federation commented that section 2 does not appear to cover illegal trading that takes place indoors. That means that such trading would be exempt from penalty and could not be a justification for exercise of the power to enter and search in section 25. Scottish Enterprise commented that it believes that the regulations under the bill will not hinder legitimate business involvement in the games.  Sections 10 to 16 deal with advertising issues, including the creation of an offence of advertising within the vicinity of a games event at particular times. The Advertising Association suggested that the maximum duration of any advertising regulations should be specified, that there should be a duty to consult the advertising industry on any secondary legislation, and that any advertising regulations should be subject to the affirmative resolution procedure. The bill proposes that regulations would be laid before the Parliament under the negative resolution procedure. The Advertising Association also suggested that an advertising defence should be introduced. The association drew the committee's attention to the London Olympic Games and Paralympic Games Act 2006, under which regulations that concern the physical location of advertising are subject to affirmative resolution procedure in the House of Commons. The Scottish Police Federation believes that section 11(2) is too widely drawn and could prohibit churches from using their normal notice-boards or distributing parish bulletins. The SPF asserted that it is inappropriate for such organisations to have to rely on the exercise of discretion under section 14 to avoid punishment for breaking the law. That concern was also identified by the Advertising Association, which suggested that an advertising defence would be a useful way to tackle the problem. On the creation of an association right, the Advertising Association is firmly of the opinion that the body of law that covers intellectual property rights provides more than sufficient protection to sponsors in relation to the Commonwealth games. The creation of an association right is, in the Advertising Association's opinion, disproportionate and risks damaging the wider advertising sector by introducing intellectual property rights over words and numerals that are in common usage. It is clear to the committee that further work is required to assuage the concerns of businesses and those who will be tasked with implementing the advertising provisions. The committee accepts that many of the issues that have been identified in relation to advertising are reserved matters, but it would welcome a clear statement from the Scottish Government about why the restrictions that it has outlined are considered necessary. In particular, we ask the Government to respond to the points that were raised by the Advertising Association. Sections 17 to 20 are on ticket touting. They include a provision to make it an offence to tout games tickets, exceptions for certain advertisers, and provisions on internet and other electronic communication issues. The Scottish Rugby Union drew attention to the complexity surrounding ticket  touting and in particular the use of unofficial hospitality packages as a vehicle for the sale of black market tickets and the increasing incidence of internet ticket touting. The SRU suggested that the solutions found in the bill could be extended to other sporting events and that the bill affords an opportunity to tackle the problem in the context of sports events as a whole and not just in respect of the games. Glasgow Chamber of Commerce suggested that the bill could be applicable to all major events and suggested considering that in relation to the bill. The issue of enforcement attracted the largest amount of and most detailed evidence submitted to the committee. ACPOS set out specific examples of where the bill provides enforcement officers with powers beyond those that are currently granted to police officers, such as the empowering of enforcement officers to take what they consider appropriate action to enforce a games offence, which is properly a matter for the courts to determine, and the power to destroy an infringing article used in the commission of a games offence, which should instead be presented to the courts as evidence. That point is supported by the written evidence of Glasgow Chamber of Commerce, which shares similar concerns, considering that such destruction of property would be based on a belief, rather than evidence, that it was being used in a games offence. Following submissions by Network Rail, the committee recommends that if enforcement officers are to be enabled to enter railway land, appropriate provisions will be required to ensure health and safety. I note that time is running short, so I will truncate much of what the committee had to say to certain key points. The committee appreciates that some changes have been made from the draft bill to the bill as introduced. However, it is clear that significant concerns remain regarding the recruitment of enforcement officers and the powers that the bill grants them. Accordingly, the committee recommends that the Government review and address the enforcement provisions of the bill in the light of the concerns that have been raised. However, the committee is content with the provisions on how offences will be taken forward. The committee is content with the provisions on transport and the transport plan, and it recommends that work continue on consulting and involving all relevant organisations on the specific issues. The committee also notes that, notwithstanding the funding assumptions that underpinned the successful bid, the Scottish Government is not now precluded from making a policy decision to try to offset some of that public  commitment by seeking lottery funding, allowing more money to be invested in grass-roots sport development in Scottish communities. I make no excuse for mentioning that point for a second time, because we believe that it is fundamental to the success of the games. The committee notes the information that was provided by the bill team on broadcasting revenue and looks forward to updates on that as part of the regular updates to the committee that the Minister for Communities and Sport has offered. We welcome the minister's commitment to keep the committee and members in general informed on the bill, and we look forward to receiving updates and an annual report on progress towards the Commonwealth games. The committee considers that there is broad overall support for the proposals in the bill, which has been welcomed as containing appropriate measures for the delivery of the Glasgow Commonwealth games. In its report, the committee identified certain places where the proposals in the bill could be improved further. Subject to those caveats, the committee recommends to the Parliament that the general principles of the bill be approved.

The minister will recall from meeting several organisations in my constituency on 22 August last year that North Ayrshire Council, Scottish Enterprise Ayrshire and others have made it clear that the way to regenerate my constituency, and the most significant investment, would be to construct the Dalry bypass. Will he use his influence to press for the construction of that bypass at the earliest possible date as part of the review?

Mr Kerr talks about the poorest areas. Does he not realise that, in the eight years in which Labour was in power, Glasgow City Council, which has half of Scotland's poverty, actually received the worst settlement? If it received the same share of funding in the current year as it did in the first year of devolution, it would have an extra £102 million to spend.

It is but a few short weeks since Gavin Brown described me and the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth as the new Romeo and Juliet of Scottish politics. How my heart leapt to hear those words. However, love is fickle and often unrequited. In my case, it has been made bitter by the certain knowledge that, in recent days, Mr Swinney has devoted himself not to me but to seducing a mysterious and demanding woman in the east known only as Margo, whom he has wooed assiduously with gifts of a substantially pecuniary nature. Nevertheless, I pledge my undying devotion to the quaint document that has been laid before us, which one  may call the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Order 2008. It appears that 32-nil is the score in terms of the number of councils that have signed up to the Scottish Government's proposals. No matter how many effigies of Councillor Pat Watters he has burned or how many voodoo dolls he has stuck needles into, Andy Kerr has failed miserably to browbeat Labour councillors into rejecting the SNP's local government settlement. Councillors know which side their bread is buttered on, and they will not toe Mr Kerr's now discredited line. That hardly augurs well for him in Labour's forthcoming leadership contest, which is now looming as Wendy Alexander suffers political death by 1,000 resignations or, on today's evidence, by 1,000 First Minister's question times—or even a budget vote or two. We now know that, for the first time post devolution, the proportion of total managed expenditure will increase, which shows the importance of local government in Scottish National Party thinking and delivers a substantial real-terms increase in funding, with improved flexibility, over the next three years.

To be honest, "exonerates" is a bit far fetched—"lets off the hook" would be a more accurate description of what has happened. We have heard from Mr Kerr about how councils will struggle financially under the SNP settlement, but he seems to forget that Westminster sets the level of the Scottish block. Until that situation changes by our securing the re-emergence of Scotland as an independent sovereign state, we will always be at the mercy of London to some extent. Of course, our hard-pressed council tax payers, unlike people in the United Kingdom as a whole, will benefit from what the Scottish Government is doing. As the publication of the "Why do we feel so broke?" report reveals, in the past year alone the disposable income of the average family in the UK has fallen from £16,305 to £15,231, after five consecutive years of decline. As members will recall, recently we have heard much from Labour members about the need to protect vulnerable children. No doubt there will, therefore, be a queue of Labour members demanding the resignation of Councillor Janet Cadenhead, leader of Clackmannanshire Council, after an independent report that was published today condemned its appalling record on services to its most vulnerable children. In the past six months, Labour-controlled Clackmannanshire has also received damning Audit Scotland reports on  best-value performance and its housing and homelessness services, which were called "poor and deteriorating". In addition, recent local media reports describe the council as being nearly bankrupt, with reserves of only £9,000 remaining for this financial year. Today's report from HM Inspectorate of Education highlights flaws in Clackmannanshire Council's children's services, including "systematic weaknesses" in monitoring and helping children who are exposed to long-term harm; the highest referral rate to the children's reporter in Scotland—double the average of comparable authorities; a 33 per cent vacancy rate for children's social workers, which the local authority "had not engaged fully with its partners in a collective approach to consider"; and a lack of joint working with the police, the national health service and other partner agencies. Only Midlothian Council, also under a Labour administration, has received a worse overall report for services to children. Both the deputy leader and social work director of that council resigned in February 2007 as a result. It is said that a society can be judged on how it treats its weakest and most vulnerable members. Some young people in the care of Clackmannanshire Council have lived without electricity or education for four or five years at a time. That is an absolute disgrace. Labour MSPs have been banging on sanctimoniously about how councils cannot be trusted to run local services and should have most of their spending dictated to them. Now we know why—they have been talking to their own councillors. On 13 January, Wendy Alexander told the BBC's "Politics Show": "I have no doubt that Labour councillors, indeed Labour councils, have spent their life looking after the homeless, women's aid, all of these poor, weak, vulnerable groups that we came into politics for. But I frankly can't have the same confidence that a Conservative-controlled council, or perhaps even an SNP-controlled council or an independent council will, for example, meet our obligation to women suffering domestic violence." Perhaps she should have a closer look at her own councils and councillors before maligning anyone else. Clackmannanshire Council's leader has let down employees, service users, vulnerable children and the local people. With greater freedom for local authorities comes greater responsibility. That council's housing services are a shambles and its finances are almost bankrupt. By passing the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Order 2008, the Government will allow local government more autonomy and responsibility than it has had for many years. The SNP will ensure that councils that we control are effective and responsible in the  delivery of services. Perhaps Labour should consider doing likewise.

Speak for yourself.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it will take to encourage the teaching of eastern European languages in schools. (S3O-2078)

Does the minister agree that encouraging social, cultural and economic links with eastern European accession states and non-European Union nations such as Russia and Ukraine is vital to secure bilateral economic growth and political stability in the east? Does she further agree that encouraging the teaching of eastern European languages in our schools, alongside French, Spanish, German and indigenous Scottish languages, will help to ensure that Scottish businesses have the personnel available to market our country in eastern Europe and thus secure jobs and investment here in Scotland?

I congratulate George Foulkes on securing this important debate on an issue in which I have long had an interest. Indeed, during the first session of the Parliament, Dr Richard Simpson and I discussed the possibility of a joint members' bill to introduce presumed consent. At the time, with the Alder Hey incident still fresh in the minds of the public, we decided that it would not be appropriate to do that. As neither of us was re-elected, we could not go on with the idea during the second session of Parliament, although I was pleased that John Farquhar Munro tried to progress with the issues. On my re-election, my staff member Jared Vengrin worked full-time and exclusively on the issue with a view to introducing a member's bill on 18 July. That did not happen because of the possibility that the Scottish National Party would adopt presumed consent as a policy and progress with the matter in Government. I therefore hope that the minister will assure the chamber that that is the Government's intention. Since 2002, there has been a 16 per cent increase in the number of transplants overall, a 26 per cent increase in the number of kidney transplants, and a 280 per cent increase in the number of non-heart-beating donors. However, the same period has also seen a 30 per cent increase in the number of patients who are listed for a transplant, and a 10 per cent fall in the number of deceased heart-beating donors, who were historically the main source of donated organs. The lack of transplant organs has caused some to go overseas and undergo risky and expensive transplant procedures. Along with putting the patients at risk, there is great damage to those who provide the organs, no doubt because of poverty. Presumed consent is not new; indeed, we have already heard about the position in Spain. In fact,  22 countries, 21 of which are in Europe, already have this policy. The Parliament can learn a lot from what has happened in those countries and get the best of all possible worlds. Detailed regression analysis that compared 22 countries over 10 years and took into account determinants that might affect donation rates such as gross domestic product per capita, health expenditure, religious beliefs, the legislative system and the number of deaths from traffic crashes, cerebrovascular diseases and so on concluded: "When other determinants of donation rates are accounted for, presumed consent countries have roughly 25-30% higher donation rates than informed consent countries." Even if families have the final say, there are fewer refusals in presumed consent countries. This is all about saving people's lives. I understand why people become distressed when they are asked to donate their relatives' and loved ones' organs. However, as Richard Simpson and George Foulkes have rightly pointed out, many who refuse to do so have regretted the decision years later. Spain's success, which has been mentioned by a number of members, has been attributed not just to presumed consent but to the introduction of a network of transplant co-ordinators, which has dramatically improved donor detection. When Austria introduced presumed consent, the number of donors over a decade or so quadrupled. Indeed, there is now almost no waiting list for transplants in Austria—which means, of course, that people do not have to die while on such a list. Professional opinion is divided on this issue. The BMA, the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh and the British Transplant Society are in favour of a soft opt-out system, while the Royal College of Nursing and the Scottish Transplant Co-ordinators Network oppose it. However, this debate is not about removing anyone's rights. A system of presumed consent would guarantee a person's absolute right to say that they do not wish their body to be used for transplants after they die. As the Jewish people say, he who saves a life, saves the world entire. We should think about those suffering on waiting lists and move towards introducing a system of presumed consent.

As I chaired the meeting in Lamlash at which the cabinet secretary made his announcement on Monday, his answer comes as no great surprise. Does the cabinet secretary agree that the establishment of a marine management plan in Lamlash bay, which includes  a no-take zone to regenerate the marine environment, could be a model that allows conservationists and fishing communities to work together successfully for their mutual benefit?

rose—

We have heard again about the poor, weak and dispossessed from Mr Gray, Johann Lamont and co. The now legendary Labour president of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, Pat Watters, said: "It is ironic that we have heard more from some opposition parties about these groups as part of an attack on the government's Budget than we have ever heard over the last eight years." Johann Lamont and James Kelly talked about tax cuts. No doubt they condemn Gordon Brown's plans to reduce capital gains tax for the rich from 40 per cent to 18 per cent. Labour members have tried to resurrect the dead parrot of ring fencing, which puts them at odds with local government councillors of all political persuasions and none. When one reviews the amendments that Labour members put forward in the Finance Committee, one sees little more than tinkering around the edges. There is no vision and no key alternatives, only a few back-of-a-fag-packet, we-need-to-say-something amendments. The best that Labour members could come up with was a reshuffling of 1 per cent or less of the Scottish budget. Probably they are embarrassed by the fact that, before the election, they had decided to put any additional moneys into education, which means that they cannot defend some of their current proposals. In the Local Government and Communities Committee, Labour members put forward proposals that were not notified to the committee in advance but which were telegraphed by party leader Wendy Alexander. No evidence to support those proposals was presented prior to their being moved in private session. The proposal that springs to mind is the top slicing of £70 million for disabled children and their families, kinship care and additional support for learning. Other  proposals were so badly formulated that they merit no mention whatever. Labour spin doctors have told Labour members to seize the political initiative by grabbing the social justice agenda. It was therefore embarrassing to see them being badly let down last week by their colleagues in London who, as Alex Neil pointed out, have decided to rob Scotland of £184 million in lottery funding for good causes. That announcement holed Labour in Scotland below the waterline. The party's lack of interest in real social justice in opposition is exposed, as is the threadbare commitment to Scotland of the Labour Government in London. All we see in Scotland is a slavish devotion to London. James Kelly, who is not in the chamber to hear the point, described the SNP as "tartan Tories". I say to him that at least we are tartan. The cut in lottery funding will impact on organisations in my constituency such as the building bridges project, which provides advocacy services for drug users; the North Ayrshire forum on disability; and the Garnock playgroup. In recent years, those organisations have gained lottery funding of more than half a million pounds. Labour members should be ashamed of their Westminster colleagues. I turn to the Liberals. On the BBC earlier this afternoon, I pointed out to Ross Gibson—I am sorry, Ross Gibson is my son; I meant to say Ross Finnie—that his party voted with Labour at Westminster to rob Scotland. His reply was that that was nonsense. Perhaps he wants to review that comment, given the way that Jo Swinson, Lord John Thurso and co voted. Our budget is a positive one. It will deliver a council tax freeze that will be warmly welcomed across Scotland. I contrast it with the decision of the Labour Government in London to abolish the 10 per cent tax threshold, which will deprive all those with an income of less than £17,000 a year of £130 a year. Our budget will deliver more police on our streets, abolish prescription charges and establish—for the first time—a new £30 million sustainable development and climate change fund. Earlier in the debate, Tavish Scott touched on efficiency savings in local government and suggested that they would lead to redundancies. Perhaps that might happen in terms of the jobs that are removed from the bureaucratic end of government when ring fencing is removed. However, Mr Scott failed to acknowledge that, although we are implementing 2 per cent efficiency savings as opposed to the 1.5 per cent savings that his regime implemented, we will ensure that those savings are made available to be reinvested in front-line services. COSLA has  said that its members can make those efficiency savings over the next three years and enhance local government services. Perhaps I missed something in the amendments that the Finance Committee considered, but I could find nothing on the Liberal Democrats' much-vaunted education amendment. It failed to appear. I hope that the Liberal Democrat speaker will address that point in summing up. Labour members alluded to the way in which they would reallocate budgets. Let us first look at what they want to cut. Despite everyone knowing that we have to make lifestyle changes if we are to increase life expectancy, Labour has proposed a £12.5 million cut in health information. It also proposes to cut £20 million from the road improvement budget; £60 million from the money that goes to build and maintain our schools; £10 million from police support services; £75 million from the budget that ensures clean water supplies; and—laughably—£30 million from the routine winter maintenance budget. I support the Government budget.

Having worked on a member's bill to introduce presumed consent when the SNP decided last year to support the idea, I welcome the SNP's present stance. Members all round the chamber support the idea, although there are those such as Mr Rumbles who are opposed to it. Will the First Minister use his influence to move the argument forward? Does he personally support presumed consent, as four of his 16 ministers did when John Farquhar Munro lodged an amendment to the Human Tissue (Scotland) Bill in the previous session of Parliament?

Did the member support the last Conservative Government's introduction of VAT on fuel?

Does Mr McMahon not accept that three quarters of the members in the chamber, including many of his colleagues on the Labour benches, do not accept his point of view? That has been recognised by the Westminster Government, which has said that it will not have any more nuclear plants in Scotland. The debate has moved on. A decision has been made that there will not be any new nuclear plants in Scotland. Does the member not think that he should move on to talk about the other technologies that we should be bringing into Scotland, given the decision that has been made?

Given that the member makes a strong argument for nuclear, is he disappointed that the Westminster Labour Government has decided that it will not have any nuclear plants in Scotland?

A third of known global oil reserves have already been exhausted. With fuel consumption accelerating due to rapid economic growth—particularly in India in China—and continued population growth, it is likely that oil and gas reserves will be denuded much faster than was thought only a few years ago. However, I am an optimist. I must be: I joined the SNP in September 1979 after we had lost nine of our 11 MPs in those halcyon days when the Tories had 21 MPs in Scotland. Once, they roamed the land like the buffalo; now they exist as but a small, insignificant herd. Human ingenuity has few limits, and the future for renewables and new technologies is exciting and varied. We know that many members across the chamber look forward to such a positive future. Confidence in clean, green energy is such that, when Friends of the Earth Scotland polled MSPs after May's election, 72 stated their opposition to commercial nuclear generation, with only 24 in favour. No doubt some of those 72 MSPs are Labour and that is why the word "nuclear" does not appear in the Labour amendment. I will touch on the new technological opportunities for Scotland, but we should not forget that old technologies can also add tremendously to the mix. Only last week, it was announced that the Glen Doe hydroelectric plant will come on stream later this year, providing enough electricity for some 250,000 Scottish  homes. As Patrick Harvie mentioned, some 65 per cent of primary energy is lost during conversion. We must tackle that. If we are to consider whether we have enough energy for the future, one of the most fundamental issues that we must tackle is how energy is used at present. There are many policy ideas that can be adopted—everything from energy taxes to financial incentives, professional training, labelling, environmental legislation, greenhouse gas emissions trading and international co-ordination of regulations and traded products. Efficiency means getting the same service for less energy. That could be achieved by better insulation, compact fluorescent light bulbs, which use a quarter of the energy of normal bulbs, energy efficient devices, efficient building designs and retrofitting of old buildings with new systems. Of course, United States power providers are already expected to build another 280 500MW coal-fired plants between 2003 and 2030, and China builds the equivalent of one large coal-fired plant each week. Those plants generate about half the amount of electricity that Hunterston would generate in an average year.

I was delighted that Hunterston's lifespan was extended to 2016. In fact, I had hoped that it would be extended to 2017. However, I have made it clear publicly in my local press—unlike, for example, my Labour MP, who shares my views but is reluctant to express them in the local press—that to spend more than a decade building a nuclear plant that will generate electricity for 35 to 40 years, produce waste that will last tens of thousands of years and cost billions of pounds to decommission is not appropriate. I supported the life extension for Hunterston because it allows us to invest in new technologies, consider renewables and bring some of those technologies on stream before Hunterston has to close, as I believe it should. Carbon capture and storage are used to boost petroleum production in the US by pumping captured carbon into oilfields. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change estimates that 99 per cent of captured CO 2 will remain underground for the next 1,000 years. The integrated gasification combined cycle is more expensive but more effective than coal-steamed electric power and is the least expensive option for carbon capture.  Photovoltaic cells produce some 5,000MW annually around the world. That is only one sixth of 1 per cent of the world's energy use, but production is increasing rapidly and new technology has been able to double efficiency to some 30 per cent. In California, two Stirling engine mirror farms that will also rely on solar power are being built. Those innovative plants should produce as much power as a major power station. For the past decade, wind turbine energy production has been increasing by 25 per cent a year. Biofuel studies have also demonstrated the ability to gain energy from biomass. Green diesel gasification of organic material is also possible, and there are high hopes for hydrogen, which is important. Once the technology of hydroelectric cells has been fully harnessed, it will be possible to electrolyse hydrogen from water to replace petrol and diesel in engines. That will produce few emissions and allow people to drive their cars into the next century without emissions being an issue. Fusion is likely to come on stream in the next 30 or 40 years. That will produce massive amounts of power with, essentially, no waste and no radioactivity beyond 1km from where the fusion generator is located. High-altitude wind is being investigated in the United States, as is space solar power—placing solar panels in space—which will be able to gain eight times more sunlight per cell. Nanotechnology solar cells are likely to be developed in the US within the next five years. They will use billions of tiny dots to create electricity much more efficiently and much more cheaply than is currently the case. A global supergrid could also be built, using supercooled superconducting wires to transport electricity and hydrogen all over the world. I tell Lewis Macdonald that, when it comes to generation and grids, we want to think not only about Britain but the world. We know about wave and tidal power, which could provide a fifth of the UK's electricity. There are also biological solutions. We could create organisms that reprocess carbon dioxide into natural gas or produce hydrogen from sunlight using photosynthesis. A large algae farm next to a 1GW power plant can produce 50 million gallons of ethanol a year by reprocessing CO 2 . Scotland has plenty of coal, which we need to burn much more cleanly. We have oil and gas for our needs for many generations. As I have pointed out, building energy efficient options can also significantly reduce energy use. For example, energy for transportation can be reduced by improved vehicle design, lower speed limits, traffic management and hydrogen cells. We have a tremendous opportunity, not only through what is happening in our country but by learning from the  technologies that are being explored in the United States and elsewhere, to take our country into the green, clean future that we all want.

We are so alike—it is easy to be confused. Many members have talked about how important it is for the Parliament to take decisions on the running of Holyrood and local authority elections, which would be eminently sensible. After all, as I suggested to Mr Gould, who is a Canadian, during a meeting of the Local Government and Communities Committee, it would be preposterous if the United States of America presided over the running of Canadian elections. It is daft for the Scottish ministers and the Scotland Office to have their oars in the water; we must conclude that the process should be devolved to Scotland. The ballot paper design clearly caused confusion and difficulty. I am sure that lessons will be learned. I anticipate that whoever designs the next ballot paper will acknowledge that having two, separate, Holyrood ballot papers is essential. More thought should be given to which parties are permitted to put their name on the regional ballot paper. Voters are confused by the plethora of minuscule three-men-and-a-dog parties—often recently formed and with as few as three members—that are allowed on the regional list. I am aware of no other legislature that allows such nonsense. It is clear that some voters are confused when they are confronted by ballot  papers that include such parties. That does nothing to advance the democratic process.

Not a lot, if the truth must be told. Thought should be given to ensuring that each party on the regional list has at least 100 members and has existed for a year or more before polling day. It is hardly surprising that voters are weary of campaigns, given that everyone who stands for Parliament—although not for local government—is permitted a free postal delivery from the Royal Mail. A veritable rainforest of leaflets is delivered to our doorsteps. In my constituency, an obscure fringe party called the Scottish Liberal Democrats was able to take advantage of the free mailing, despite having no campaign whatever. The party's candidate, a Mr Hutton, failed to turn up for all but one hustings meeting, at which—this was bizarre—he sat in the audience and watched the real political parties discuss the important issues of the day. Why should small, insignificant parties that lack activists who are willing to deliver leaflets and chap doors have a free leaflet drop? Surely that undermines the process.

In a minute. Members have talked about STV. When two or more candidates for the same party stood, 92 per cent of the councillors who were elected were the ones whose surnames came first in the alphabet—so Alasdair Allan would have a greater chance of being elected than would William Wallace. I support STV, and at the 2001 Scottish National Party conference I moved that STV be used in all elections, but the alphabetisation issue must be resolved, perhaps by randomisation of names when two or more candidates stand for the same political party.

The member makes a good point. I have no particular stance on the issue; I have an open mind. We should consider all options for STV. Iain Smith, Jim Tolson and other Liberal Democrats are wrong to imply that there are no problems with STV—as has been said, the number of spoilt ballot papers in the local government elections was three times higher than it was in 2003. I am sure that many people did not realise that they could vote for three candidates, but thought that they could vote for only one candidate. I apologise to Patricia Ferguson, who wanted to intervene.

I absolutely agree. That would get rid of people who are not serious and allow other parties to come forward. Charter 88 and Unlock Democracy produced a report for the Local Government and Communities Committee that all members will have received. It shows that 26 per cent of the volunteers Charter 88 recruited to monitor the election did not understand how STV works. It is clear that there is much more work to be done. Some political parties fielded more than one candidate in an area. It goes against the grain of STV when multi-member wards are divided. For example, in my wife's ward, where there are three Labour Party members and one SNP member, the Labour members divided the ward into three sections. That should not happen. Although parties can deal with matters as they wish, surely the voters should have the opportunity to go to whoever they want to. If such a strategy is going to be used in an election, voters should be told in advance that the ward will be divided up, so that they are not deceived. We have heard about the "Alex Salmond for First Minister" issue. It is another way in which voters are not being given all the information that they should be give prior to an election. We have to widen the issue out beyond the aspects of the Gould report that previous speakers have focused on; we must consider the entire issue in the round.

On 17 October, Strathclyde Police acknowledged that 121 jobs of a non-front-line nature have already been civilianised, which will release 121 police officers on to the streets of Strathclyde from February this year. Is Mr Martin aware of that?

That is not true.

What has the once-mighty Labour Party been reduced to with this pitiful motion, which repeats the same tired old mantra of fears and smears? With the removal of ring fencing, every poor, disabled and vulnerable group will be left to the mercy of those heartless, cruel and uncaring brutes we call councillors. They are an evil and rapacious group of 1,222 men and women from throughout Scotland, who at this very moment are plotting how to deny their most defenceless constituents the largesse that has been bestowed upon them by a generous, loving and caring Westminster via those scoundrels we know as the Scottish Government. So shameful and debased are the councillors that even those who were elected only last year by a naive and trusting public under the once-loved and respected name of Labour are apparently part of that dreadful conspiracy, which is fronted today by that shadowy figure who goes by the mysterious and innocuous-sounding name of John Swinney. Only the true and noble forces of the mighty Wendy Alexander MSP—who is dazzled by the sunlight after many days and nights holed up in her bunker—can save the day, as she rides out on her white charger to rescue the weak and the meek from that wicked scoundrel, the aforementioned and dastardly Mr Swinney, and  his horde of deluded, manipulated and brainwashed local government followers. Honestly, the script of "Enchanted" has more in common with reality than the tired nonsense that we heard today from Mr Gray. It is the weary and worn-out Labour strategy of the big lie—if we say something preposterous loud enough and often enough, people will believe it. For years, Labour has repeated the big lie that Scotland is too poor and too wee, and that the Scots, uniquely, are too stupid to run our own country. The latest nonsense—which is, in a nutshell, that councillors do not care about their vulnerable constituents—follows hard on the heels of Labour's deeply insulting Holyrood election campaign, and shows that Labour is a party not of lions but of kittens led by donkeys, and that it has learned nothing in defeat. Scots are fed up with Labour crying wolf, and no one is being taken in by the latest attempt at frightening not just anyone, but the most vulnerable in our society. To quote, since its election, the SNP Government has used "executive powers to drive through an astonishing range of initiatives and reforms with no particular consensus sought. Saving hospital A&E departments, abolishing prescription charges, bridge tolls and student fees, freezing council tax, cutting business rates, axing government departments and quangos such as Scottish Enterprise, rejecting nuclear power, opposing Trident, replacing PFI and ending private involvement in the NHS. It was impossible to keep up. In the process, Salmond has created a new form of progressive nationalism, unlike anything seen in Europe in the past three decades. The image of nationalism as a backward and narrow-minded political force, preoccupied with ethnicity and hostile to foreigners, has finally been dispelled. The SNP has made a reverse takeover of the Scottish social democratic consensus that Labour has presided over for the past half-century. Instead of the SNP being blown away by the unionist majority, Labour were almost blown away by the sheer verve of Salmond's hyperactive administration. Labour end this annus horribilis in a terrible state, with a leadership crisis and a donations scandal. The new Labour leader, Wendy Alexander, has failed to offer any intellectual challenge to Alex Salmond's populist nationalism, and the party organisation is disintegrating. Labour have feigned opposition to SNP initiatives ... and then ended up supporting them. In fact, it is hard to find much that the nationalists have done in the past nine months that Labour really oppose as a matter of principle. They even support Donald Trump's blessed golf course. The truth is that the SNP were doing a lot of things that Labour MSPs would have liked to do, but couldn't because of the London connection. Despite being only one seat behind the SNP, Labour have yet to mount any coherent opposition in Holyrood, and have ceded the initiative on many key issues". That lengthy quote, from the esteemed political commentator Iain Macwhirter in the Sunday Herald of 23 December last year, sums up where  we are politically in Scotland. Could any of us have said it better? Of course, we are now into 2008. Last Monday, Jackie Baillie appeared on "Newsnight" to offer a stout defence of her leader. During the programme, she ludicrously posited that the SNP is on the run over Labour's virtually-forgotten-already constitutional commission.

With Labour members suffering from that level of delusion, there is not much hope for them, is there, Presiding Officer?

Is it not the case that there is a 13.2 per cent increase in capital funding over the next year, specifically to ensure that the class size commitment is met?

Does the member accept that the SNP is concerned about marine biological resources because during the eight years when Labour was in power 1,000 Scottish fishing boats were decommissioned, 3,000 fishermen lost their jobs, 1,000 fish processing jobs were lost and the white fish fleet fell by two thirds, while other European countries, such as Spain and Ireland, which had a seat at the top table, were able to increase their fishing fleets?

On that point, the SNP is against the treaty as it is currently written. I thank Mr Rumbles for his graciousness in letting me make this intervention. Why will the Liberal Democrats' second-best leader of the week, Mr Clegg—a self-proclaimed listening leader—Mr Rumbles and the rest of their party not listen to the people who want to have a referendum? Is the party's name an oxymoron?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. On at least two occasions during her speech, Rhona Brankin accused the cabinet secretary of discourtesy for being absent from the chamber—for, in fact, a total of seven minutes, no doubt on a comfort break. Given the fact that she then left the chamber herself—for 11 minutes, probably for the same reason—should not she also apologise for the discourtesy?

I open with these words: "With the signing of the concordat between Local Government and the Scottish Government, for the first time, there is a firm commitment from both spheres of government to build a relationship of mutual respect and partnership. The Concordat underpins the funding for Local Government over the next three years, and aligns both the Scottish Government and ourselves to a new, and more democratically accountable, means of producing services for the people of Scotland." Those are not my words, but those of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities in its submission to the Local Government and Communities Committee on 5 December. In evidence to the committee, the COSLA delegation, which was led by its president, Labour councillor Pat Watters, made it clear that the Government has delivered for local government "the best deal that we could get", to which Rory Mair, the COSLA chief executive, added: "We need to recognise that this is quite different from any previous situation, when leaders would have had no choice at all. Previously, the first that leaders would have known about what money their councils would receive was when the announcement was made. Leaders have much more advance knowledge of the position than was the case before."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee , 5 December 2007; c 331-37.] How much is the settlement worth? Some £34.8 billion over three years. What is significant is that not only does that represent a welcome 5.2 per cent increase in the resources that are available to local government, if we include the additional moneys that were announced today, but an increase in the local government share of the Scottish budget, which has fallen from 39 per cent a decade ago to 33.4 per cent this year. Furthermore, the cabinet secretary has allowed local authorities to retain efficiency savings whereas, in the three years of the previous spending review, £168 million was top sliced from Scottish councils at source. He has also increased efficiency savings from 1.5 per cent to 2 per cent. Councillor Watters told the Local Government and Communities Committee: "Now, we have a commitment from the Government that we can retain efficiency savings and use them to fulfil local priorities."  He added: "We still have to make the efficiency savings, but we will be able to use the money to deliver services at a local level. The fact that we will be able to keep that money is an improvement on losing it".—[ Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee , 5 December 2007; c 334, 341.] Thus, unlike under the previous sleight of hand in which the Labour-Lib Dem coalition indulged, the money that has been announced for councils will be delivered to them and they will be able to reinvest savings to improve services for the benefit of the communities that they represent, thereby creating an incentive to deliver efficiency savings to the front line. The 25 per cent of local authority spending that was ring fenced—that perennial bone of contention for local government—has been reduced substantially. Councillor Watters, in support of the reduction, said: "Having flexibility makes good sense in relation to how we manage our resources."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee , 5 December 2007; c 342.] Of course, Labour members have, predictably, used the removal of ring fencing to do what they do best: frighten and scare vulnerable people. We hear that services for disabled children will be slashed and that domestic violence reduction measures will no longer be funded. However, we trust local government. Mr Mair's view of the reduction in ring fencing was: "We have said that the previously ring-fenced funds that are no longer ring fenced should be distributed exactly as they were previously ... All those funds will go where they went. Playing around with the distribution of those funds three or four months before the beginning of the financial year would create a ridiculous level of volatility." I realise that that might not be clear enough for some Opposition members, but Mr Mair added: "The first time that we will look at redistribution will be for the next spending review period."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee , 5 December 2007; c 349-50.]

When I asked Mr Mair what benefit the removal of ring fencing would bring to councils, which at present have to produce myriad reports on small sums of ring-fenced moneys, Councillor Watters replied: "The reduction in bureaucracy will free up officers' time, which can then be devoted to more productive elements of service delivery, rather than just producing reports on how we spend £2,000."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee , 5 December 2007; c 352.]

I interject here that the reason why I am not taking any of Mr Rumbles's tedious interventions is that, on half a dozen occasions in a previous debate, I tried to intervene on him, but he did not take an intervention from me or any other member. Of course, £70 million has been made available to freeze council tax next year, as a prelude to its eventual abolition. That has been warmly welcomed by council tax payers, who have been forced to endure rises of more than 60 per cent under Labour's tenure. Laughably, even though not a soul will be worse off under the Government's proposals, Labour members shed crocodile tears over what they say, in a rather convoluted way, will be a widening income disparity as a result of the SNP no longer wishing to burden hard-pressed families. If Labour members care about the poorest in society, they will sign my motion S3M-1005, which condemns the United Kingdom Government for removing money from all households with a joint income of less than £17,000 a year through the abolition of the 10 per cent rate of income tax. I realise that Labour members are incapable of accepting that, under difficult financial circumstances, as recognised by COSLA, the SNP Government has delivered a good settlement for local government and a sea change in the relationship between Holyrood and councils through the concordat—note the pronunciation, Mr Scott—which COSLA president Councillor Watters said "was accepted by all leaders without any objections."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee , 5 December 2007; c 331.] Today has been a good day for local government and a great day for Scotland.

Does the cabinet secretary agree that it is utterly iniquitous of Labour members to hint—as they have done in recent weeks—that the removal of ring fencing from Scottish councils' budgets in some way impacts adversely on vulnerable service users? Does he share my view that local authorities care deeply about the people in the communities that they represent and deliver services to—

Does the cabinet secretary agree that to infer otherwise is to insult local government staff and councillors, who work for an improvement in people's lives, day in, day out, week in, week out?

Every day, the Kingston bridge and the approaches to it are completely gridlocked, often for hours at a time. So many cars idling in traffic jams can have only a deleterious impact on the environment and the west of Scotland economy. Does the First Minister agree not only that completing the M74 is vital to the regeneration of the west of Scotland economy, but that it could have been expedited much sooner had the unholy trinity of Labour, Tory and Liberal members not voted to squander £490 million on an entirely superfluous Edinburgh tram scheme?

Does the minister agree that it is unacceptable that my constituents in Arran have had to wait more than a month to have a major broadband fault not even repaired, but surveyed? What discussions will the minister instigate to ensure that that state of affairs is not repeated?

Will the member take an intervention?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The member says that we are not participating in the debate, but I do not recall seeing Mr Finnie here for the debate while we were listening to other members' points of view—he came in at the last minute to sum up.

Does the member agree with me—

If Brian Adam is willing to take an intervention, why will you not let me make one?

Fasten your seat belts—it is going to be a bumpy ride. This morning, the Labour Party has dipped its toe in the water of what it considers might be delivered constitutionally for Scotland. That is not, of course, because it thinks that Scots should have more control over their lives—no, not one bit of it. If Labour members had thought that, they would have waxed lyrical on the subject during this year's election campaign, instead of trying to scare Scottish voters by making our country out to be a nation of subsidy junkies and parasites who depend on handouts from south of the border—a myth that The Herald exposed on 2 November. Labour members have continued their scaremongering tactics by talking today about borders being closed—as if that happened between Sweden and Denmark or between Holland and Belgium. We want to be friends with England and every other country in Europe and beyond, on a basis of equality. The Labour Party made it clear during the election that its policy was that we could go not one step further. The motion is about establishing nothing more than a vague talking shop to discuss matters that Labour can safely concede in order to regain power. Who would have credited it? A few short years after devolution was introduced with the express intention of killing the SNP stone dead, this corpse of a party has set the political agenda in Scotland. Now, Labour members must bend to it reluctantly—if not kicking and screaming, then certainly mumping and moaning, grumping and groaning. How could their birthright have been so impudently usurped last May? No longer the ostrich of Scottish politics, new, old, borrowed and blue Labour is willing to think the unthinkable and to throw the Jocks some crumbs after a few years of bumping gums with fellow unionists over nothing more than Scotland's future devolution settlement. I can hardly restrain my excitement at Labour's conversion to what it previously considered to be constitutional navel gazing. We welcome cautiously Labour's intention to let 100 flowers bloom, but it should not thrill us too much. After all, despite 300 years without asking Scots their opinion in an independence referendum, Labour and its unionist allies still have no faith in the Scottish people's ability to vote in what they consider to be the right way in a referendum, let alone—I am sorry, Presiding Officer. I have lost my train of thought temporarily. [ Laughter. ] Labour does not want to do what 50 other European nations take for granted: to dare to run  our own affairs as independent members of the family of nations. It is shameful that some politicians in the Parliament do not even consider Scotland to be a nation at all—the Lib Dems, for example. On St Andrew's day at the University of Edinburgh, in a speech that The Herald last Monday castigated—perhaps unfairly—as being cast into "outer darkness", acting Labour leader Wendy Alexander said: "the trends in Scottish politics are all going in the direction of the SNP, and the cause of equality". That is the nub. We in the SNP want only equality for Scotland. Why anyone should have such a catastrophic lack of faith in the Scots by opposing that I cannot comprehend. Of course, the independence train has left the station. The First Minister set the route via the national conversation and the north British parties are playing catch-up—and what we have heard from the Lib Dems is that that is not as far as Navarre has gone. Labour—Scotland's political King Canute—can no longer hold back the Scots' ambitions or aspirations. So what powers would be up for grabs should the vague, independently chaired commission ever see the light of day? Does the Labour Party still believe that it is beyond the ken of Scots to have control over—from the host of reserved powers—dealing with the misuse of drugs; the classification of films; scientific procedures on live animals; the designation of assisted areas; the regulation of architects; public lending rights; and equal opportunities? If we can be trusted with those matters, how about the Post Office, research councils, the Ordnance Survey, road transport, consumer protection, judicial remuneration and broadcasting? I am pushing the boat out, but will financial services, immigration, international relations, social security, nuclear energy, air transport and abortion law be on the table for discussion? Who will take the final decision? The Scots or Labour bosses—our London masters? Can we expect a quantum leap in Labour thinking or will just some feeble tinkering take place around the edges? As a way of moving forward, what about considering as a first step acquiring the powers of Jersey, Guernsey and the other Channel Islands or the Isle of Man? Let us be a little bold in our thinking. Despite having fewer than 200,000 souls between them, those islands enjoy full fiscal autonomy, full social security powers, full employment law powers, full health and safety powers and full control over postal services and communications. Those islands are entirely self-supporting and receive no subsidies from the UK,  to which they make an annual contribution for defence and overseas services. Public revenues on the islands are raised by income tax, duties on imports and other taxes, all of which are determined by each island's legislature. Surprise, surprise—each island has a strong and vibrant economy that is based on finance, tourism, retail, construction and agriculture. All provide high standards of social benefits and of living. How sad it is that the unionist parties are too timid and lacking in ambition even to attempt to emulate our smaller neighbours here in the British isles. Perhaps Ms Alexander should listen more to her spouse. What did he say? I quote: "full fiscal autonomy was 'an absurdity' found nowhere else in the world. 'Against that option, full-blown independence might be better, because ... you can do ... more things,' he added. 'If you're being forced to balance your books, then I think the logic is "be independent", don't do it within the Union. So you heard it here first—the argument for independence.'" If Ms Alexander cannot convince her own husband of the merits of her case, she will not convince us. The cobbled-together, anything-but-independence motion talks of better serving the people of Scotland and improving the financial accountability of the Scottish Parliament. Labour and other unionist members will, no doubt, therefore be keen to secure the 26 billion barrels of oil that are left in the North Sea and their revenues for the Scottish people, but then again, pigs might fly.

As the minister knows, synthetic phonics was pioneered in Clackmannanshire, under an SNP council administration that was led by my esteemed colleague Keith Brown. What resources will be required to roll out synthetic phonics throughout Scotland?

Does the cabinet secretary agree that the Red Cross provides an excellent support service to patients in Ayrshire and Arran and that the costs of delivering that service to the public would be considerable if it was provided by the health board? North Ayrshire Council is considering withdrawing its support to the Red Cross due to a lack of equivalent funding from Ayrshire and Arran NHS Board. Will she attempt to persuade the health board that to provide modest support would not only save it the cost of providing the services but would ensure continued delivery of excellent Red Cross care to the people of Ayrshire and Arran?

As someone who has never been inflamed with wild notions, I congratulate my colleague Dr Bill Wilson on bringing this important debate to the chamber. The approach that is described in the motion should be considered in depth because it is an innovative example of the kind of subject the Scottish Parliament should investigate. However, I condemn Dr Wilson for stealing the quote from Plato that I intended to use in the debate, and for stealing my title of Statto of the Parliament by reeling off so many statistics in such a short period. I know exactly what Bill Wilson was talking about. When I was at university, I was part of a group of four. Two of my friends were quite heavy drinkers, but I was teetotal until I was 23 years old because of my family background, and my friend Michael was one of those people who seem to think that, to impress people, they have to be seen drinking. The problem was that he did not like drink. We would go into a bar and, of course, we would all buy rounds. He would sit there sipping  his pint. After an hour or so, about 2mm of his pint would have been drunk. He would then go to the bathroom and, miraculously, the pint would disappear. We knew that he had flushed the pint down the toilet. When we met him the following day, he would say, "I've got a terrible headache. I was really bevvied last night." That infantile attitude in a young adult did not make friends or influence people—we all joked about it—but he perceived that that was what young students did. That is why it was important for Bill Wilson to highlight that a lot of students do not drink heavily. Many young people are concerned about their future, are extremely well behaved and care about their society and the planet. They care about lots of things: they do not want to smoke their lungs out, to drink themselves to death or to take drugs. One difficult issue that we face is the sensationalism of the press: the lurid approach to life whereby people are plucked from obscurity and put on a pedestal for a short time, which leads to their lives being damaged in the long run. Their 15 minutes of fame—the Andy Warhol idea—often results in their being pictured in a variety of relationships or perhaps taking their clothes off in public. That has an impact on young people—younger people are much more sexualised than they were in the past and are much less innocent. There is a real problem of responsibility in the media. None of my friends at school smoked, and I have never tried a cigarette or understood the concept of smoking at all. My parents did not smoke either. However, in a crowd where people smoke or drink a lot, there is obviously peer pressure to do that. I hope that with the reduction in smoking figures, particularly among boys, we are at the trigger point and it is now becoming extremely unfashionable in certain circles to smoke. I would like to see it become much more unfashionable among young people to drink, particularly drinking products such as Buckfast in the street. Just a couple of days ago at a public meeting, someone said to me that if Buckfast was called Honeysuckle Juice, people would not drink it. "Buckfast" has a macho sound to it that perhaps attracts people that it should not. The issue is an important one that we should pursue in Parliament. I welcome once again Dr Bill Wilson's having brought it forward for debate, and I am sure that the minister will be positive in her summing up.

The cabinet secretary will be aware that, in partnership with the Scottish Ambulance Service, the British Red Cross operates community first responder schemes in Scotland. Under the four schemes, Red Cross volunteers delivered thousands of on-call hours over the past year. What plans does she have to develop such schemes throughout Scotland? The Scottish Government has made a clear and welcome commitment to support voluntary sector organisations, such as the Red Cross, that deliver health and social care services in our communities. Will the cabinet secretary confirm her commitment to work towards flexible contracts and full cost recovery for such organisations?

Yesterday, Jackie Baillie asked Mr Swinney whether he will "ignore the comments of Shelter Scotland, the Chartered Institute of Housing in Scotland, the Scottish Council for Single Homeless, Scottish Churches Housing Action, and local authority chief housing officers when they say that next year's budget for new affordable homes has been cut by 6 per cent in real terms".— [ Official Report , 14 November 2007; c 3348.]  The terms of her question were echoed by Iain Gray in the debate on the strategic spending review. Aside from the fact that investment in affordable housing—

—will actually increase by a whopping 23.5 per cent over the next three years, is the First Minister not astonished that, within an hour of the spending review's publication, all the organisations mentioned had read, absorbed and discussed it and had collectively agreed to inform the Labour Party of their position? Or, like me, does he suspect that Ms Baillie, in the heat of the moment, decided to take the names of those organisations in vain in a desperate attempt—

—at undermining the good news that was contained in the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth's statement?

Does Mr Kerr accept that there is anything positive about the budget, such as the doubling of the international development budget or the 50 per cent increase in the equality budget?

I have no doubt that the majority of neutral observers will perceive this budget rightly not only as a personal triumph for John Swinney but as a significant milestone for the SNP Government. Only a few short weeks ago, the Government was presented with what most members would in their heart of hearts agree was a less-than-generous settlement from the United Kingdom Treasury. Despite that, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth has delivered responsibly and effectively for Scotland. Of course, members will be aware that this is all a far cry from the nonsense that was spouted during the election campaign, during which some people portrayed an SNP victory as being likely to cost each Scottish family £5,000 a year, not including the swingeing council tax increases that would have to be made in the short term. For example, in Glasgow, under the heading  "SNP and Liberal Democrat Council Tax Increase Shock" Labour Party leaflets announced that "SNP spending plans would require a 16.6% increase in Glasgow Council Tax levels" and "The SNP and Liberal Democrats must be the only people in Glasgow who think that local people don't pay enough tax. Their spending plans would force hard-working Glaswegians to pay hundreds of pounds more and not improve a single local service". In reality, the cabinet secretary's work with our partners in local government has produced a settlement for our councils that will allow service improvements to be made without the huge council tax rises that we were accused of planning to impose. One hopes only that such scaremongering election rhetoric from irresponsible members of Opposition parties will be tempered in the future.

We have not ditched our promises. Clearly Andy Kerr was not listening to the cabinet secretary's statement. There is much in the budget that will be welcomed throughout Scotland. For example, there will be an additional £37 million for ferry services, £51 million for our fire services, £97 million to phase out prescription charges, and a doubling of the international aid budget over three years. Moreover, the 20 per cent increase in capital investment in higher education will maintain and strengthen Scotland's competitive edge, which will be vital to our future economic prosperity. Regeneration will also benefit to the tune of £435 million, which will ensure investment in some of our most vulnerable and disadvantaged communities. The SNP is determined to tackle drugs misuse and to enhance rehabilitation. With £94 million to spend over three years, I have no doubt that we will make considerable headway in addressing that challenge in our communities Alcohol misuse is also a scourge. As Brian Adam pointed out, the £85 million that is devoted to reducing the harm that is inflicted by alcohol misuse—in a health improvement package that amounts to £350 million in new money—will allow the Government to tackle a problem that is endemic in much of Scotland. Decent housing is a fundamental right, so I am delighted that £1.47 billion will be invested in it over three years, with a 27 per cent increase from 2008-09 to 2010-11.  The third sector's crucial importance to the well-being of Scotland is recognised with a record £63 million development programme and a £30 million investment fund that will help voluntary organisations to invest in people and assets through business development to ensure sustainability. Of course, with independence the SNP could do much more. That is why it is pleasing to see that my predecessor as MSP for Cunninghame North now supports an independence referendum—I look forward to his former colleagues doing likewise today. Earlier this year, Malcolm Webb, who is chief executive of the United Kingdom Offshore Operators Association, pointed out that there are still 26 billion barrels of oil left in the North Sea. To put it simply, that is 5,000 barrels for every man, woman and child in Scotland. With prices likely to remain near $100 a barrel, the mind boggles at what Scotland could do with that kind of financial muscle. It is an excellent budget. What else could we expect from a party that puts Scotland first, last and always and which has so much faith in the Scottish people?

I am a bit puzzled: Mr Gray talks about a 6 per cent cut in the housing budget, but page 106 of "Scottish Budget Spending Review 2007" says that housing expenditure in 2008-09 will go up from £373 million to £446.7 million in a year, which I estimate to be an increase of about 18 per cent.

I, too, congratulate Nanette Milne on securing this evening's important debate. Autism is not new. The first detailed description of a child whom we now know had autism was written in 1799 by Jean Itard in his account of the wild boy of Aveyron. The first time that I heard of autism was in the 1970s when I watched the programme "Nationwide", which, despite its title, covered not just Scotland, but the UK. On that programme, autism was described in its most extreme form and the prevalence was said to be one in 5,000 to one in 10,000. Of course, we now know that autism is much more prevalent. As has been said, there are 50,000 sufferers in Scotland, so perhaps one person in 100 suffers from autistic spectrum disorder, which can have a devastating impact on the lives of those whom it directly affects. One of my closest friends has a nine-year-old son—Dominic—who has severe autism. Dominic cannot speak, is extremely temperamental and can show deep frustration at his inability to communicate by randomly picking up and throwing heavy objects accurately—as I have found to my cost. I have been astonished by the incredible patience that Dominic's parents have shown and  by their determination to secure the best possible future for their son. That has not been easy. As members know, the quantum leap in the diagnosis of autism in the past decade or so has greatly exceeded the growth in services to cope with that diagnosis. That has left many parents feeling let down by local authorities. In this parliamentary session, the first session and my time as a Glasgow city councillor, I have dealt with a number of parents who believed that their children's needs were not met, that their concerns were dismissed and that their wishes were ignored. No two autistic children are the same, so it is vital to gear services to an individual child if he or she is to reach his or her full potential. Services must evolve to meet that challenge. Of course, autism is not just about children; it has an impact on adults, too. Last night, at the cross-party group on disability, concerns were voiced that the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Act 2004 is not as effective as it should be in helping young people with autism through the transition to adulthood. On 9 August, I lodged three parliamentary questions, S3W-3115, S3W-3116 and S3W-3118 on the subject of autism. The Minister for Public Health responded positively to S3W-3116, on transition, in relation to the work that is being done on the guidance for commissioners of services for people with autistic spectrum disorder. She gave a similar answer to S3W-3115, on services for adults with autism. When the Minister for Children and Early Years responds to the debate, I hope that he will expand on where we are with the guidance. Of course, progress is being made. I am pleased to say that that is the case in Ayrshire, where Daldorch House school has recently opened in Catrine. The school, which is managed by the National Autistic Society, offers continuing education and supported living for 16 to 21-year olds from across Scotland and is the first of its type in Scotland. It provides 27 residential places and eight day places for young people with autism who require intensive and specialised support. That is the level of service that I hope we can continue to see. James Kelly touched on the think differently campaign, which is important in raising awareness of autism and letting people know exactly what autism is all about. In fact, many people have the wrong idea about people with autism; they think that they cannot be reached. That is because, in previous generations, many people believed that all autism was the extreme variety that I mentioned at the beginning of my speech. With the right structured support in and outwith our  schools, individuals with autism—including adults—can be helped to reach their full potential. There is, of course, no reliable prevalence estimate or register of people in Scotland with autism. I hope that we can move forward on that, as a Parliament. I note that you are nodding in my direction, Presiding Officer. I believe that you wish me to discontinue my contribution, so I will finish by saying that, as a founder member of the cross-party group on autism in the first session of the Parliament, I welcome the development of the autism parliamentary network. I also welcome all the work that Nanette Milne has done in achieving that.

My nine-year-old son is currently in a primary class of 60 children and has been so since he first went to school, under a Liberal-Labour Executive. That works well because, although the number of pupils per teacher is limited to 33, the two teachers in the class split the children into two equal groups, based on ability, for each subject. Does the cabinet secretary agree that having two teachers in a class of 33 would be less expensive, less disruptive and easier to expedite than having a limit of 18 children per classroom for primaries 1 to 3, would permit greater individual focus on the educational and associated needs of each child while providing increased flexibility for group working, would be welcomed by the teaching profession as it would allow significantly greater preparation time by staff and the permanent deployment of more teachers following their probationary year, and would ensure that parents could send their children to their preferred school without worrying that class size limitations might reduce capacity in the school of their choice?

In August 1994, while I was on holiday in Austria, I got the phone call that no one wants to receive. My mother called me to tell me that my father had died. Although she told me that I did not have to return home to Scotland to attend his funeral, I felt that it was my duty to do so. My father was a chronic alcoholic, and it killed him at the age of only 57. By then, he was a wreck of a man—the pregnant skeleton that Dr McKee and Dr Simpson would recognise as being the end stage in the life of an alcoholic. In the last 25 years of his life, I do not think that I saw my father sober more than half a dozen times. Over those years, I doubt that anyone in our home had a decent, uninterrupted night's sleep. We had a terror of the clock striking 10, because that was when the pubs closed and my father was due home. As a result of that, my sister left home at 15, and I soon after, at 17. My mother felt that it was her duty to stay, and to stand by my father to ensure that he had a bed at night, and a meal, on the rare occasion on which he was capable of consuming one. Such years of love and devotion demonstrate loyalty that is often unrequited. Of course, my father did not recognise that he had a problem until he was unable to deal with it. In his view, the fact that he was able to get up for work in the morning meant that there was not really an issue. I have no doubt that my upbringing was not so different from that of many, many thousands of Scots who have had their lives blighted by the problems of alcohol. It is extremely important that the Parliament does whatever it can to change attitudes and behaviours in that important area. The protection of children from the adverse impact of alcohol is fundamental. At the very least, society must do its utmost to protect those who are the most vulnerable: our unborn children. As members will be aware, on 27 September I submitted motion S3M-561, headed "Alcohol and Pregnancy: A Dangerous Cocktail", to highlight the impact of alcohol on unborn children. I am indebted to Gail Grant of the British Medical Association for providing me with a copy of "Fetal alcohol spectrum disorders—a guide for healthcare professionals". Subsequently, I have received welcome assistance from Paula Evans of Children in Scotland. Foetal alcohol spectrum disorder covers a wide range of disorders, encompassing everything from behavioural problems to extreme physical and neurodevelopmental disabilities. There is no cure. FASD is a lifelong medical condition that can prevent children from succeeding in school, leading healthy lives and becoming productive adults. It is, by its nature, extremely difficult to  diagnose. Indeed, if we compare figures from other developed countries, not least the United States of America, we can see that it is likely that the condition is seriously underdiagnosed. As a result, it is difficult to ensure that the needs of a child with FASD, and its most severe manifestation, foetal alcohol syndrome, are met. Prevention is the key, which is why it is of some concern that six out of 10 women in Scotland drink during pregnancy. How much is safe for a pregnant woman to drink? The chief medical officer sensibly suggests nothing at all. The BMA, the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists and the Royal College of Midwives support that view. It is vital that that position is promoted by the Scottish Government. No one really knows how much alcohol, if any, it is safe to imbibe in the womb. Each foetus develops neurologically at slightly different rates, and although the pathways are the same, it is not known when a specific development may occur and when a child may therefore be vulnerable to alcohol in the womb. So why take risks? Down south, the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence suggests a maximum of no more than 1 to 2.5 units a day, which is not far short of what is suggested for an adult woman who is not pregnant. What does that mean, though? A card that I picked up in the Parliament at lunch time tells us that 25ml of gin, rum or vodka represents 0.9 units, with an alcohol level of 37.5 per cent by volume, while 175ml of wine, at 12 per cent volume, is 2.1 units. It is extremely difficult for people to get their head around that, which is why I suggest that the Parliament should promote the view that no alcohol should be drunk during pregnancy. In the USA, all bottles containing alcohol display a warning that simply states: "According to the Surgeon General, women should not drink alcoholic beverages during pregnancy". I support the BMA's recommendation that further research into FASD be conducted. Guidance and training for health care professionals on the prevention, diagnosis and management of FASD should be implemented at the earliest possible opportunity. Public awareness of FASD and the adverse effects of alcohol in general should be raised. We need to place a higher priority on dealing with addiction and must increase funding to tackle it. In schools, a comprehensive education programme needs to be introduced, starting at primary school. It is my understanding that education on alcohol misuse is patchy. We need intense public information campaigns to bring home the health and social impacts of misuse. Those must be helped by responsible promotion  by the industry, which must include clear labelling—I have touched on that—and sensible drinking messages. As the cabinet secretary indicated, we need a crackdown on underage drinking, including action to stop the deep discounting of alcohol—especially alcohol bought in bulk—which is one of the reasons that I welcome the motion. A zero-tolerance approach by law enforcement agencies towards alcohol misuse on our streets is essential. With a comprehensive, co-ordinated national strategy for the treatment of alcohol addicts and alcohol misuse, we can take a major step towards reducing some of the severe problems that we encounter in the streets and homes of Scotland due to alcohol misuse.

To ask the First Minister what steps the Scottish Government will take to improve the care provided to terminally ill people. (S3F-199)

As the First Minister knows, palliative care is still in woefully short supply throughout the country. Given the years of neglect and disgracefully low levels of funding by the previous Labour-Liberal Democrat Administration, which the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh highlighted earlier this week, will he consider implementing a national strategy to ensure that all health boards improve specialist  training and multiprofessional approaches to reduce the time that patients spend in acute hospitals and that health boards provide the palliative services that are needed to improve the quality of care, for which families and patients are calling?

I thank organisations such as Energy Action Scotland and Citizens Advice Scotland for supporting the motion. I also thank Robin Harper, Mary Scanlon and my 27 Scottish National Party colleagues who signed the motion, enabling me to bring the debate before the chamber. Warm Zones was established in 2000 in England to develop a new, proactive and cost-effective approach to fuel poverty. Incidentally, the term "Warm Zone" is copyrighted, so if the Scottish Government agrees to explore and implement the concept, it may wish to change the name, perhaps to something like "cosy zone". To avoid any confusion, I will use the original term this evening.  As members are aware, fuel poverty is the inability of a household to afford sufficient warmth for health and comfort. A fuel-poor household was defined in the 2002 Scottish fuel poverty statement: "A household is in fuel poverty if it would be required to spend more than 10 per cent of its income (including Housing Benefit or Income Support for Mortgage Interest) on all household fuel use." That means fuel for heating, hot water, cooking, lighting and electrical appliances. The amount spent on heating must be enough to achieve a satisfactory level of warmth, which is generally accepted to be 21°C in a living room and 18°C in other rooms. Living in cold, damp homes increases the risk of cold-related illness, including heart, stroke and respiratory illness. At the same time, using less energy helps the environment. Fuel poverty is caused by a combination of factors including poor household energy efficiency, high fuel costs and low household income. Reducing fuel poverty enables people to use less, spend less and still keep warm. Although the Scottish Government may have little influence on fuel costs or household income, it can do a lot about energy efficiency. The extent of fuel poverty across Scotland is difficult to measure, as fluctuating fuel prices lead to varying figures at any given moment, but the most recent figures provided by the Scottish Government range from 384,000 to 419,000—around 16 to 18 per cent of all Scottish households. Some are even worse off: an estimated 119,000 households are in extreme fuel poverty, as they spend more than 20 per cent of household income on keeping their homes warm. Much has been done in recent years, through the warm deal, the central heating programme and other initiatives, but the number of households in receipt of the warm deal has fallen steadily year on year from 47,085 in 1999-2000 to 15,500 in 2005-06, and the value of the grant has fallen from £500 to £421 in real terms since 1999. The central heating programme has remained much more buoyant. Nevertheless, the number of systems installed fell from a peak of 16,788 in 2003-04 to 14,425 two years later. The time to enhance those two programmes is now ripe. So what is a Warm Zone and how can it make a difference? A Warm Zone is a given area in which all households that need help, in particular the vulnerable and fuel poor, are identified and provided with all available assistance to make their homes warm and energy efficient in a concentrated, proactive and cost-effective way.  Warm Zone companies are set up for a period of three to five years and operate on a not-for-profit basis with the sole aim of making life better for families who are fuel poor, who live in cold, damp homes or who just cannot afford to keep warm. Whatever the circumstances, improvements can always be made. Much of the work to deal with fuel poverty is about installing free measures, such as thermal insulation, draught-proofing and central heating to improve comfort in the home for those who qualify. At the same time, sound and comprehensive advice on energy efficiency and benefits entitlement can help to reduce the amount spent on energy, save cash and maximise household income. Warm Zone teams do not look just for fuel poverty. Everyone in the Warm Zone can benefit from the latest energy efficiency measures, such as new low-energy light bulbs and expert and impartial advice on saving energy and reducing our carbon footprint. Five pathfinder zones were established in 2001 in England to trial different approaches. Warm Zones Ltd, operated by National Energy Action, a leading fuel poverty charity and other partners, was set up with United Kingdom Government help to manage the pathfinder zones. The trials were completed in March 2004, and at that time full ownership of Warm Zones transferred to National Energy Action. The trials showed that Warm Zones work in cities, towns and rural communities, providing long-term, sustainable benefits. Two zones, Stockton, and Redcar and Cleveland, have now completed their programme of work and are designated as "comfort zones." The remaining three pathfinder zones are continuing their work to reduce fuel poverty and improve energy efficiency—the improvement has been by an average of 40 per cent in Gateshead. Additional zones have been established in Newcastle, east London and Gateshead. Warm-Zone associated projects have also been established in Wales and Stoke-on-Trent. How does a zone work in practice? Warm Zones have developed as a proven and cost-effective way to deliver help to householders who are struggling to keep warm or to pay their fuel bills. In a Warm Zone, a ward-by-ward programme is normally adopted, with the following stages repeated in each community. First, awareness raising takes place via general and ward-specific marketing, promotion and direct mailing. Secondly, a five-minute doorstep assessment questionnaire is completed to gather selected information in confidence about a household, which determines  whether it qualifies for free measures such as those that I mentioned. Discounted schemes are made available to householders whose households do not qualify for free measures but who wish to take advantage of low-cost measures at preferential rates. Participation by residents is entirely voluntary. Among those who participated in Gateshead, the satisfaction level was 97 per cent. Surveyors who are employed by insulation and/or central heating contractors complete the necessary surveys for each qualifying household, to determine what can be installed. Insulation and heating measures are installed by companies under contract to Warm Zones. Monitoring and quality control checks are then carried out by the Warm Zone team. All projects work on the basis of something for everyone, so a Warm Zone project should be designed to benefit all homes across all tenures. Funding is provided through partnerships with local authorities, European Union agencies, energy companies such as Scottish Power and other supporters. In Scotland, the Scottish Government will no doubt lead. Success depends on development funding to support business planning, energy company selection and installer tendering, and on the funding of physical measures and of zone team costs to provide the support that is needed for assessments, quality assurance, efficiency measures for people who are not fuel poor, focused marketing and community involvement and delivery of objectives through partnership working. Where would be the best place to trial a Warm Zone in Scotland? To be frank, I can think of no better place than my constituency of Cunninghame North. Across North Ayrshire, half of which forms my constituency, some 11,000 of 62,000 households—18 per cent—are in fuel poverty. I believe that percentage to be considerably higher in several communities. The levels of economic inactivity—40 per cent in Ardrossan and 43 per cent in Saltcoats—are accompanied by a lack of educational qualifications, correspondingly high levels of sickness and low life expectancy. One would therefore expect levels of fuel poverty to be significant. Undertaking a comprehensive pilot project across Ardrossan and Saltcoats and learning from the experience of work that has been done south of the border would not only make homes in those towns warmer, more comfortable and less expensive to heat, but provide much-needed employment and training for local people that would directly benefit them and their communities.  Such a project would also greatly assist in restoring local confidence. A fuel poverty reduction component could be part of the strategy for regeneration work by Irvine Bay Urban Regeneration Company and its partners. Community assets could be used to reduce fuel poverty. For example, the boiler of a local swimming pool or school could be used to supply heat and power to local homes, and profits from community-owned generation schemes could be ploughed back into area renewal. Outwith the Warm Zone, an innovation fund for councils to investigate and invest in local energy-saving and fuel poverty reduction measures would provide local authorities with an incentive to do more than fulfil minimum requirements and encourage more in the way of Warm Zone-style working. The Warm Zone model provides an excellent opportunity to take forward the great work to reduce fuel poverty that the Parliament has already carried out, but in a more proactive, comprehensive and focused way. I hope that the Scottish Government, which has already shown itself to be keen to adapt and improve on established and successful initiatives elsewhere, takes this idea on board with a view to introducing a pilot project in my constituency at the earliest opportunity.

Will the member give way?

The member has three minutes left.

Thank you. Does the member accept that one of the reasons why stock transfer went through in Glasgow and other places was debt write-off? Does she agree that the Treasury should write off the debt in Edinburgh, Renfrewshire and other places that voted against stock transfer and in the local authority areas where no transfer ballot has taken place thus far? Would that not be an excellent way of providing local authorities with the resources to enable them to tackle the lack of affordable housing?

I warmly welcome the cabinet secretary's statement, and particularly his comments about  reduced bureaucracy and more local area working. As the cabinet secretary is aware, the island areas of my constituency are covered by Highlands and Islands Enterprise. How will the focus of HIE be enhanced in that regard? What, if anything, will happen to grant schemes in the HIE area?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Last Wednesday, the Local Government and Communities Committee discussed fuel poverty, and we questioned the Minister for Communities and Sport at length on that and other matters. The Official Report clearly shows that the convener asked the minister whether it was true that "the free central heating programme might be means tested in future", to which the minister replied, "No, I am not suggesting that."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee , 19 September 2007; c 87.] The minister said later that the review "is about enhancing the programme to ensure that we do what I think we all want to do—tackle fuel poverty."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee , 19 September 2007; c 90.] However, the following day, directly referring to that committee meeting, the temporary acting leader of the Opposition said in questions to the First Minister: "the Scottish National Party Government is now reviewing the scheme, with targeting or means testing the likely outcome". She asked "Why is the Minister for Communities and Sport now proposing to cut that lifeline?"— [ Official Report , 20 September 2007; c 1970-71.]  Is it appropriate for the leader of the Opposition to mislead Parliament in such an obvious way, and to refer to a committee meeting when the Official Report has not been published, so that members cannot see whether the minister said what he is alleged to have said?

The First Minister will be aware of the moveable feast that passes for Lib Dem constitutional policy these days. The Lib Dems now want Scotland to have a share of the oil revenues that they and the other unionist parties have denied the people of Scotland for years. Great—welcome aboard. However, does the First Minister agree that Nicol Stephen and his party are tying themselves in knots by arguing against the right of the Scottish people to a first-ever referendum on Scottish independence, because they want Scotland to remain in the United Kingdom, while calling for a referendum on remaining in Europe, because they want the UK to remain in the European Union?  Does the First Minister agree that that is neither logical nor sensible, let alone liberal or democratic?

I congratulate Trish Godman whole-heartedly on securing this evening's debate. As with other members, the issue has a direct impact on my constituency. The concerns that have been brought to me, to local councillors and to the local member of Parliament relate primarily to the developer of the 114 houses on the Noddsdale meadow estate in Largs—Mactaggart and Mickel Limited—which is in negotiation to  transfer the estate to the Greenbelt Group without even a modicum of community consultation. The residents wish to put on hold the current negotiations between those two bodies for that land transaction. Why do they wish to do that? Why is there is such hostility to Greenbelt? As other members have explained in some detail, Greenbelt quite simply has a history of charging home owners whose estates it manages an excessive amount for carrying out its duties. Indeed, my constituents allege that those duties are not always carried out to the proper standard. The accusations that my constituents have made against Greenbelt include: that it refuses to reply to communications by telephone or letter; that it is quick to invoice for work that has either not been done or has not been carried out to a suitable standard; that open spaces have been left in a shocking state; and that fences and woodland have been left in a state of disrepair. Companies such as Greenbelt can end up with an almost feudal grip on estates. Home owners are locked into open-space maintenance contracts with no opportunity to revisit the management of their property and no legal recourse under their title deeds if they are unhappy with either the services with which they are provided or the fees that they are charged.

I have considerable sympathy with that view, but in the first instance we should perhaps require that people be given an opportunity to be consulted on who their factor should be. If a third party is to be brought in as factor, surely the residents of an estate should be given the opportunity to discuss that. The allegation has been made to me that 55 per cent of the bill that Greenbelt submits is merely for Greenbelt being the factor. Allegedly, only 45 per cent is allocated to cover work that has actually been done. In the estate in the constituency that I represent, people are concerned that the developers have still not done a considerable amount of work that needs to be done prior to the proposed transfer. Householders are extremely nervous that they will be hit with very high bills as a result. There is no control over such charges. When people work hard and save to buy a home, they do not want to have such concerns hanging over them.  Members of the Noddsdale meadow residents association fully understand that they have agreed to pay for a factoring arrangement to maintain common land. That is not the issue; the issue is that the factor that has been chosen without their consultation is causing immense concern. As has been mentioned, the issue has been brought to the attention of members of both the House of Commons and the Scottish Parliament. There is collective frustration in estates throughout Scotland, so I urge the minister to consider solutions that will ameliorate the situation so that, both now and in the future, residents of estates will no longer have to go through the heartache that many of our constituents are currently going through.

As the First Minister will be aware, hundreds of Scots die each year from hospital-acquired infections, including methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus. What plans does the Scottish Government have under the proposed public health bill to eliminate MRSA from Scottish hospitals, something that the previous Administration signally failed to do?

Will the minister accept an intervention?

Sorry. Does Rob Gibson agree that one of the difficulties with EARL and the trams project is that, if we invest in those projects, many worthy projects in Scotland will be denied money? For example, the Glasgow crossrail proposal would cost approximately a quarter of the cost of either of those two projects and would, if progressed, open up the north, south, east and west of Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it will take to address any inequalities in school funding across local authority areas. (S3O-281)

The funding of individual secondary schools can fluctuate dramatically, even within local authority areas, although headteachers are equally accountable. Given that, does the cabinet secretary agree with the Headteachers Association of Scotland that all schools that are under democratic control should be funded under a commonly agreed basic formula that allows for rurality and deprivation when appropriate, to minimise the likelihood of students receiving an education that may suffer from what is in effect a postcode lottery for resources?

I am delighted to speak in a debate on a subject in which I have long had an interest. On 28 September 2000, I asked an oral question on whether the then Scottish Executive would support a Scottish Olympic team; I followed that up by lodging motions on 6 October 2000, 16 October 2000 and 25 February 2002. At the time, the unionist forelock tuggers were in government; now they whine from the Opposition benches. Today, we have heard from them just another version of the north British cringe. It would be preposterous for a party such as the SNP, which supports the re-emergence of Scotland as an independent sovereign state, not to support having an independent Olympic team. At least our position is consistent. The unionist parties say that we are too wee, too lacking in talent and too inept to inspire, encourage and nurture our own champions and compete on an equal basis with the best in the world. The Tories and their north British allies show a total lack of faith in the Scottish people. They have lodged a motion and amendments that are designed to dull Scottish sporting ambitions and national self-belief. It is lucky that our forebears had a little more gumption; if they had not, there would be no national football or rugby teams. If Scotland had not been instrumental in spreading world football and had not joined bodies such as FIFA decades ago, the parties that oppose having a Scottish national team competing in the Olympics would no doubt now oppose our national football team. Scotland has not won a world cup yet, but Uruguay—the population of which is half the size of ours—has won two world cups and 14 South American championships, which inspires hope. If things were up to the Opposition parties and they could turn back the clock, we would not even be competing, albeit that we would, of course, have the opportunity to show our excitement at getting a Scot on the bench for some big game at Wembley once in a blue moon. Non-independent nations, protectorates and semi-autonomous island groups ranging from Palestine to the Netherlands Antilles and Puerto  Rico have Olympic teams, so why should Scotland not have one? Perhaps some members believe that Palestine could best be represented as part of the Israeli national team. What about the Great British Olympic team? Historically, the group of nations that comprises the UK has collectively performed remarkably poorly over 111 years. Great Britain ranks 30 th , which is well below Australia, for example, the population of which is a third of the population of the UK—Australia's population was proportionately even smaller in the past. Finland, Norway and the Netherlands have done much better than larger countries, not only on a per capita basis, but on an absolute basis because health, sport and fitness are given a much higher priority in those countries than they are in the UK. Australia has 1,500 Olympic-sized swimming pools; the UK has eight. It is therefore all the more remarkable that Scottish swimmers won six gold medals as part of a Scottish Commonwealth games team. However, that five of them had to train in England is shocking. Of course, when Scots succeed at the Olympic level, others take the credit. Who can forget that when the all-Scottish female curling team who went on to win gold in the 2002 winter Olympics was struggling, the commentator said: "It looks like a British success is becoming a Scottish failure"? An independent Scotland will not neglect sport—nor will the Scottish Government, which is committed to securing the 2014 Commonwealth games and the 2016 European football championships. The pressure on Scotland and Wales to join a British team for the Beijing and London Olympics can only threaten the ability of Scotland's football team to compete independently on the world stage. The wolves at FIFA are circling. It is to the credit of the Scottish Football Association and the Football Association of Wales that they have rejected overtures to contribute to British teams in 2008 and 2012. They're no so daft. We need a Scottish Olympic team for Scottish sport truly to flower. I urge members to support the amendment that was lodged by the Minister for Communities and Sport.

I welcome today's statement on the UK energy white paper. Does the minister share my concern that, by focusing so much time and so many resources on nuclear energy, the UK Government is in danger of crowding out investment in clean carbon and renewable technologies? Does he acknowledge that the carbon cost of extracting uranium from dwindling, increasingly remote and often environmentally fragile sources will exceed any carbon saving from nuclear power by 2050?

Will the member give way?

Will the member—I almost called her the minister—take an intervention?

The member talked about the extra £173 million that she feels should go into the rural development budget. Will she tell us from which budgets she would take that £173 million?

The member talked about the profitability of the rural sector and how he wants to develop rural Scotland. Which parts of the rural development programme would he cut to reduce expenditure by the £150 million by which his party would like to reduce it?

Having represented the region of Glasgow in a former life, I have never before spoken in a debate with a rural dimension. It therefore gives me great pleasure to do so today. The recently liberated constituency of Cunninghame North has many small mainland rural communities, from Meigle to Gateside, and other rural communities are on the islands of Arran and the Cumbraes. It also includes small towns of varying character, such as Beith and Dalry. Perhaps they do not fit the Scottish Executive definition of what is rural, but they nevertheless face many of the same challenges as do rural communities. I welcome the cabinet secretary's introduction of the debate and the positive speeches by many members throughout the chamber—particularly that of David Stewart, which was in marked contrast to that of his front-bench colleague Rhona Brankin and the latter part of his Highland colleague Peter Peacock's speech. Unlike Peter Peacock, I think that the cabinet secretary did exceptionally well to cover the ground that he did  in the time that was available. I am convinced, as I am sure everyone else is, that he will later cover all the points that he could not cover in the allotted time today. I also welcome Aileen Campbell's highlighting of the SNP's commitment to reduce the burden of regulation and bureaucracy on rural Scotland. Of course, many aspects have not been covered, and I will touch on them. The cabinet secretary mentioned in passing tourism, which is fundamental to rural Scotland's economic development. Scotland's beauty and splendour are unmatched. In my constituency, Arran, which is called Scotland in miniature, is a sight to behold. I am pleased that the cabinet secretary has visited Arran several times. The Parliament must do more to enhance tourism, which can be seen as a double-edged sword. Jobs in tourism are often low paid, low skilled and seasonal, despite the amount of money that tourism generates for the Scottish economy. We need to work more on bringing more people to our beautiful country. Affordable housing is of great importance to members of all political persuasions and I am pleased that it came to prominence in the election campaign. On Monday, I will meet the Housing Initiative for Arran Residents, which highlights the fact that Arran has the highest level of homelessness per capita in Scotland. That is because housing in Arran is exceptionally expensive, so local people who have low wages cannot compete with people from other parts of Scotland and further afield to purchase property. We must work seriously throughout the Parliament to find ways to make housing much more available to people—otherwise, as several members have said, our young people will continue to leach out of our rural communities. Several members, including Rob Gibson, touched on transport, which is fundamental. It is difficult for profitable farms to compete when one considers the level of road, rail and ferry charges. I look forward to finding out whether the road-equivalent tariff will make a significant difference to that. Viability is vital throughout rural Scotland, which is why the Parliament should not take its eye off post offices. I was pleased to hear John Swinney's statement about post offices, but we must do everything that we can to ensure that we do not lose the universal service obligation. A post office in my constituency at Kilmory in Arran closed earlier this year and I understand that 16 of the 23 post offices in my constituency are under long-term threat. Several members have mentioned renewable energy. We should think about not just biomass  and biofuels, but solar and geothermic energy. I am pleased that the Executive will support non-land-based renewable energy to the tune of some £10 million. That is welcome. Clyde Muirshiel regional park is one of the most beautiful areas of my constituency. It touches on several constituencies, including that of the Deputy Presiding Officer. The last thing that I want is industrial development in an area of such beauty when other parts of Scotland and my constituency offer the opportunity for renewable energy development. Emergency medical services are important to Scotland. The emergency medical retrieval service on the west coast has been run for three years—it was supposed to form a 12-month pilot project—and provides life-saving assistance voluntarily to people in island and rural communities. We must enhance the £1 million a year that is required to continue that service. I welcome David Stewart's comments about the voluntary sector. In small communities, it is difficult not only to provide the diversity of the voluntary sector but to have a voluntary sector. We must look into that. The Local Government Committee looked into the matter in the first session of the Parliament, but it is time to move on. The £18 million support for the creation and development of microenterprises is extremely welcome, as is the support for diversification out of agriculture or forestry. Obviously, people from a farming tradition want to continue to work in that tradition, but we must, if possible, allow them to have opportunities to move into other areas. I want to touch on farm incomes, which have been discussed. In the financial years 2004-05 to 2005-06, net farm incomes fell by 27 per cent, from £13,840 to £10,110—two Conservative members have already mentioned that figure. Dairy farming incomes fell by 20 per cent, income from specialist sheep farming in LFAs fell by 53 per cent, and income from lowland cattle and sheep farming fell by 54.2 per cent in a single year. One could argue that that is an indictment of the previous Executive, but the figures also mean that the increase in voluntary modulation, which has been kept to 4 per cent, is much more welcome than it would have been if it had been much higher.

Mr Rumbles should have waited until I had finished. I was trying to say that I welcome the fact that the reduction has been kept  to 4 per cent as opposed to the increase that he and colleagues in his party would have liked. I also welcome the £70 million of new money that the cabinet secretary has announced and the £10 million for the entrants scheme for farmers. Labour members have presented a dichotomy. They have asked where the £70 million will come from, but also argued that an extra £173 million should be injected into the sector. Rural development is a difficult issue for the new Executive, given the figures that the previous Executive has handed to it, but it is doing a sterling job so far. Long may that work continue.

As someone else who enthusiastically embraces the new politics—[ Laughter. ] It was ever thus. I congratulate the First Minister on his positive vision for Scotland. He spoke of the necessity for new, greener energy sources. Is not a real barrier to the development of new energy projects in Scotland the imposition of unfair transmission charges? Does he agree that that inflicts disproportionately high costs on Scotland, while subsidies are provided to increase energy capacity in southern England? What discussions will he initiate to reverse that iniquitous state of affairs?

Will the member take an intervention?

I have never been able to tie it properly; I cannae ride a bike, either. [ Laughter. ] That is actually true—it is one of my many failings. In fact, I am still working on tying my shoelaces. To return to more prosaic matters, I ask Lyndsay McIntosh whether she and her group will support Kenny MacAskill's member's bill, which aims to reregulate bus services.

Does Mr Harding accept that the  situation is actually worse than that? Once people go over the threshold, not only will they suffer a marginal tax rate of 40 per cent but they may also lose council tax rebate and housing benefit, such that the marginal rate of taxation can be as much as 88p in the pound for those with smaller occupational pensions.

That was a nice, cheery speech from the Minister for Social Justice. She is obviously demob happy, and I do not intend to lower the tone too much in my speech. There are 944,000 people of pensionable age in Scotland—about 19 per cent of the total estimated Scottish population. By 2026, there will be about 1.3 million people of pensionable age, or approximately 27 per cent of the total Scottish population. Life expectancy stands at 72.9 years for men and 78.2 years for women. As was recently reported, those figures are, sadly, among the lowest in western Europe. Despite the advances that have been made, of the 641 mainland parliamentary constituencies in Britain, 10 of the 20 poorest are in Glasgow, so there are certain areas of health inequality still to be addressed. That will take not just years but generations. A majority of people of pensionable age are female, because of women's longer life expectancy. As a result, many of them will live alone and will consequently suffer high morbidity rates. We would all agree that many of the attitudes held by some people in our society towards older people must change. Jess Barrow, head of policy at Age Concern Scotland, said: "Some of the ways we treat old people we just would not accept for any other section of society." Unfortunately, the European Union is not due to implement anti-ageism legislation until 2006. A recent King's Fund guide found that ageism is difficult to identify because people are not used to having to recognise it, given the lack of anti-discrimination legislation that is related to age, unlike that which exists for race or gender for  example. However, more than half of Scots believe that "this country treats older people as if they are on the scrap-heap"— and almost half believe that "old people in this country are considered to be a burden on society." Ageism, or discrimination against older people, may not consist of deliberate sentiments against older persons, but may involve them being patronised through ignorance of their need to be treated as fairly as everyone else. The Executive has set up an equalities strategy, the older people's unit and the older people's consultative forum, and it is great to see the forum's chair, the esteemed Frank McAveety, here today. However, more must be done to reverse the deep-rooted social acceptance of patronising and discriminatory behaviour towards older people so that we treat them with the respect that they deserve. Age discrimination occurs because a low value is associated with older people's lives. The idea exists that older people had their chance and that their quality of life, as an older person, is not worth saving as much as that of a younger person. Some people believe that older people are a burden to others, such as their family or friends or the NHS. Many older people do not face only discrimination as a result of their age. They may also suffer from multiple problems due to age and disability—indeed, they may face discrimination on the ground of disability. As Ros Levenson, author of "Auditing Age Discrimination: A practical approach to promoting equality in health and social care" stated: "Tackling age discrimination is too low on the agenda for many health and social care organisations. But ageism is a serious equality issue." I am pleased that the minister touched on that matter. Of course, the majority of older people are fit and healthy and should not be thought of merely as a burden on the NHS. Health is one area of older people's lives in which they are likely to encounter both positive discrimination—for example, exemption from prescription charges—and negative discrimination, such as age limits for transplant services in the NHS. Executive targets for reducing the incidence of cancer, heart disease and stroke apply only to those below the age of 75. In the words of Maureen O'Neill, the director of Age Concern Scotland, that approach will "entrench these inequalities". My colleague Kay Ullrich will explore the impact of health care on elderly people in greater detail, as it is an important issue for older people.  Some initiatives are proactive, but they will not make a difference until other problems in the care of older people are rectified. One survey—"Hard Times: A study of pensioner poverty" contained the following message from an older person: "Thank you very much for my free TV licence but I would really like to have my cataracts done so that I could see the television." A quarter of suicides occur in older people, although they make up less than a quarter of the general population. Ninety per cent of those concerned had serious depression and most visited their doctor in the three months prior to their death. That may indicate that general practitioners are not taking the mental health needs of older people seriously. I encountered that problem, especially in the treatment of depression, in a previous life. When older people who are suffering from depression visit a doctor, they are often given older drugs such as tricyclic antidepressants, which can dope and slow down older people, making them more liable to falls and so on. Younger people, who tend to work or have families, receive drugs such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, which cost 20 times more per day than the drugs that are given to older people. I encountered that apartheid in primary health care on many occasions before I was elected to the Parliament, which may want to examine that issue. Long-stay hospitals have closed in favour of treating older people in the community, and that is to be welcomed. Implementing the joint futures agenda to provide more seamless care between the NHS, local authorities and community and social care has reduced the number of delayed discharges. As the minister indicated, the Parliament has introduced free personal care for the elderly and the regulation of care services in Scotland. However, although welcoming the progress that free personal care is making in local authorities, a recent Age Concern Scotland report argued that there was a continuing need to publicise it and to provide clarity about the policy. The report found that there is a postcode lottery in available care places and that waiting times for care provision vary. Its authors were also very concerned about long-term funding. Scottish Care, the Executive and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities need to renegotiate funding for private care homes, before older people who require care become the innocent victims of the crisis in funding in community care. Their human rights may be breached. As Tessa Harding, head of policy at Help the Aged, states: "Homes have to be closed with care ... if the Human Rights Act is not to be breached ... Where are these residents to go? There is already a major crisis in the care home sector and few areas have spare capacity."  Bedblocking remains a problem. Some 2,798 patients are awaiting hospital discharge, 239 of whom have waited more than 12 months. If the Executive does not find it acceptable for people to wait more than 12 months to get into hospital, why is it acceptable for them to wait more than 12 months to get out? In addition, the number of people receiving a home-care service has declined since 1999 by 7,357, and the number of residential care places has fallen from 16,300 to 15,150, which is a decline of 1,150. An issue in which many MSPs have been interested in the past few years is that of Scotland's carers. There are approximately 626,000 carers in Scotland and about one in six is over 65. Two thirds of carers look after elderly people. It is therefore vital that we take on board the considerations of older people and carers and end the opportunity gap for carers, older people and older carers. Benefit provision for Scottish older people, which is reserved to Westminster, is necessary to reduce and prevent poverty. Two thirds of pensioner households do not claim state benefits—of course, some are not entitled to them—but an estimated 57 per cent require some form of state benefit. Unfortunately, almost a quarter of those who are eligible do not claim. Indeed, 50,000 pensioners who are entitled to the means-tested minimum income guarantee do not claim it. Each person who has not claimed it is really entitled to an average increase of £18 in their weekly income at present, which would raise their pension levels to more than £90 on average—that was the amount that Age Concern stated was necessary in 2001. The minimum that we can guarantee is an admission that the basic state pension is inadequate to live on. Pensioners might not collect benefits because there might be a stigma attached to claiming them among older people, but it is also likely that the process is time-consuming and confusing for some of our older people.

I believe that the basic pension should be raised. However, I am astonished that the Conservatives did not address that issue when they were in power. They decoupled the relationship between earnings and pensions. [ Interruption. ] As Frank McAveety has just shouted out, they had only 18 years in which to address  the issue. We are all aware—except those on the Conservative benches—that pensioners gained no favours during the Conservatives' 18 years in power. An Age Concern members' survey said: "Ageing persons do not welcome complicated forms to fill in— as Mr Davidson rightly said— "What they hope for is minimal fuss when they find themselves obliged to call in financial help in these matters." In 1999, a Scottish Executive survey of older people's needs and services found that there was a lack of knowledge about services and how to access them and that that was a major reason for unmet need. People tended not to approach social services for help and advice, and information did not appear to be readily available to them. The Executive has produced a welcome document, "Are You Over 50?", to serve as a guide for older people to the service provision that is available to them, but it does not go far enough. A more widely publicised campaign for benefit take-up in Scotland is required. Alice Jarvie of SeniorLine in Scotland states that calls to SeniorLine "reflect older people's confusion about exactly what they are entitled to." That is particularly important, because changes to the way in which benefits are paid are to be implemented next month. Benefits are reserved, but education about them is not. Pensions are also reserved to the Department for Work and Pensions, but pensioner poverty, which is an important issue for Scottish older people, is devolved. Minimum income benefits should enable pensioners to have a reasonable standard of living, but benefit take-up problems continue to be rife. Women who are over the age of 65 are less likely to have an occupational pension, because of career breaks for children. The fact that women are likely to live longer through retirement means that they experience particular issues relating to poverty. Today, fewer than half of people of working age contribute to a non-state pension. As members are all well aware, there is a £27 billion hole in pension provision in the United Kingdom, because of the volatile nature of the pensions market. I am sure that the Conservatives will focus heavily on that issue. I must contradict the minister, as I do not believe that current Government policies have helped to produce stability in that area. That is ominous for the future, especially as the Scottish Executive's social justice annual report showed that it had failed to increase the number of working-age people who contribute to a non-state pension, which is  milestone 20 of the 2002 report. Poverty and the number of pensioners who live in poverty are major issues of concern. Relative poverty is the issue that we should debate, in common with other European nations. I will not argue that case, as I have very little time left. The Scottish Executive stated: "the poorest families have experienced real increases in their living standards since 1996/97." On the contrary, a study on Scottish poverty by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation, which was published just a few months ago, concluded that in the seven years between 1994 and 2001, "the overall sense is one of little change". Given that I am running out of time, I will jump ahead in my speech to an issue that has not been mentioned a great deal. I am sure that my colleagues will discuss poverty at some length, but I want to make a point about fuel poverty. I have some concerns about the Executive's line on fuel poverty. Four weeks ago, the minister issued a press release that said that some 20 local authorities had finished their central heating programmes. One of those local authorities was Glasgow City Council, which will not finish its programme for three years. When I pointed that out to officials, they said that the minister would release a retraction, but that has not happened. We must be concerned about spin on that issue. The Conservatives quoted a figure on fuel poverty. I, too, have a figure: 25 per cent of our pensioners live in a household that is cold enough to put residents at risk of hypothermia. There is still a long way to go. Older people are more likely than younger people to worry about being mugged or robbed. Although we know that older people are less likely to suffer from crime, fear of crime can be as much of a problem as crime itself. Forty-six per cent of people who are over 65 believe that crime in their area has got worse during the past two years. Between 7 and 10 per cent of older people are victims of some form of abuse, often from family members. The Parliament has not touched on that issue in recent years, but we should examine it, especially in light of the alarming information that Age Concern has provided, which indicates that reports of abuse of the elderly have increased by 400 per cent in the past year. Although that increase might be the result of greater awareness, it is a serious concern. I would also like to discuss transport, but I have only 30 seconds left, so I will not.

In that case, I might mention it after  all. Half of those in the over-65 age group live in households with no car, whereas the corresponding figure for all households is only a quarter. Thirteen per cent of over-65s said that they could not use public transport because of illness or disability. In 2000-01, less than 16 per cent of Scotland's bus fleet had a low floor and only 12 per cent had any kind of disabled access. Half of the pedestrians who were killed on UK roads were over retirement age. The Executive has introduced free local off-peak bus travel for older people, but there should be a coherent national concessionary fares scheme, as exists in Wales, so that older people are entitled to the same level of free travel no matter where they live or where they are travelling to. That would reduce confusion about concessions, which can catch older people short. In addition, reregulation of the bus service would help elderly people, particularly those in outlying communities. We are all aware that age discrimination in employment can start at the age of 40. I am marginally over that age, although I will probably be the youngest member to speak in the debate. My final point relates to our raison d'être. From a nationalist perspective, we find shocking the level of poverty in this country. If we look at the standard of living of pensioners in most other European countries of comparable size, it is clear that they get a better deal. That shows that nations can look after their own people if they have control over their own economies, benefits and taxation systems. Those nations are clearly the most prosperous and pensioners in Luxembourg, Sweden and Austria are all certainly better off than those in Scotland. The answer for Scotland's pensioners, as for Scotland's young people and the middle-aged, is independence. I move amendment S1M-4064.2, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: "notes that life expectancy in Scotland is among the lowest in the developed world; further notes that Scottish Executive health targets entrench age inequalities; accepts that ageism is a reality in modern Scotland and must be countered; is aware that 25% of Scottish pensioners live in poverty; acknowledges that more coherence to the concessionary fare scheme is required; seeks more flexibility in delivering the central heating programme; desires that the postcode lottery of free personal care places be ended; recognises that older people have a vital part to play in our democracy; is concerned at continuing reductions in the value of the state pension in real and relative terms; demands that the closure of final salary scheme pensions be addressed to prevent future generations of older people being left with low incomes, financial insecurity and dependent on means-tested benefits, and believes that to address the needs of older people in Scotland the Parliament needs the full powers of an independent sovereign state."

Will the minister give way?

Will the member give way?

I apologise to Mr Raffan for perhaps not clarifying the situation a wee bit earlier. The proposed hotline is about linking existing organisations. I mentioned a lethality assessment, whereby the person at the end of the phone is trained to assess, as far as is humanly possible, the situation a person is in and refers them to an appropriate organisation, such as the Samaritans. The person at the end of the phone might have to deal with someone who has taken a drugs overdose. In America, centres that are linked in have to have 200,000 hours of training. We are not talking about volunteers who have a few hours of training; we are talking about specialists who know what they are about and who know that they could provide the last chance to save someone's life.

This is a timely debate following our debate on the passage of the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Bill, during which the subject of suicide was occasionally touched on. In speaking to the motion today, I must first thank Mark O'Dowd and Gavin Brown of Glasgow Junior Chamber of Commerce, who first proposed a national suicide helpline called project suicide. I also thank the 21 MSPs who signed the motion. Junior Chamber Scotland is now fully behind the idea and the chairman of Bishops Solicitors has agreed to become the project's legal adviser. I also congratulate the Daily Record on its high-profile save our kids appeal. Following the tragic suicide of 12-year-old Emma Morrison, the Daily Record has raised £40,000 from readers to help Penumbra assist suicidal teenagers receive the counselling services that they need. I wish the Daily Record all the best in its campaign to raise £200,000. Scotland has an appalling suicide problem. In  2000, at least 880 people committed suicide—the actual number may have topped 1,000. In addition, at least 1,500 people attempted to commit suicide. Those are horrific figures for such a small country. Scotland has a suicide rate of 18 per 100,000, which is twice that of England. Our suicide rate is also 50 per cent higher than that in the United States, despite the greater opportunity for suicide there because of the widespread availability of firearms. Since 1991, Scotland's suicide rate has increased by an alarming 26 per cent. More young men now die by their own hand through suicide than die through drug overdoses and car crashes combined. The reasons for an individual taking his or her own life are often highly complex. Within the limited time available, I do not intend to explore the reasons why the difference in suicide rates between England and Scotland is so acute or why people chose to kill themselves. Those issues were explored in my previous debate on suicide on 6 April 2000. Today, I wish to consider a proven method of saving lives through suicide prevention. What people in crisis need is an easy-to-remember telephone number that people at risk of suicide can call for help. The number must be not only free but easily recognised and remembered nationwide. It is important that a hotline gets everything right. There can be no accidental disconnections or stressed operators, as the caller needs urgent help. The call may be the person's last lifeline, so the ability to connect directly to a trained crisis worker is important. A person on the brink of suicide may not think clearly or reach for the phone book. They run through all the options in their head and if they cannot think of anything, they kill themselves. That is why a well-publicised, easy-access freephone number is so vital, as it will pop into the mind instantly and save lives. Currently, Scotland lacks a national freephone number that someone can call in the event of a suicidal crisis. The telephone numbers of organisations such as the Samaritans are not widely known. American research has shown that having to contact directory inquiries may inhibit a suicidal caller. Both the United States and Australia have set up national suicide hotlines that operate under umbrella networks that link crisis centres across each country. That type of programme is affordable, easily adaptable and works effectively to reduce suicide rates. The American system is called Hopeline USA. It was established in 1998 by Reese Butler after the death of his wife by suicide. Hopeline is an umbrella organisation that links crisis centres throughout the USA. When the Hopeline number is dialled, the caller is immediately linked to the  closest crisis centre without an intermediary. If there is no answer after four rings, the caller is transferred to another centre. That is done eight times before the system hangs up. That means that, on every call, the person can be put through to eight separate centres within 32 rings. As a result, the probability of a caller reaching a person to talk to is extremely high.

I hoped to touch on that matter as I went on. The Samaritans exist to listen to people. If someone phones the Samaritans and tells them that they want to commit suicide, they do not believe that it is their job to talk people out of it. Their job is to listen and, if someone decides not to kill themselves, as far as the Samaritans are concerned, that is their choice. The organisation helps many people but we are talking about a more interactive service. I will go into that in more detail. Hopeline uses two numbers: a toll-free number—1-800-SUICIDE—and 911. Those numbers are easily remembered and heavily publicised. It is vital that the number is easy to recognise, free, and operates 24/7. At Hopeline, trained crisis workers carry out a lethality assessment as soon as a call is received. Callers who are not considered to be at immediate risk are referred to a local crisis centre once the reason for calling is determined. If the caller is at high risk, the decision for intervention is made by the on-call supervisor who dispatches help. Hopeline started with private money but now has a three-year grant for research and development as well as overhead costs. The project currently costs approximately $1.7 million per year to run: $1 million goes on administration, including publicity, and $700,000 goes to telephone and computer use and development, yet the organisation covers the whole USA. With new telephone and computer technology, the cost is virtually the same whether there is just one region or the entire nation is linked. Hopeline gets 600 calls per day and received 650,273 calls between 1998, when it began, and 1 March this year. It approaches crisis centres to get them involved and linked to the network. A crisis centre requires at least 200,000 hours of training to become a part of the network. There are other strict guidelines for becoming part of the network. For example, each crisis centre maintains a  database of hundreds of services currently available in the community in which it is located, ranging from intervention centres, shelters for runaway youths, domestic emergency departments of general and psychiatric hospitals, and specifically focused education and outreach programmes, such as school-based suicide prevention and crisis response teams. The basic tenet is that every citizen has the right to necessary assistance in a life-threatening crisis. That value reflects the philosophy that active intervention must be used in such situations. Crisis intervention services offer an effective means of reducing harm to oneself or others by providing primary suicide prevention, bereavement assistance to survivors, intervention and community information about those issues. Secondary prevention and intervention are also provided for persons who have attempted suicide, for the chronically self-destructive person and for victims of violence. Components of services in life-threatening crises are lethality assessments, rescue services, services for victims of violence or suicide survivors and community education. The bottom line is to keep the individual alive. Dispatch teams, including professional workers, are sent to save people. The suicidal person might then be examined by psychiatric liaison, or he or she might be hospitalised, often followed by out-patient therapy, both for the suicidal person and for his or her family. Intervention and the breaking of confidentiality are used only as a last resort after all other options to save a life are exhausted. If consent for help is still not given, intervention will occur without it. At all times, callers are dealt with on a non-judgmental basis. Crisis workers offer a balanced and realistic attitude to the person and do not expect to save all potential suicide victims by themselves or to fix all their problems. The Australian system, which is based on the American one, is called LIFE—living is for everyone. Since its establishment with Government support, suicide rates are at their lowest for a decade. Last year, there were 132 fewer suicides than in the previous year. Its motto is that one suicide is a suicide too many. According to researchers at the University of Montreal, studies have shown that the suicide rate in areas in which a hotline is available declines faster than in areas where there is no hotline. Other studies have found that hotlines have a beneficial effect in helping attempters to avoid repeated non-lethal suicidal behaviour. With technological advances, setting up hotlines has becoming increasingly simple and inexpensive. The Executive has a national strategy and action plan to prevent suicide in Scotland—choose life.  Unfortunately, in my view the strategy lacks ambition and is currently funded only for three years. For example, the target of reducing suicide rates in Scotland by 20 per cent over 10 years will still leave Scotland with a higher suicide rate than in 1991, and a rate that is 60 per cent higher than that in England. We must aim higher. Scotland has excellent anti-suicide organisations, such as Breathing Space—a telephone helpline funded by the Executive, which aims to provide an anonymous and confidential point of contact that is easy to access. It is an excellent service, but although the hotline has received 6,500 calls since its inception, it can be hard to reach. Nevertheless, its success shows the need for an all-Scotland, easily accessible network. Money was allocated for Breathing Space for only three years, which began in 2001. There are no immediate plans to extend the funding, which is due to run out shortly. The helpline, which serves greater Glasgow and Argyll and Bute, is available only from early evening until 2am. It is important for a helpline to operate 24/7. A number of crisis centres and organisations provide help, including not just Breathing Space, but the British Association for Counselling and Psychotherapy, ChildLine, Depression Alliance Scotland, the NHS helpline, the Samaritans, Stresswatch Scotland, and the University of Edinburgh's nightline. Linking those organisations nationally is vital. The 999 emergency service at present covers police, fire, ambulance, coastguard, mountain rescue and cave rescue. Under current practice, as many as three public telecommunications operators may handle one call. Some people are placed in long queues of up to 10 minutes before being connected with the proper authority. If someone is suicidal, they need a crisis worker right away. Further resourcing of the emergency services is therefore essential if a hotline is to work effectively. However, with the support of the Scottish Executive and the minister, any problems can be overcome and many lives can be saved.

I am pleased to speak in this debate as I was the first member to sign Keith Harding's bill proposal after it was published. I thank him for introducing the bill, which will obviously be passed today. I congratulate Jamie McGrigor on the birth of his new child, Viagra. It shows that there is still lead in that old pencil yet. As we know, there are 0.5 million dogs in Scotland today and 80 tonnes of excrement are currently laid on the pavements and parks of Scotland. This innovative and positive bill will help to tackle that problem by dealing with people who  fail to clear up their dog's mess, rather than those whose dogs foul. Many of us who have young children are disgusted when we go into parks and see widespread distribution of dog faeces on our green spaces. Trish Godman touched on the health aspect. As those who have been following the progress of the bill know, some 300 children a year are blinded through toxocariasis spread by faeces. It is therefore important from a health and safety point of view, as well as from an aesthetic point of view, that the matter is dealt with. Brian Adam raised the issue of incontinent dogs. I was first alerted to that matter when one day I was walking along the Brockburn Road in Pollok and I saw something that looked as if it could have been laid only by an extinct species of dinosaur. It looked like a coprolite rather than a good old-fashioned Glasgow jobbie and was about a foot and a half long. I thought that the sooner we had effective legislation to deal with the issue, the better. The Tidy Britain Group's attitude and awareness survey 1998 showed that dog fouling ranked alongside vandalism as the issue that most caused concern to people throughout Britain. That was echoed in a survey that was done in Glasgow in the mid-90s, when dog fouling was classed as the third most important issue. The issue can sometimes cause arguments between dog owners and non-owners. To quote the policy memorandum: "Dog fouling, especially in places such as playing fields, public parks and on pavements, is generally resented by people who are not dog owners and can generate an "anti-dog" feeling." The bill has been treated fairly and equitably by the Executive, and the non-partisan way in which it has gone through the Local Government Committee shows exactly how the Parliament should work. I trust that the bill will make a difference in cleaning up our streets and ensuring that irresponsible dog owners are brought to book.

I, too, welcome amendment 1. It is important that all legislation that is introduced should be enforceable. Keith Harding's eminently sensible amendment will make the bill work more effectively. I am sure that many members have been approached at public meetings by constituents who have mentioned dog fouling. I was often confronted by the issue when I was a councillor and on many occasions the police mentioned their powerlessness in dealing with it, given that they had so many other issues to deal with. The amendment has been produced with support from the Local Government Committee and has cross-party support. If the amendment is agreed to, it will go a long way towards making the bill more effective, which is what we all want.

Is Mr McLetchie seriously telling us that Scotland's Parliament should not debate the key issue of the day, when local authorities throughout Scotland and the UK have been debating it? Is he aware that all 79 councillors on Glasgow City Council, including the sole Tory, said that there should be no pre-emptive strike on Iraq? This is the most important issue of the day and we should be discussing it, not saying that this is not a matter for the Scottish Parliament.

On behalf of the Scottish National Party group, I thank the clerking staff, the convener of the Social Justice Committee and all those who gave evidence to help to produce this important piece of legislation. Although we are disappointed that amendments 6 and 16 were agreed to, we genuinely welcome the bill. The bill covers important issues, including homelessness tests, priority need, anti-social behaviour, local connection and the support that homeless and vulnerable people will be able to obtain. All those issues were thoroughly discussed and debated in committee. The paucity of amendments reflects the genuine consensus among all parties on homelessness. The number of homelessness applications has been at a record level. The key to delivery for Scotland's homeless people and those who might become homeless is resources, by which I mean money, adequately trained and deployed staff and new homes being built the length and breadth of the country. I know that those issues are exercising the private sector and the Executive. The committee discussed hidden homelessness. There are concerns that there might be an upsurge in the number of homelessness applications as people benefit from the legislation. However, that is obviously a suck-it-and-see issue for the Executive. There are also concerns that the level of resources that will be required has not yet been assessed. We look forward to that happening. The minister touched on housing stock transfer, which I did not think was part of the issue that we are discussing. However, I am happy to mention it. Now that stock transfer has been approved, I hope that there will be genuine community ownership. I hope that we do not see a situation in which big, national housing associations effectively take over what should be community-run housing associations. Those community-run associations genuinely deliver to people—small is beautiful, as my colleague Linda Fabiani has said. The SNP certainly wants secondary transfers at the earliest feasible opportunity. The minister is right in saying that we cannot rush into implementing legislation. However, in our view, there have been delays in implementing some important aspects of the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001, as I mentioned in our discussions on the amendments. Although we do not want legislation, guidelines or implementation to be rushed, we do not want procrastination either. It is important to introduce the measures as soon as possible. Despite the minister's comments about the Executive's work in tackling housing issues and  homelessness, we should remember that in the dark days of Mrs Thatcher housing investment was three times what it is in Scotland today. However, it will help that the Executive has accepted a number of SNP policies, such as the abolition of the 75 per cent clawback rule and the introduction of prudential borrowing and a Scottish housing standard. In conclusion, I believe that the bill is excellent. We must all ensure that it works for the most vulnerable in our society.

We have concerns about amendment 3. In our view, if amendment 3 is passed, ministers will have the right to impose secondary legislation in an important area of public policy rather than having it approved by Parliament. In the stage 2 debate, Des McNulty made the point that the Subordinate Legislation Committee had recommended an affirmative statutory instrument rather than a negative one. Mr McNulty said: "The Subordinate Legislation Committee's recommendations at stage 1 form the basis for the provisions of amendment 17. That committee expressed concerns that the appropriate subordinate power should be used."—[ Official Report, Social Justice Committee, 15 January 2003; c 3357 . ] Amendment 17 was the amendment that brought in the use of the statutory instrument. It was an Executive amendment following the recommendations of the Subordinate Legislation Committee. Having used the committee recommendation as a bolster to get that amendment agreed to at stage 2, the Executive now wants to run counter to the arguments of the committee in forcing through this amendment. I therefore ask all colleagues to oppose it.

The SNP opposes amendments 6 and 16. As Jackie Baillie said eloquently at stage 2, there is an acute need to end the use of bed-and-breakfast accommodation for families. The homelessness task force recommended that it be ended. Indeed, I was pleased to move Jackie Baillie's amendment at a Social Justice Committee meeting at which the amendment was passed. One would sympathise with the case that Karen Whitefield put if regulations arising from the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001 setting out minimum rights for hostel dwellers and people in bed-and-breakfast accommodation had been published. However, after almost two years, those regulations have not been published. As the bill stands, the use of bed-and-breakfast accommodation for families will end, except in an emergency. Of course, figures for the use of such accommodation under the coalition are at an all-time high. Bed-and-breakfast accommodation for homeless people is, of course, not like the accommodation in grannie's Heilan hame. Local authorities might try their best, but families in bed-and-breakfast accommodation often have no facilities for washing and drying clothes and the establishments might be damp, in poor repair,  inadequately furnished and lacking basic cleanliness. Privacy and play opportunities are lacking because of overcrowded living space, and cooking and toilet facilities might have to be shared with strangers, some of whom might have alcohol, drug or psychiatric problems. Violence and theft can occasionally be associated with that situation, which can create feelings of fear and insecurity in families. In the 21 st century, the use of bed-and-breakfast accommodation for homeless families should be consigned to the history books. An announcement has been made in England of the United Kingdom Government's intention to abolish such use of bed-and-breakfast accommodation, except in emergency circumstances. Consultation on the abolition has begun. If the bill that we are debating is to be the most progressive legislation in Europe for homeless people—as it is touted as being—we must oppose amendments 6 and 16.

Proposed changes to intentionality aim to enable local authorities to provide support to households that are deemed to require it. That we welcome. However, consistency and fairness are important. There is no guidance on how local authorities are expected to exercise discretion. Guidance would allow consistency, yet would also allow for local circumstances to influence local policy and would ensure that indirect discrimination is avoided. Guidance could cover when it is appropriate to investigate intentionality; the need for a council to have a written and published policy on applying section 4(1)(b); the requirement to maintain a  record of how the section has been used to assist in policy reviews; and an equality-checking procedure. Section 4(1)(b) gives local authorities discretion in deciding whether to implement the test of intentionality for a household presenting as homeless. Together, amendments 10 and 12 would give Scottish ministers clear powers to issue guidance on how local authorities should use their discretion in deciding whether to apply the intentionality test, and would make it clear that local authorities must take cognisance of the guidance when using their discretion. I move amendment 10.

Despite the minister's response, we take the view that, while what amendments 10 and 12 propose is technically feasible, existing provisions do not provide the clear and specific guidance that we believe is required if consistency is to be achieved across Scotland. Therefore, we would still like the amendments to be made, and I shall press both of them.

The SNP supports Lyndsay McIntosh's amendment 5, as we did a similar amendment at stage 2. We also support Robert Brown's amendments 11 and 13, which are similar. We oppose amendment 14, which in our view would delay the implementation of inquiries into intentionality until a progress and intent statement has been prepared. Our view is that there can be no justification for waiting for such a statement before rights are given to those most in need.

The Scottish National Party welcomes the eventual removal of the priority need test. The reason behind amendment 9 is that pursuing the measures to remove the priority need test might have unforeseen consequences for the available supply of social housing. There are widespread concerns about the adequate supply of affordable social rented housing of good quality. The minister will recall the concerns raised by the Finance Committee and the Social Justice Committee. There are also worries about the possible impact on non-homeless households who are on waiting lists and might find it more difficult to access social rented housing if there is a significant increase in the number of homeless households eligible for housing but no corresponding increase in availability. Without such an increase, local authorities might of necessity place homeless households into areas of low-demand housing. Any statement on progress towards abolishing the priority need test should reasonably be expected to provide estimates of additional housing requirements generated as a result of changes to priority need. Unfortunately, there is no clear commitment in the bill to monitor the impact of the changes to priority need that will be introduced by section 1, or proposals for future changes made possible by section 2(1). Amendment 9 seeks to secure that commitment, by seeking to ensure that the Scottish ministers' statement on the abolition of the priority need test, as set out in section 3, assesses the impact of changes to priority need on housing availability, the number of homes required and the type of housing used to accommodate homeless people.

Will Mike Watson take an intervention?

I was listening to the minister with due deference. The Scottish National Party welcomes the debate and the opportunity through the European year of disabled people to assist where possible in promoting and communicating equal opportunities for people with disabilities. At present,  consideration of the needs of disabled people in Scotland is unfortunately patchy at best. As our amendment suggests, much more needs to be done to ensure that Scotland is ready to meet the requirements of the Disability Discrimination Act 1995 over the next few years. What is disability? The Disability Discrimination Act 1995 defines a disabled person as anyone with "a physical or mental impairment which has a substantial and long-term adverse effect on his ability to carry out normal day-to-day activities." In Scotland, approximately 800,000 people live with disabilities. That represents almost one sixth of Scotland's total population. The definition is broad enough to encompass not only people with physical disabilities, but those with learning disabilities and hidden disabilities, such as epilepsy and cancer, which may not be immediately obvious but can have a dramatic impact on the day-to-day lives of those who are affected by those illnesses. As we have an increasingly elderly population, it is extremely important that disability be viewed without negativity. Many older people in Scotland put their day-to-day difficulties down to being old and therefore miss out on benefits for which they are eligible, because they do not want to be considered to have a disability. Of course, as we know, equal opportunities and the Disability Discrimination Act 1995 are reserved matters, but observance and recognition of equal opportunities matters are devolved to the Parliament. The European Commission has declared 2003 to be the European year of people with disabilities, with the following main objectives: to raise awareness of disabled people's rights; to encourage equal opportunities for disabled people; to promote the exchange of best-practice strategies at local, national and European Union level; and to improve joint working between Government, social services and the voluntary sector in helping people with disabilities, while promoting a positive image of people with disabilities. There are many different disabilities. Children and younger people with disabilities must receive equality in education and be fully integrated in our society. For the purposes of the European year of disabled people, the Executive has provided a steering group, as the minister stated. That steering group involves representatives from many of the voluntary organisations that deal with disabled people in Scotland. However, the real impetus for the year comes from Westminster. The European Union funding that has been set aside works out at £550,000 for the United Kingdom, plus another £2 million from the UK  Government. Twenty-two of the 97 Scottish projects that bid for resources were successful and will receive a share of the £300,000 that has been allocated to Scotland. That works out at approximately 38p extra to help each disabled person in Scotland. We must be cautious of what Bert Massie, chair of the Disability Rights Commission, once highlighted: "Public appeals for greater understanding of disability issues are often well received, but rarely translate into specific action." I am heartened by the action that the Executive pledges to take and has taken to date. In recent years, two pieces of legislation have helped to provide legal rights for people with disabilities. The Disability Rights Commission is an independent organisation that was set up under the Disability Rights Commission Act 1999 to stop discrimination against disabled people, to provide information and advice to disabled people, to investigate cases of discrimination, to provide codes of practice and to advise all Governments in the UK. The commission's annual budget is £11 million. The Disability Discrimination Act 1995 was passed to protect the rights of those with disabilities and to prevent them from being discriminated against with regard to employment. Part II of the act, which covers employment, will be enforced in 2006. The provisions of part III, on facilities, services and goods, will be enforced in 2004, as will those on the letting, buying, selling and managing of land and premises. Part IV, which requires educational institutions to provide information and to improve physical access for disabled people, will be enforced in 2005. Part V allows the Government to set minimum standards in relation to helping disabled people to use public transport. Capability Scotland's recent "1 in 4" study found that only "13% thought the government had done a good job in improving awareness and tackling discrimination". Furthermore, only 22 per cent of people were aware of the enforcement in 2004 of part III of the Disability Discrimination Act 1995. Only one in six cases that have been brought to tribunal under the 1995 act have been successful. According to RNIB Scotland: "Disabled people are deterred from making claims because the system is so complex and they could face enormous costs if they lose." Research that was carried out by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation found that one in six disabled people lose their jobs in the first year following the start of their disability. Employers  often find, however, that disabled employees stay in the job longer and have a strong commitment to work, good punctuality and low absenteeism rates. Many disabled people fear losing their benefits and becoming financially worse off if they take on employment. Some people with disabilities are suspicious that the Department for Work and Pensions' pathways to work scheme, which is designed to help those on incapacity benefit return to work, is merely a way to reduce the number of benefit claimants and save money. There are a number of issues that the Executive could deal with more directly. The enterprise strategy, "A Smart, Successful Scotland", does not mention disabled people once. Unfortunately, some employers consider it a hassle to have to make reasonable adjustments, such as lowering light switches for wheelchair users or providing people with disabilities with scribes or drivers to help them in their jobs, because they fear that that may cut into their profits. Disabled people or those who live in a household with a disabled person are more likely to have a lower income than the rest of the population, as the minister stated. They also have extra costs to meet because of their disability. That includes extra heating costs, dog food for guide dogs, stairlifts and car adaptations. I hope that the Executive will address the issue of access to housing. More needs to be done to match the availability of housing for the disabled with the need for such housing, to ensure that disabled people are not living in unsuitable homes while non-disabled people are living in homes that have been adapted for those with disabilities. Although the homes of only 34 per cent of disabled people have been adapted to accommodate their disability, 60 per cent of wheelchair-accessible homes are occupied by people who do not currently use them.

I am sorry—I am just about to finish; I would have liked to let Jamie Stone intervene. Many people care for people with disabilities and, according to the carers manifesto that all MSPs received recently, 91 per cent of carers said that caring affected their health; almost half of them said that it affected it greatly. According to Capability Scotland's "1 in 4" study, only 9 per cent of carers have access to respite care or short breaks; only 15 per cent receive home care; and only 10 per cent receive direct payments. Unfortunately, only 18 per cent of carers who wanted to work were able to do so.  I wanted to raise many other issues, but unfortunately lack of time has prevented me from discussing, in particular, issues around disabled people's difficulty in accessing transport. I agree with what the minister said at the end of her speech. To paraphrase new Labour, much has been done, but much more has to be done. That is why I hope that everyone will support the Scottish National Party's amendment. I move amendment S1M-3956.1, to insert at end: ", accepting that much more needs to be done to ensure that Scotland is fully compliant with the Disability Discrimination Act 1995."

I agree with everything that the minister has said. People who smoke cannabis are 17 times more likely to suffer from throat cancer than are people who smoke cigarettes. This is not the time to take the steps that Mr Sheridan suggests, without further and extensive research.

I will first say how shocked and horrified I was that my esteemed colleague Shona Robison did not have the courtesy to welcome the debate and congratulate Robert Brown on securing it. I therefore do so on behalf of both of us. Lead is alleged to have been one of the main causes of the fall of the Roman empire. It was alleged that Caligula often ate from lead dishes rather than gold, and that that helped to imbalance his mind and led to the fall of that lofty institution. Lead is a naturally occurring metal that is found in air, food, soil and water. One of the problems that we have, particularly in the west of Scotland, is that soft water is more likely to pick up lead than is hard water, so lead is more likely to be a problem in some parts of Scotland than it is in others. As has been mentioned, lead causes behavioural problems and can restrict the mental development of young children because it builds up in the body. Although one must commend successive United Kingdom Governments for taking action to reduce lead in petrol, paintwork and pipes, lead—as well as lead solder—in pipes remains a problem in several parts of Scotland. Houses that were built before 1970 have more of a problem than those that have been built since then, but when one considers the number of old houses and the problems that still exist, it is hardly surprising that only two years ago the City of Edinburgh Council felt the need to send a leaflet to some properties to advise people about the risks from lead in their households. It is important that people are able to identify a lead pipe, but not everyone can. What does lead look like? If it is unpainted, it is a dull grey soft metal that is shiny and silver underneath if scraped. It is therefore quite different from the much darker iron, or the copper that we see in our low-denomination coins. It should be easy to find. If people have lead pipes in their water systems, one would advise them to try to have it removed, either with the assistance of grants or through their own resources. Until that happens, if such people are going to use tap water, they should let it run for a couple of minutes from the cold tap before they use it. Even then, they should still boil it to ensure that the lead is no longer present. There is also a lead test adviser who can advise people and whose number is 0131 669 8770.  In 2000, "Frontline Scotland" covered the issue. The investigation highlighted the case of the Fyfe family from Uddingston, whose son took ill through lead poisoning. Their home was brand new, but the problem was traced to lead solder on the pipes. "Frontline Scotland" carried out a random survey of 95 new homes and found that 10 were affected by lead solder. The issue is clearly of considerable concern. I was delighted to hear of the measures that John Scott intends to take in the form of an amendment to the Building (Scotland) Bill. I assure him that he will have the Scottish National Party's support for that amendment—I imagine that he will have the support of all parties. Scottish Water is doing something about the problem. As has been mentioned, it has formed a lead strategy working group, which hopes by 31 December this year to reduce the amount of lead in Scottish water to 25 micrograms per litre, which is half the maximum level that has been set by the European Union. Although a target of 10 micrograms per litre by 2013 is a much more significant and more ambitious target, we can at least make some progress in the short term.

I congratulate Nicola Sturgeon on securing this debate, which is important for many of us with young children, and also for those who, like Jamie McGrigor, have pregnant partners and spouses. It is an issue not just for children but for pregnant women, who can also be adversely affected. In the United States of America, the Institute of Medicine urged that  "full consideration be given to removing thimerosal from any biological product to which infants, children, and pregnant women are exposed." Pregnant women, it suggested, should be advised to take mercury-free flu jabs, but the only groups advised against the jab in the United Kingdom are people with heart disease or diabetes and people who are allergic to eggshells. Advising women away from mercury would acknowledge the fact that it does pose some kind of medical risk, however remote. That appears to be something that UK ministers—until now, at least—refuse to do. The Scottish Parliament has the power to ban all mercury from vaccines, and it can do that now, as health is devolved. The vaccines are available and general practitioners have freedom to order what they want. Holyrood should set an example to ensure that we have better practice in this country. There is a lot of medical evidence on the issue. One study suggests that it is hypersensitivity to thimerosal that triggers autism, and not specifically the mercury poisoning. There will be a study on mercury poisoning later this year, but it will be on Alzheimer's, not autism. Clearly, a lot more research must be done, but why should we take chances? In the United States, all routinely recommended licensed paediatric medicines that are currently manufactured contain no thimerosal or only trace amounts. There are now two hepatitis B vaccines that are thimerosal free, four haemophilus influenzae type B—HIB—vaccines, and two DTP vaccines. Previously, the maximum cumulative exposure to mercury by routine childhood vaccinations during the first six months of life was 187.5 micrograms of mercury. The newly formulated vaccines allow a maximum cumulative exposure during the first six months of less than 3 micrograms, which is a 98 per cent reduction, and a huge and significant step in the right direction. The issue has had a much higher profile in the United States than in this country. Indeed, there are now £30 million-worth of lawsuits being launched in the United States because of perceived cover-ups in recent years. The reason for that is that many people who suffer from illnesses such as fibromyalgia, lupus, depression and bipolar disorder directly link their illness to mercury. Clearly, the issue must be given greater focus. We should err on the side of caution. If several vaccines are available to prevent a range of illnesses, surely we should do what the United States has done since 1999 and ban mercury, except very trace amounts if they are necessary. Of course, the US went even further. The House of Representatives formed a committee specifically to consider the danger of mercury in  medicine. The US did that because a study came out of the Faroe Islands based on some 900 children born in 1987 whose mothers had eaten mercury-contaminated whale meat. It was discovered that the children had slow reaction times and diminished attention spans. Mercury is so toxic, as Nicola Sturgeon pointed out, that even if the amount of mercury in the umbilical cord was as low as 1 microgram per kilogram, it will still be enough to trigger a set of neurological conditions commonly associated with autism and other conditions. I urge the minister to err on the side of caution, and think about the fact that the amount of mercury in a thermometer is enough to pollute an entire loch. For the sake of our children and pregnant women, let us ensure that our vaccines are mercury free.

I am pleased to speak in the debate, particularly because I wrote the SNP's submission to the McIntosh commission five years ago. I also moved that STV be SNP policy for local government and all other elections. I remind Robert Brown, who said that the bill is self-serving tat, and Helen Eadie, who said that the bill is purely about self-interest in the SNP, that the SNP is trying to obtain a majority of seats so that we can have a referendum on independence. In a first-past-the-post system, the SNP would clearly achieve a majority with 37 or 38 per cent of the vote. In a PR system we would need close to 50 per cent of the vote. We do not support the bill in order to further the aims of our party. At local government level, while we might gain some seats in some parts of the country, we would lose seats in others. We would be likely to see a quadruple alliance of new Labour, Conservatives, Liberal Democrats and independents—as exists in Perth and Kinross—ganging up against the SNP. We are in favour of PR because it is in the interests of the voters, as Dennis Canavan and John McAllion said. At the previous Scottish local government elections, 59 wards had no contest—people had no choice in those wards.

In a second. The Conservative party contested less than half the wards in Scotland and the Liberals contested barely more than one third. The Liberals did not put up a single candidate in any of the 92 Ayrshire wards—their party is not a national party in Scotland. We want to give the voters a choice, but even Labour contested only three-quarters of the seats and the SNP only five out of six. In huge swathes of Scotland, people did not have a choice. In Stewart Stevenson's constituency, five SNP councillors were elected unopposed. I ask those who say that they are against PR if they seriously think that Labour and Conservative voters should not have had a choice in those elections. PR would have given them that choice and would attract a better quality of person to stand for local government. A lot of nonsense has been spoken about ward links, which Bill Butler did not mention but Sylvia Jackson did. In 1992, Bill Butler contested the Blairdardie ward in Anniesland; in 1995 he contested Greenfield in Baillieston; and in 1999 he contested Tollcross in Shettleston. Around Glasgow—and in other local authorities—there is a series of musical chairs: when people are deselected in one part of the city, they move elsewhere. Let me move on to the Liberals. What a pitiful, shameful and embarrassing contribution they have given us. The bill is about principles, but the Liberals are basically saying, "We might not actually win the vote so maybe we should just sit on our hands." If we all thought that about every debate, there would only have been one or two divisions in the chamber. The SNP would say "We are going to lose this vote; we'll not bother turning up today."

Be quiet for a second. For God's sake, let me speak. That is a fig leaf and the Liberals should be utterly ashamed of themselves. They have pulled a rabbit out of a hat with the draft bill that they produced today and I repeat that, really, they should be ashamed of themselves. I say to Labour colleagues that what goes around comes around. Yes, traditionally, the Labour party might have had the majority of seats—that is certainly true of some parts of Scotland. However, things are not always going to be like that. In the past few months, Labour has lost overall control in Aberdeen, Fife and Renfrewshire, and it lost Falkirk 18 months ago. A few years from now, when we have a SNP executive, the Labour members might be the ones  who are squealing for PR if they do not deliver on Tricia Marwick's bill. I ask all colleagues to give the voters a choice, to support PR in local government, and to support the principles of the bill.

We do.

Say that with a straight face.

Where is his party's bill?

I hope that I can bring some calm to the situation, Presiding Officer. Surely the minister is aware that, if Glasgow received the average increase in direct grant expenditure, it would have £18 million to spend in the next financial year and so would not have to impose £15.5 million in cuts and £2.5 million in additional charges, as proposed in the document, "Glasgow's Budget Proposals 2003-2004". Can the minister explain how cutting £2.176 million from its education department and £5.814 million from its hard-pressed social work services department will help the city to improve services and close the poverty gap between Glasgow and the rest of Scotland? Before the minister talks about council tax, I remind the chamber that Glasgow's council tax is the highest in Britain.

Is it not the case that, while any additional resources for Glasgow are welcome, those resources, over three years, represent less than 1 per cent of the city's annual budget and are a mere fraction of the £330 million in aggregate external finance that has been cut from Glasgow since new Labour came to power? Does the First Minister agree with The Herald editorial of 9 January, which said that the review "seems to have avoided or fudged all the hard choices, potentially leaving the neediest further behind" or the Evening Times editorial of 12 December that said that "the Cities' Review is essentially a non-event, a total turkey which holds no real cheer for Glasgow"?

When Mr McCabe was Minister for Parliament, he allowed a debate on pardons for men who were executed in the first world war, which is a reserved subject, so does he accept that there is a lack of consistency in his perspective? Does he agree that it would be anomalous for the Parliament not to debate issues such as the one that we are discussing, given that, when I was a member of Glasgow City Council, I participated in debates on Chechnya, Bosnia, trade union rights and the minimum wage? Surely if Scotland's local authorities are free to debate such important issues, Scotland's Parliament should be no less free to do so.

Does the minister agree with homelessness charities' belief that it is important to restore benefits to 16 and 17-year-olds? Will the Executive lobby Westminster to achieve that end?

The SNP welcomes the stage 1 debate on the  Homelessness etc (Scotland) Bill. Homelessness impacts on an increasing number of Scots and the SNP concurs with the Executive on the need for legislation in the field. I will touch on a number of areas that the bill focuses on and my colleagues will cover them in greater detail. A long-term strategy to end the growing problem of homelessness in Scotland is vital. We support the work of the homelessness task force and agree with the general principles of the bill. However, we have a number of concerns, which I believe are shared by members of other parties. The bill sets out a phased abolition of priority need with a goal of complete elimination by 2012. Phase 1 extends the statutory definition of priority need to include those assessed as being homeless who have not reached their 18 th birthday, who have experienced domestic abuse or who are defined as vulnerable in the code of guidance. Phase 2 is the complete abolition of priority need by 2012. We support the eventual abolition of priority need but have reservations about the practical and resource implications of implementation. The homelessness task force noted that, in most cases, the best advice that is offered to those who are assessed as non-priority cases is a list of accommodation providers. It took the view that the only way of ensuring fairness of treatment for all homeless people was to abolish priority need categories altogether, leaving the allocation up to the reasonable discretion of local authorities. The Social Justice Committee expressed some unease at that approach. Ian Robertson of Glasgow's Hamish Allan centre expressed his view that priority may not, in fact, be best left to the subjective judgment of local housing officers. He stated: "The problem is that unless the priority is clearly laid out in the legislation, it is left to the individual local authority and the individual members of staff in the organisations, who have the presentations in front of them, to make the decision. That cannot be good for continuity throughout Scotland." He also said: "If a woman is fleeing violence with a couple of kids, and she has clearly been abused, most people would recognise that as a number 1 priority. How can that be done if 10 or 15 people are present at one time and nobody has any priority? In operational terms, the people who apply tend to be prioritised."—[ Official Report , Social Justice Committee , 13 November 2002; c 3269-70.] In supporting the aim of abolishing priority need, the SNP shares the concerns of the Social Justice Committee about the practical difficulties of implementation while housing demand outstrips supply. We therefore urge the Executive to consider practical and deliverable ways forward at stage 2.  We also recognise that the expansion and abolition of priority need categories will, if the measure is to be effective, incur significant costs to local authorities in housing development, housing provision and staff resources. In the short term, such resource needs may be less onerous, as Gavin Corbett of Shelter stated in evidence to the committee. He said: "In the first phase of the main expansion of priority need, most of the people who should be housed in that way should have been housed because they were identified as priorities in the code of guidance. We do not expect a massive new need for accommodation in the first phase." However, homeless charities fear high resource demands in the second phase because of the potential housing shortage and the inadequacy of resources in the supporting people programme. Kathleen Caskie of the Big Issue in Scotland Ltd informed the committee: "When homeless people are going through the system and using the legislation that will be brought into force, they will need more advice, explanation and support to enable them to know what is going on."—[ Official Report , Social Justice Committee , 13 November 2002; c 3243-44.] In evidence to the committee, Glasgow City Council, Highland Council and West Dunbartonshire Council, among others, raised the issue of housing supply. In order for priority need provisions to be implemented effectively, resources must be made available to deal not only with the existing homeless people, but with the hidden homeless—those who are currently not acknowledged as homeless because they do not present, stay with a relative or sleep on a friend's floor. The abolition of priority need may lead to a significant increase in housing demand as the hidden homeless come forward. There must be flexibility in resource availability if increased needs are to be met. The Executive must continually monitor and assess the progress of local authorities and their resource needs, which will inevitably increase. I am pleased by the minister's earlier comments on that. The bill replaces the duty on local authorities to investigate intentionality with a power to do so. The bill provides that, in cases in which the applicant is found to be intentionally homeless, local authorities will offer a short Scottish secure tenancy. The ultimate goal is to provide support services that are tailored to each household to address the causes of homelessness and to minimise repeat applications. We agree with the recommendation in the Social Justice Committee's report that "a definition of the support framework is provided on the face of the Bill and further consideration is given by the Executive to the extent of resources required to fund the Supporting People programme and other support services, including details of numbers of additional staff required, and how they will be trained and deployed."  The homelessness task force noted that the key to preventing repeat homelessness lies in the quality of the support services that are provided, including facilitating access to benefit entitlement, enabling people to access appropriate services and providing access to advocacy, as appropriate. To do that, the data must be more complete and should be analysed frequently to enable support to be tailored to the individual. During the past year, there has been a change in the way in which housing data are collected. Figures are no longer collected per applicant but are being compiled per household. The categories of priority need and vulnerability into which the information was broken down will be replaced by broader categories, such as single men. We acknowledge the heightened efficiency of the new system, but it seems to have come at the cost of information that is more useful. Knowing how many families are in need is not enough, because we also need to know why they are in need. The new reports do not adequately highlight an applicant's housing and support needs. The SNP would like the option of more comprehensive data collection and analysis by local authorities to be explored within the framework of the bill. The bill will suspend local connection criteria. Local authorities will no longer be able to investigate the local connection of an applicant or refer that applicant to another locality where they are deemed to have a connection. COSLA stated that some of its members "have expressed concerns regarding the impact of the suspension of the local connection and the potential impact on the balance and sustainability of local communities."

I thank Mr Sheridan for that intervention. In fact, I am just about to touch on the issue to which he refers. In 2001-02, only 2.1 per cent of all homeless applications were referred to another local authority. The homelessness task force found that the greatest cause of dissatisfaction concerned where people were housed, which could be a huge barrier to feeling settled, particularly among those who were housed away from their home areas. The SNP acknowledges the potential for pressure in more desirable localities, but we believe that such pressure will be manageable. If pressure mounts, it is better to respond with added supply than to reinstate the local connection provision. Most homeless applicants will, in any case, apply to their own locality, preferring to stay near friends and family, who may provide an  informal support network. People who move elsewhere usually have good reasons for doing so—for example, escaping domestic abuse—and they should be afforded that mobility. The bill will suspend local connection rather than abolish it. The power remains to reinstate the local connection provision if suspension is found to put undue pressure on authorities. We feel that such concerns are unlikely to be realised and, after taking cognisance of the evidence, we are reasonably happy with the bill's provisions on that matter. However, we seek assurances that there will be continuous monitoring of any additional stresses that are placed on local authorities, so that the decision can be made whether, when and how local connection should be reinstated. I believe that the deputy minister will give such assurances when he sums up. At a meeting of the Social Justice Committee, David Comley of Glasgow City Council raised concerns about refugees. He said: "A recent court decision suggested that refugees should be held to have a local connection with the place to which they were dispersed under the asylum seekers dispersal programme. The fact that someone was dispersed to Glasgow does not mean that they have established a connection with the city, because in no sense do asylum seekers chose to be dispersed to Glasgow."—[ Official Report , Social Justice Committee , 6 November 2002;  c 3220.] Were the local connection provision to be reinstated, we would call for an exception to be made for asylum seekers. Across Scotland, numerous communities are blighted by anti-social behaviour. I was pleased that the minister touched on that issue. The Chartered Institute of Housing in Scotland and the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations are worried that tenants who are evicted for anti-social behaviour will be offered a short SST. The Social Justice Committee acknowledged that concern and collectively agreed that there should not be an automatic right to a short SST without the fulfilment of responsibilities. The committee seeks an appropriate Executive amendment at stage 2. I noted the minister's comments following Karen Whitefield's intervention. Our view is that a properly prepared Executive amendment would carry more weight than an amendment that came from a committee member. We acknowledge that repossession should occur only as a last resort. The bill makes two proposals. First, courts will be placed under a duty to investigate the extent to which third parties are a contributing factor before issuing repossession notices. That will serve primarily to guard against repossessions when there has been a delay in a housing benefit claim. Secondly, any application to a court for a repossession order must be reported  to the applicant's local authority. That will allow the local authority to assist the applicant and possibly prevent the eviction in the first place. We support the development of a long-term strategy to close off routes into homelessness and we believe that the proposals to which I have just referred fit in with that strategy. However, we acknowledge that, for the measures on repossession to be effective in preventing homelessness, a time frame must be set for landlords to report repossessions so that the local authorities can intervene where appropriate. As that time period might vary between local authorities, we would like each local authority to develop a time scale for landlords and courts to report repossession cases. That could be included as part of the local authority homelessness strategy. We encourage ministers to lobby their Westminster colleagues about the restoration of benefits to 16 and 17-year-olds, although we appreciate that the issue does not fall within the scope of the bill. On 13 November, I asked the homelessness charities that were giving evidence to the committee whether the restoration of benefits to 16 and 17-year-olds would make a difference. Kathleen Caskie, of the Big Issue in Scotland, said: "Yes! I am sorry: that was what in America they call a no-brainer. Yes. Those without income are vulnerable, particularly if they are homeless. Do I need to add to that?" Gavin Corbett, of Shelter Scotland, added: "Nobody is going to say no to such a restoration of benefits." The convener then said: "We have no hostility towards brief and clear answers. They are welcome."—[ Official Report, Social Justice Committee, 13 November 2002; c 3264.] Again, I urge the Executive to lobby Westminster on that issue. A thread that ran through the evidence-taking sessions was the issue of resources. We stress the importance of providing adequate resources, in terms not only of housing supply and structures, but of support services and the recruitment, training and deployment of staff. As I said, that will be necessary if the bill is to achieve its aims. My colleague Brian Adam will focus on resources. Before the debate, he pleaded with me not to steal his thunder by giving a load of statistics. To stop his cold sweat, I will not go into the issue in any detail, but I will say that page 130 of the document that contains the evidence that was taken by the committee seems to indicate that adequate resources would amount to only £22 million. I also draw members' attention to the practitioners' concern, which was also raised by the Finance Committee and the Social Justice Committee, that  "the Scottish Executive could not quantify the cost of implementing the provisions of the Bill". There was were also concern about "the danger of funding being skewed away from other services as a result of the Bill creating pressure to address the housing element". The Social Justice Committee highlighted the fact that the Executive "could not 'give any future commitments' to funding the financial burdens placed on local authorities (through the expansion of priority need) beyond the investment to 2005-06". Like the Social Justice Committee, the SNP believes that the much-used word "support" needs to be more clearly defined. In 2001-02, there were 46,380 homeless applications in Scotland. That is the highest figure on record and it is an indictment of new Labour and its failure to prevent homelessness from rising, let alone to reduce it. Only yesterday, it was revealed that the number of households in temporary accommodation increased by 10 per cent on the previous year to 4,419, including 1,506 families with children. For their sakes, we must get the bill right.

To be frank, I think that the minister doth protest too much. Is not the minister ashamed that new Labour has not only failed to reduce poverty in Scotland but has actually failed to stop it rising since coming to power five and a half years ago? Never mind new Labour's fiddled figures; those are the figures that the Joseph Rowntree Foundation published last week, to the embarrassment of the minister. Will the minister explain how giving Glasgow the worst local government settlement of any of Scotland's 29 mainland authorities over the next three years can possibly reduce the gap between the level of poverty in Glasgow and that in the rest of Scotland? Is not it the case that poverty will continue to get worse in Glasgow relative to the rest of the country because the Executive does not see Glasgow as an area where it can win extra votes next year? The Executive takes the city for granted and anyone who looks at the figures knows that money is going into the marginal constituencies—

The SNP warmly welcomes the bill. This unsung piece of legislation shows the Parliament working at its best, both in committee and in the chamber, on a constructive and cross-party basis. I doubt that the outside world will ever hear about that, but we should commend the work that the Transport and the Environment Committee and the ministerial team have done on the bill. The SNP believes that any new system must have a robust basis and credible enforcement powers, and reflect the need for basic accountability and competence—from both the design professional and those who are charged with verifying compliance. The new system must be reactive to the needs of developers and proactive in addressing innovation and sustainability. It must build on the experiences of practising building standards professionals. We believe that the bill will both promote the aim of establishing a safe, efficient and sustainable built environment and protect local government's ability to ensure the delivery of such an environment. However, change or clarification will be required in some parts of the bill. The SNP's own Bob the Builder, Colin Campbell, talked about cowboy builders. The bill presents us with an opportunity to eliminate the problem of cowboy builders and to increase consumer protection through a national approach to the regulation of building standards and the accreditation of builders. If the minister does not know what dwangs and noggings are, he should not feel bad about that—I do not know what they are either. As Linda Fabiani said, the bill must be strengthened to ensure that it is objective driven, rather than process driven. We can do that by amending the preamble to reflect the bill's objectives more clearly. Section 7 must also be strengthened to require Scottish ministers not only to make lists available, but to ensure that they are accessible, widely publicised and effectively promoted. Ministers should be required to issue guidance on how those functions are carried out and to consult widely on the content of that guidance. As Linda Fabiani and Ken Macintosh indicated, because of the changes that it makes to the hierarchy and the new roles and responsibilities that it introduces to advance building standards in Scotland, the bill has implications for access for disabled people to the built environment. Most concern has arisen from the resetting of the mandatory status of technical standards to guidance level. It would be helpful if access for and usability by disabled people were covered  explicitly in the functional standards. The standards should be clear enough for the courts to determine whether the design and construction of a building perform that function. Technical standards for disabled people, which will form the basis for the early versions of the forthcoming guidance, have often been criticised for setting minimal requirements. Ken Macintosh dealt with that issue in detail. Building control has failed to deliver those standards, such as they were, consistently and satisfactorily. Murdo Fraser expressed concerns about that. We are disappointed that the response to the criticisms that have been levelled at the building control system has been to issue guidance documents to replace mandatory technical standards. We need guidance that is clear, articulate, accessible and written in plain English. That will benefit all involved, including designers, building owners, builders and verifiers. It will also help to engage disabled building owners and users in the process. The language of the bill mirrors that of the Building (Scotland) Act 1959. Both the policy memorandum and the explanatory notes imply that it covers the issues of access and usability. My colleague Linda Fabiani raised the issue of relaxations. Class relaxations and relaxations that are granted on application have long been contentious issues for disabled people. The Disability Rights Commission recommended strongly that no building in public use should be granted relaxation of a regulation if that would have a direct or indirect negative impact on accessibility and usability. The commission also recommended that consideration of all applications for relaxation should take full account of potential and prospective users of buildings, as well as current users. Potential users of a building could include disabled people who wish to buy it or to use the services that it contains, or who are required to work in it. Ministers could take account of the fact that buildings that are built for a specific purpose may in future be subject to a change of use. In such cases, the relaxation that allowed for the original use may no longer apply. Achieving accessibility and usability in a building that is complete and occupied is more expensive and time consuming than doing so at the design stage. The Transport and the Environment Committee noted that a number of the bill's provisions could have significant cost implications for local authorities. Written evidence from the City of Edinburgh Council highlighted the "enormous burden" that regular use of the expanded powers to inspect buildings to ascertain whether they are dangerous could place on local authorities. More general concerns relating to local authority resources were expressed in written evidence  from the Scottish Association of Chief Building Control Officers, which stated: "The Association is concerned that in the short term at least a reduction in resource potentially available to local authorities will seriously affect the roll out and implementation of the building standards system. Much is made in the explanatory notes and policy memorandum of the need for local authorities to be more professional and reactive to those seeking building standards approval. The Association agrees wholeheartedly with this but would warn that such aims cannot be achieved without adequate funding." The policy memorandum states that the current system for setting standards for buildings is very prescriptive. At present, complying with building regulations involves complying with technical standards that have full statutory force. According to the Executive, that creates a barrier to the use of innovative approaches to design and makes it more difficult to comply with harmonised European construction product standards, the first of which have already been produced. Many more such standards will be rolled out over the next few years. The Disability Rights Commission raised concerns about the revised status of the technical standards. It stated: "Our main bone of contention is the fact that the technical standards may no longer be mandatory. We feel that the impact of that could be negative, unless, through other facets of the bill, we can strengthen the application and observance of equalities and so strengthen accessibility and usability."—[ Official Report , Transport and the Environment Committee , 6 November 2002; c 3615.] The aspect of the bill that has attracted most comment, and some criticism—although not from the Conservatives—is the provision to allow the appointment of private sector verifiers, who would operate alongside the current system of local authority verifiers. This morning, the minister pointed out that the Executive has said that it has no plans to introduce such verifiers at present. In evidence to the Transport and the Environment Committee, the City of Edinburgh Council stated: "No private verifier could ever meet the criteria of being independent and accountable to the local electorate when they are appointed and paid for by a client directly. The DETR in England has as a result created a private building control system which exists at present, therefore, the essential elements of which are no refusals, no problems and no enforcement!" Nora Radcliffe was right to say that, before moving forward on this issue, we should wait to see how the English legislation beds down. The SNP has an open mind on the subject. Providing that the system is well monitored and regulated, it may be a possibility for the future. I wanted to mention other issues, but because I am running out of time I will finish there.

I would like to be the first to congratulate Bill Butler, not only on securing the debate, but on his passionate contribution to it. Post-natal depression is an extremely important issue, particularly for those of us who have small children and who recall some of the concerns that were associated with the birth of those children. For many, PND is hard to diagnose. The Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network's guideline 60 states: "Postnatal depression is regarded as any non-psychotic depressive illness of mild to moderate severity occurring during the first postnatal year. ... It is important to distinguish postnatal depression from 'baby blues', the brief episode of misery and tearfulness that affects at least half of all women following delivery, especially those having their first baby ... Puerperal psychosis ... is a mood disorder accompanied by features such as loss of contact with reality, hallucinations, severe thought disturbance, and abnormal behaviour." In other words, we are talking about a serious illness. The fact that more than 2.4 per cent of mothers suffer from PND means that more than 1,000 mothers in Scotland have it. There is a health care network for new mothers but, unfortunately, it is not always possible to detect PND as a specific condition. Across Scotland, there is wide divergence in diagnosis and in how the issue is dealt with. Many people are involved in that process, such as midwives, health visitors, clinical psychologists, obstetricians and psychiatrists. It is important that all those people play their part, not only in identifying PND, but in treating it. The point of the debate is to call for specific mother and baby units; Bill Butler is not asking for the earth; he is asking for a small number of units across Scotland, amounting to approximately 30 to 45 dedicated beds for the whole country. That would not be too much of a burden on the health service, but it would be a major benefit to those mothers who go through what is a traumatic, distressing illness.  For those who think that PND may be a passing phase, I must say that, unfortunately for many sufferers, that is not the case. It can lead to other psychiatric illnesses and to a deepening of other underlying pathologies. Some people have family support to get them through PND; others do not. It makes it much more difficult for mothers to bond with their children if they are trying to deal with the illness at the same time. I believe that Bill Butler's proposal is extremely worth while, and I hope that the Minister for Health and Community Care will address it positively.

I will motor, but first I congratulate John Farquhar Munro on securing this debate. Affordable housing is now perhaps the biggest social issue in rural Scotland. Access to permanent accommodation is influenced by a wide range of complex factors: availability, cost, proximity to services and employment, household income, level of competition and productivity within the housing allocation processes. Some rural areas, often those that are most isolated, have houses lying empty as a result of factors such as population drain and lack of local employment opportunities. However, in other areas, the opposite is the case. The rural partnership for change found that the right to buy has reduced opportunities for those who are reliant on the socially rented sector. People moving into rural areas often revitalise communities, but a side effect has been increased housing pressure. That is especially the case in areas that are within commuting distance of urban settlements and areas that are popular as holiday or retirement destinations. Housing pressure can have a detrimental effect on local communities, especially on people who are disadvantaged because of low income or other personal circumstances. The quality of housing in rural Scotland is a concern among older people who own their homes  but cannot afford to carry out repairs. The rural partnership for change has indicated that the physical quality of houses is a major worry. Lack of flexibility in addressing homelessness is a problem. I hope that the Homelessness etc (Scotland) Bill will sort that out. A significant proportion of homelessness applicants may spend time in temporary accommodation, either while they are being assessed or following assessment, while the local authority seeks appropriate permanent accommodation for them. Priority households in rural areas are more likely than their urban counterparts to be placed in, and spend longer periods of time in, temporary accommodation and bed-and-breakfast accommodation. The supply of affordable housing is vital. Concerns have been raised in the Social Justice Committee that, to implement the Homelessness etc (Scotland) Bill, only enough moneys have been provided for eight additional houses in the Highland region, although 285 may be required. Homeless people are often placed in accommodation that is located in isolated areas, where they have limited access to services and support networks. That can make it costly and difficult to access services and employment. Given the fact that household incomes in many rural areas are below the Scottish average, with incomes in some areas having shown a relative decrease over the past decade, the fact that house prices in rural Scotland have risen higher than those in urban areas is a worrying trend. The issue of affordable housing must therefore be addressed.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether rough sleeping will have ended by 1 May 2003. (S1O-5905)

Given that the minister has said that rough sleeping is likely to be with us for a considerable time, does he agree that it was not only crass and insensitive but downright dishonest for the Deputy First Minister to state on  "Newsnight Scotland" on 20 October: "The Liberal Democrats will have ended rough sleeping by 1 May 2003"?

I am pleased to speak in a debate on an issue that has caused great concern and distress to many Scots, particularly to the elderly and vulnerable. I congratulate Duncan McNeil on securing the debate and on his excellent speech. Mis-selling and fuel-supplier transfers in particular are frequently discussed by the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on consumer issues. Indeed, last June, we had a presentation from the managing director of a company that employs door-to-door sales representatives. He talked about the pressure that disreputable companies place on their sales staff, as Duncan McNeil said. Often, sales staff who are found to have mis-sold are dismissed by their employers, but apparently they regularly resurface with other companies. Reputable supply companies should ensure that direct sales companies blacklist those who fall into that category and drive them from the marketplace. Of course, we should also investigate companies that encourage sharp practice but throw up their hands in horror and blame their staff when they are caught out.  If companies do not get their act together, perhaps suppliers should consider whether they want their reputations sullied and fines imposed on them, such as the £2 million penalty that was recently imposed on London Electricity for continuing to work with the rogue companies. In a competitive market, salespeople are, of course, paid by results and often earn 100 per cent of their income from commission, which encourages the cutting of corners at best and downright fraud at worst. Complaints continue to mount. Last year, Citizens Advice Scotland reported a 33 per cent increase in utility problems—some 8,200 cases. Those constitute 9 per cent of all Citizens Advice Scotland's social policy cases and more than half of them relate directly to problems arising from fuel transfer. The work load of citizens advice bureaux continues to increase in that sphere. Enforcing licensing conditions, implementing the new code of practice and working with energywatch are important steps. Compensation for those who have endured mis-selling might also focus minds and hit rogue sellers where it hurts financially. I support Duncan McNeil's comments on that issue. However, the announcement by the Minister of State for Energy and Construction that rogue companies must crack down on mis-selling or face penalties has not yet had the desired effect, according to Citizens Advice Scotland. Perhaps last month's action by the regulator will make those companies think again. Of course, we should take into account the fact that many people who transfer to another fuel supplier benefit financially. However, the fact that many of Scotland's poor are excluded from the opportunity to switch and benefit is the other side of the coin. We could debate that another time. Another issue is that thousands of people who genuinely wished to transfer suppliers filled in forms and had them accepted. However, those forms were incinerated—and so could not be processed—because of the incompetence of some of the supplier companies. Therefore, there is the ridiculous situation in which some people are harassed and distressed by being mis-sold utilities, while others who genuinely want to transfer are being prevented from doing so. Restoration of public confidence in the sector is vital and I look forward to hearing the minister's response.

I offer warm congratulations to Johann Lamont on securing the debate. I also warmly welcome the Scottish Executive's consultation document on proposals to regulate the private security industry in Scotland. Indeed, the document's first sentence sums up the matter. It says: "There is a clear need for regulation in the private security industry in Scotland." Johann Lamont's motion was prompted by incidents in Pollok. As members will appreciate, it was no coincidence that, following certain events, certain parties made offers of help. However, as Johann pointed out, we cannot say too much more about the matter as it is sub judice. The consultation document touches on the question of what private security firms actually are. Concerns have been raised about everything from private investigators to bouncers who stand outside some of Glasgow's nightclubs. I have gone round clubs with the police and it is interesting to note the difference in the quality of stewardship at the doors of some of those places. Indeed, on that night, I saw via the TV cameras at police headquarters someone being severely beaten. As a result of such incidents, regulation is important. However, we must also take on board the views of legitimate companies, which welcome the Executive's consultation document. It will do everyone good if we can get rid of the cowboys in the industry and ensure that those who provide a legitimate service are allowed to go about their business. We must ascertain how many companies there are, what they do and how we define the term "private security". Is it some form of community vigilantism or a protection racket in which communities are told that if they pay £3 a week they will have no problems with graffiti or broken windows? Is private security a bit more refined than that? Does it include wheel clamping or the stewardship of nightclubs? The consultation document opens the door to examining the matter  in depth and ensuring that we have proper regulation. I look forward to the minister's comments.

Will the minister give way on that point?

If Mr Rumbles had listened to the speech—

If Mr Rumbles had listened, he would have heard that—

Will the member take an intervention?

One complaint that is voiced about the Executive relates to the absence of independent analysis of what it delivers. The Executive is often judge and jury on its own performance. Today, I will focus on independent analysis, which is provided in the report "Poverty in Scotland 2002: People, places and policies", which was published by the Child Poverty Action Group in Scotland, the Scottish poverty information unit and others. The main finding of the report is that around one third of Scottish children still live in poverty. The report also concluded that the Scottish Executive is limited in addressing employment policy and social security matters, which are the main areas of social policy and are reserved to Westminster. As we know, in an independent Scotland, the Scottish Parliament would have full control over tax and benefits, which would allow Scotland to collect and target resources for the benefit of the population and would open the way to real social justice for all Scots. Does any member doubt that Westminster's hold on important reserved matters such as employment policy and social security holds back Scotland's potential? If Scotland had control over such powers, would invalidity benefit and benefit for single parents have been cut or—as a Liberal Democrat member of Parliament recently discovered—would secret plans to cut benefits for 650,000 working single parents throughout the United Kingdom have been introduced? I doubt it. Unfortunately, devolution has led to little real change in social policy, which is influenced overwhelmingly by UK control. At the very least, attention must be refocused on the nature of policy co-ordination and Scotland's interaction with Westminster during policy development. The research from the devolution and constitutional change unit concluded that civil servants find it hard to discuss reserved matters. The report stated: "Policy seems to be very reliant on Westminster". The Scottish Parliament has no direct control over the most obvious anti-poverty measures,  despite the valiant efforts of the Scottish Executive. Yesterday, while taking evidence on the Homelessness etc (Scotland) Bill at the Social Justice Committee, I asked representatives of the Big Issue in Scotland, Shelter Scotland and the Scottish Council for Single Homeless whether restoration of benefits for 16 and 17-year-olds would make a difference to the prevention of homelessness. The answer was a resounding yes, but the Executive has no powers to act. Does any member believe that the Executive would not restore those benefits, if it had the power to do so? Unfortunately, London says no. What is the true picture of poverty in Scotland? Around a quarter of Scots, including 30 per cent of children, live in low-income households that are below the 60 per cent median income threshold. That is higher than the UK average and, in 2001, the figure increased by 1 per cent from the previous year, as thousands more families slid into poverty. In November 2001, the total number of people on income support was 668,000, which includes claimants, their partners and dependants. The percentage of the Scottish population who received income support was 13.1 per cent, which is above the UK average of 11.7 per cent. That figure is higher than in 1997, when new Labour came to power. Thirty-four per cent of Scottish households now claim income-related benefits, in contrast to just more than one quarter in the UK. A higher proportion of households in Scotland receive housing and council tax benefit than in the UK. As has been stated, we would disregard those benefits in calculating working families tax credits, as advocated by One Plus and others. It is significant that, in the UK, the number of people who are economically inactive is five times greater than the number of unemployed people. Economic inactivity is often described as hidden unemployment. It is high among groups that are vulnerable in the labour market such as older people, lone parents, people with disabilities and those who live in disadvantaged areas including the post-industrial communities of west central Scotland. Lone parents are disproportionately represented among those who face poverty. They are twice as likely as couples with children to be poor. More than a quarter of all pensioners live in households where the income is half the average income. A great percentage of households with disabled people are in the lower income bands; more than two thirds of such households have incomes of less than £10,000. Fourteen per cent of Scottish 16 to 19-year-olds are not in employment, training or education. The proportion has remained virtually constant since 1992. Roughly a quarter of the new deal entrants  in Scotland have no qualifications. New Labour has published a consultation document on new ways of measuring child poverty. Indeed, that is typical of new Labour: if it fails to meet a target, it re-defines it. Last Thursday, in answer to a question from my colleague Linda Fabiani, the First Minister spoke of "absolute poverty". He was attempting to change the Executive's definitions—no doubt embarrassed at having the highest relative poverty in western Europe.

That is because the Executive changed the definition of absolute poverty.

No. Across the European Union, the definition that is recognised is that of relative poverty. I am getting a feeling of déjà vu—this reminds me of the argument on waiting times. Let us deal with the issue rather than seek redefinitions. Any redefinition of poverty that produces dramatic changes in the figures would erode public trust. The redrawing of the statistical definition of poverty reminds the SNP of the Tories' continual remeasuring of unemployment when they were in power. The Social Market Foundation has commented: "Any attempt to adopt this measure would result in allegations that the Government is 'manipulating' the figures". The Social Market Foundation is not the Executive; it is an independent group, which has also set out: "Any good measure of poverty must satisfy the requirements of being simple, intuitive, consistent, useful, robust, objective, appropriately relative and comparable." In the Scottish Executive's annual report "Social Justice ...a Scotland where everyone matters", it sets out: "Above all we wish to make child poverty a thing of the past within a generation." That is not desperately ambitious when the statement is compared with the situation in other countries, but it is a start. However, child poverty levels in Scotland remain virtually unchanged. The Child Poverty Action Group states:  "The role of the Scottish Executive and Parliament is limited in addressing employment matters, especially income measures such as the national minimum wage and Working Families Tax Credit since these are reserved issues to Westminster."

I am sorry. I am afraid that I have fallen a bit behind. If I have time, I will let the member in. The Westminster Government has failed to tackle the minimum wage for those aged 16 and 17 years. The Scottish Low Pay Unit has consistently argued against a separate minimum wage for young workers. It has said: "There has never been any justification for paying workers doing the same job different rates simply on the grounds of age." Does the minister not agree? Low wages and the problems of the working poor remain the major features of poverty throughout Scotland today. The introduction of the national minimum wage is a step in the right direction, but much remains to be done. I highlight in particular: scrapping the youth development rate; linking future increases to movement in average earnings; improving the enforcement of the minimum wage; and setting up an independent operating mechanism. For many people with disabilities, work is unobtainable. Claiming benefits such as disability living allowance and attendance allowance is an enduring challenge for them and their representatives. The working families tax credit increases the number of people who are entitled to benefit, but they are often drawn into marginal rates of taxation and the poverty trap. The 2000-01 family resources survey found that more than one third of children below the poverty line did not receive income support or working families tax credit. Across the United Kingdom, another report from the Institute for Fiscal Studies found: "Some 1.5 million children in poverty are in families that do not receive the benefits that are the Government's principal instrument for tackling child poverty. This puts almost two in every five poor children out of reach of increases in means-tested benefits making child poverty targets significantly harder to reach." The new Labour Government has been slow to make inroads in addressing another key policy aim, which is ending pensioner poverty. The introduction of a minimum income guarantee and the new pension credit scheme that is planned for 2003 will increase pensioner's reliance on means-tested benefits, while the basic state pension continues to be tied to the retail prices index. The  National Pensions Convention said that the minimum income guarantee "coupled with the new Pension Credit proposals to take into account the amount of individual savings, will result in 5.5 million pensioners (half the pensioner population) facing some form of means-testing by 2003." Life expectancy is a clear indicator of poverty, and the gap between life expectancy in Drumchapel in Glasgow and in neighbouring Bearsden is eight years. Children in Glasgow's Easterhouse, in the minister's constituency, are five times more likely to die before their first birthday than the United Kingdom average. Children from poor families have lower expectations about their future and are more likely to have lower esteem, play truant and leave school at 16. Individuals who leave school with low levels of educational attainment are at higher risk of experiencing social exclusion as adults and have significantly lower lifetime earnings. Homelessness in Scotland is now at a record level. As Mel Young, a director of the Big Issue, has stated: "It would be much better if benefits were devolved to Scotland as part of an integrated anti-poverty strategy." Mike Aaronson, director general of the charity Save the Children, decried the Government's lack of ambition and said: "even if the government meets its current 10-year target this would still leave the UK with the highest child poverty rate in Europe." Of course, the rate in Scotland is higher than the UK rate. As today's edition of The Scotsman states in response to the third report of the Scottish household survey: "The findings present a worrying picture of a widening social and economic divide between the country's haves and have-nots". That is today, after five and a half years of Labour Government. Across Europe, from the Basque country to Bavaria, devolved Parliaments have greater tools than Scotland has with which to tackle poverty. Obtaining such powers would be progress, but if we are to reduce poverty to Swedish or Finnish levels and beyond, we need the powers of those Parliaments. For that, we need independence. I move, That the Parliament deplores the fact that a quarter of all Scots and a third of all Scottish children live in poverty; accepts that any measure of poverty must satisfy the requirements of being relative and comparable, noting that the Scottish Executive appears to place less emphasis on reducing the incidence of poverty than changing its definition; is aware that the Scottish Executive is limited in its ability to eliminate poverty due to the inadequacy of the powers devolved to Scotland, and believes that the most effective way to tackle poverty in Scotland is to ensure that  all powers over tax and spending decisions are transferred from Westminster to the Scottish Parliament.

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

I took two interventions from Labour colleagues.

Serious crime is obviously the most significant issue. Is Pauline McNeill aware that Glasgow's homicide rate is more than double that of London or Paris? Does not she think that that is a serious issue that should be addressed?

We have heard yet another Liberal make cheap political points by accusing others of making cheap political points. The reason for today's debate is the cruel neglect of the criminal justice system and the police by new Labour in its first three years in office. We have already heard the figures: serious assault is up 20 per cent and there has been a 50 per cent increase in the handling of weapons over the past three years alone. We have also heard Paul Martin say that it does not matter where good policies come from, which is why I am surprised that he did not support the establishment of drugs courts back in 1999. Would his constituents in Springburn agree with him that there should be no increase in police numbers and that the matter is all about efficiency?

I did not say that Paul Martin did not support drugs courts, but that he did not call for them in 1999. Now that drugs courts are Labour policy, Paul Martin thinks that they are a great idea, but he did not call for them when they were SNP policy. I am also interested in how Lord James Douglas-Hamilton's views have moved. During a previous debate on crime, Lord James talked about redeployment of police officers rather than additional police officers—if Lord James will check the record, he will find that I am right about that. I am pleased to see that he now believes that we should have additional officers. However, he also needs to think about how many officers we want to deploy. Today, I want to focus on two issues. The first is postcode policing. It is totally unacceptable that some parts of our country have policing that is inferior compared to that of other parts. That is a reflection not on the police but on the way in which they are deployed. People in one part of Scotland should not be more in fear of crime, or be more likely to be the victims of crime, than people in another part of Scotland. My colleague Richard Lochhead mentioned that Aberdeen had the second-highest crime figures; the highest crime figures are, of course, in Glasgow. Let me provide some statistics: for  offensive weapons, the incidence in Glasgow is almost three times the Scottish average; serious assault in Glasgow is almost three times the Scottish average; the number of assaults involving knives is four times the Scottish average; almost a quarter of Scotland's racially aggravated problems happened in Glasgow; and one third of Scotland's homicides took place in Glasgow. It is clear that some areas have particular policing problems. Overall crime—including crimes such as vandalism and housebreaking—is 70 per cent higher in Glasgow than the Scottish average. No other place in Strathclyde is more than 16 per cent above the average, although that is a bad enough figure in itself. Until we recruit, train and deploy the extra 1,000 officers, it is important that chief constables use their resources to ensure that police are redeployed to areas that have specific crime problems.

I have only about 45 seconds left. I acknowledge Sylvia Jackson's point. However, if crime is a significant issue in a certain area, the resources that are available must be devoted specifically to tackling that problem. That would mean that a pensioner in an area where crime is three or four times higher than it is in another neighbourhood would not have to suffer that level of crime or the fear of crime; the risk of crime would be the same everywhere. We want to reduce the level of crime, but we do not want huge anomalies in certain areas of the country. In my final few seconds, I shall touch on delays, which show that the available resources are limited. The number of delays that have resulted in cases not being proceeded with has increased from 4,214 in 1998-99 to 8,409 in 2001-02. That is a 100 per cent increase in only three years. It is clear that the system cannot cope. In Glasgow, the number has more than doubled. In 1998-99 in Glasgow, 1,384 cases were not proceeded with because of the time bar and because of delays by the procurator fiscal, the police and other reporting agencies, such as HM Customs and Excise. In 2001-02, that number had risen to 2,872 cases. The Executive is failing Scotland. It is failing to put resources into tackling crime and it is failing to reform the criminal justice system. We need more  resources and more officers. We must examine what is happening in the criminal justice system so that the people of Scotland will feel safe from crime.

That gives us a lot of time, Presiding Officer. In the past 40 minutes, we have had some heat, some light and some interesting comments. For example, Robert Brown described the bill as a "comprehensive and liberal system", which makes me wonder what his definition of "liberal" is. We have even heard Lyndsay McIntosh make a strong case for the Consumer Credit Act 1974 to be devolved to Scotland. However, if we look at the bill, we see that the Executive has been pretty fly in the way in which it has presented the bill to Parliament. It has, in effect, cobbled together two bills: one to set up a debt arrangement scheme, which would  undoubtedly have the Parliament's overwhelming support; and a bill to reinstate some aspects of poindings and warrant sales, which has generated much opposition throughout the chamber. If what I have said is not the case, I hope that the minister will be able to support our amendment, agreement to which would mean that we could bring the bill back in a year, check out the workings of the exceptional attachment order and find out whether it is poindings and warrant sales by a new name or, as the Executive has said, the turning of the page to a new chapter in dealing with debt in Scotland.

It has been a long day and I will be mercifully brief, not least because a number of colleagues wish to speak in the limited time that is available. First, I place on record my thanks to the convener of the Social Justice Committee for her even-handedness and good humour throughout the committee stage of the bill's progress. I thank the clerking staff of the Social Justice Committee for hard work above and beyond the call of duty and all those who submitted written and oral evidence. I must also thank my colleague Linda Fabiani, whose contribution has been restricted due to family bereavement and ill health. Last, and probably least, I thank Robert Brown for keeping me supplied with paracetamol throughout the day. The purpose of the Debt Arrangement and  Attachment (Scotland) Bill was to put in place measures to protect the debtor. Indeed, the bill has been welcomed by almost all organisations that have given written or oral evidence including Citizens Advice Scotland, the Institute of Credit Management, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, the Scottish Consumer Council, the Scottish Sheriff Court Users Group, the Scottish Legal Action Group and the Society of Messengers-at-Arms and Sheriff Officers. In particular, the Scottish Sheriff Court Users Group welcomed the plan to set up a national debt arrangement scheme that "could provide the cornerstone for an effective system of debt collection in the 21 st century". However, concerns were expressed in the committee about the bill's ability to separate those who cannot pay from those who will not pay. One such case is the exceptional attachment order, which was criticised throughout by the Scottish Legal Action Group as being "not exceptional enough". Indeed, as the Society of Messengers-at-Arms and Sheriff Officers and others have pointed out, exceptional attachment orders will eliminate some current so-called diligence stoppers. Unfortunately, the Executive would not support measures to that end at either stage 2 or stage 3. For example, I lodged amendments 134 and 135 at stage 2 to attempt to ensure that attachment and arrangement became a two-stage process. Indeed, Mr Sheridan lodged amendment 69 at stage 3 to ensure that people on benefit would be excluded. Although the SNP remains unhappy about that aspect of the bill and indeed about some aspects of the debt arrangement scheme, we feel that it is important to consider the bill in the round. The debt arrangement scheme will make a difference to thousands of Scots who are currently in debt. By balancing the thousands of people whose lives will be improved against those who the Executive has repeatedly asserted will amount to a few, we have concluded that we do not wish to throw the baby out with the bath water. Instead the SNP seeks to amend the bill to ensure that, within a year of royal assent, the Scottish Executive will have carried out research that proves conclusively just how exceptional—or not—exceptional attachment orders are. A few minutes ago, the minister said that he would monitor the system carefully. We do not believe that that is enough. As a result, I move amendment S1M-3534.1, to insert at end: "but, in so doing, expresses reservations that the Bill does not fully fulfil the will of the Parliament as expressed on 6 December 2000 during the passage of the Abolition of Poindings and Warrant Sales Bill, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to institute ongoing research into the effects of the provisions of the Bill and report the results of  this research to the Parliament at its first meeting after the first anniversary of the Bill receiving Royal Assent."

We know that amendment 88 cannot stand alone and for that reason we will not press it. Amendment 88 makes the point that the Executive has failed to ensure a division between commercial and domestic debt recovery procedures. In the absence of that division in legislation, the opportunities exist for creditors to pursue domestic debt through simple attachment orders, rather than exceptional attachment orders. In those circumstances, none of the schedule 2 measures to protect debtors during exceptional attachments will apply. It would be in order for a domestic debt to be pursued through a simple attachment order and for officers of the court to arrive at a debtor's house to remove any property that was not in the house. As one cannot apply a simple attachment order to anything inside a house, it is strange that, although articles that would normally be attached in pursuit of a commercial debt need only be kept inside a house to be safe, the bicycle that a debtor uses to go to work on and keeps in the garage can be auctioned to take care of a domestic debt. I move amendment 88.

I oppose amendment 86. It seeks to place yet another burden on debtors. It adds insult to injury that they will be expected to pay the storage costs of attached goods. I notice that amendment 86 does specify the maximum period during which the extra burden will apply to such goods.

Amendment 71 follows on from my stage 2 amendment 130. Its purpose is to provide an element of choice for those who do not want unnecessary intrusion into their home, while acknowledging that contact between a debtor and a debt adviser is crucial. Mr Sheridan's amendment 70, which would make a visit by a debt adviser compulsory, is inappropriate. Many debtors might not want a debt adviser turning up at their home. If the sheriff believes that such contact is warranted and if the debtor wants advice, the debtor should be able to call on the debt adviser. As well as choice, practical issues are involved. As yet, we do not know how many exceptional attachment orders there will be. Visiting each debtor could impose a heavy burden on advisers, particularly if great distances are involved and the adviser does not possess a motor vehicle. In parts  of rural Scotland where public transport is occasional, that could make life difficult and might lead to fewer cases of debt being tackled. I am sure that, if MSPs had to visit every constituent who brought a case to them, the practicalities of the matter would become clear. I pointed out to Dr Simpson at stage 2 that, as he will know, general practitioners can see an average of seven times as many cases in the surgery as they can see when they make house calls. That is why patients are encouraged to visit their GP, rather than the other way round. However, the minister is implying that visits should be more or less the norm for those who will provide advice to people who might have to endure an exceptional attachment order. Will resources allow for that? If a debtor wants to visit the adviser, why should they not do so? Contact could be made through other means. I acknowledge that, for many, telephone contact or letters might be inappropriate, although they might be effective for some. Why should we be inflexible? It is important that the debtor is helped without the undue distress and indignity that enforced visitation might cause. I urge members to reject amendment 70 and to support amendment 71.

As section 35 stands, a person who owns an article in common with a defaulting debtor will be liable for part of a bad debt as a result of that common bond. As a result of being a co-owner of an item, the third party faces either paying a debt that is not theirs or losing an asset. That cannot be viewed as fair in all circumstances. An individual who does not have the necessary finances to buy out the debtor's interest will lose an asset through no fault of their own. As an alternative to forcing debt on innocent bystanders, amendment 66 would alter section 35 by allowing the sheriff to decide the appropriate disposal of the item. I move amendment 66.

The amendment came out of evidence that was heard at stage 1. Its intention is to extend the period of attachment to 12 months, thus giving the debtor more time to pay and reducing the number of debtors who would then proceed to exceptional attachment with all the distress that that might entail. I move amendment 60.

Yes.

Amendment 61 secures for debtors at least seven days' notice of the removal of attached articles. As current legislation contains such a safeguard, it seems somewhat draconian not to retain it. With this amendment, the debtor will be provided with additional time to make  payment or payment arrangements and avoid the implementation of exceptional attachment orders. Moreover, third parties will be able to arrange for the release of their own possessions from attachment. As it is surely too harsh to carry out an order without such notice, I ask the chamber to support the amendment. I move amendment 61.

I will press amendment 61, given that amendment 80 says that "the officer shall give notice to the debtor" and yet no time period has been specified.

Amendment 62 seeks to ensure that the principal debt is paid off before the fees of sheriff officers are paid. One of the complaints that was made about poindings and warrant sales was that they often did not clear the debt; the money went to pay sheriff officers. Amendment 62 would ensure that the opposite happens.  When an item is not sold at an auction the creditor has the right to claim it. When the creditor claims it, under section 30(2), the value of the article is credited against the sum recoverable. Amendment 65 would ensure that the value of the article is credited even when the creditor does not bother to claim the article. I move amendment 62.

I will press the amendments.

I shall press both amendment 52 and amendment 57. An officer cannot always predict what circumstances he or she will encounter when approaching premises. There may be dispute as to what happened when lockfast premises were entered. Amendments 52 and 57 would simply ensure that no such dispute would occur, and that is in the interests of all parties.

Amendment 58 would increase the time that is given to sell an attached vehicle. The bill allows 14 days, but as many members know, that is unlikely to be sufficient time to sell a vehicle successfully. A sale in such circumstances would be unlikely to generate the best price, which would be to the detriment of the debtor and the creditor. With 28 days, more time would be allowed to sell the vehicle at a good price, which would assist both parties. The debtor would realise the best sum to set against their debt and the creditor would receive more. I move amendment 58.

There is a balance to be struck. For the reasons that I have given, I think that 28 days is a reasonable time and would protect the debtor and the creditor. I will press amendment 58.

Amendment 50 is a follow-on to my amendment 110 at stage 2, which the minister has commented on. The purpose of amendment 50 is to ensure that the bill recognises that Scotland is a multicultural society of many faiths and none. By proposing that the taking of any action on days that are special to non-Christians should be prevented, it seeks to ensure that their beliefs are taken cognisance of when the execution of an attachment is sought. I acknowledge that, by moving amendment 3, the minister has recognised the issue and has sought to remove specifically Christian references. We will support amendment 3, which is positive. However, because many public holidays have a religious basis, we believe that, in an equalities sense, amendment 3 does not go far enough. Amendment 50 would allow the Executive to identify days that have a resonance for minority communities in Scotland; it would not create a bureaucratic imposition on the Executive. The proposed paragraph (a) that amendment 50 would insert in section 12(1) would allow the Executive  three months to identify the relevant occasions and the proposed paragraph (b) would prevent an attachment if such days related to the debtor. The identification of such days would not be difficult. If someone is from a Sikh or a Muslim community, for example, days that are sensitive to those communities should be avoided when an attachment is to be executed. Just as an attachment will not be executed on Christmas day because it is sensitive to the Christian community—regardless of whether the subject of the attachment is a churchgoer—a member of the Jewish community should not suffer attachment at Yom Kippur or Rosh Hashanah. One of the objections that Robert Brown raised to my amendment 110 at stage 2 was that someone could say that any day was sensitive to them. That is hardly the case. In any event, amendment 50 would not prevent an attachment—it would simply allow for a delay of a day or two at best, without offending the debtor unnecessarily.

I will be brief. After going through all the rigmarole of inquiring about ownership as required by section 13, the officer reaches the stage of section 13(4), which allows the officer to assume that an article belongs to the debtor unless it can be proven otherwise at the time. Section 13 does not give adequate protection to persons whose property may be in the possession of the debtor at the time. Amendment 51 would simply provide for a period of time during which documentary evidence to establish ownership could be provided in order to prevent loss to third parties. I move amendment 51.

Given the minister's comments, I am happy to withdraw amendment 51.  Amendment 51, by agreement, withdrawn.

Again, I will be brief. Amendment 52 deals with a public order consideration. The authority that we grant to persons to open, shut and lockfast premises must be strictly controlled. The best way of achieving that is to oblige the person with the power to be accompanied by an officer of the law. I move amendment 52.

Presiding Officer—

Well, I do have my admirers in some quarters. I will be moving all the amendments in Linda Fabiani's name today, because, as you say, Presiding Officer, my colleague is unwell. Summary warrants do not allow the party being pursued to be heard in court. Whatever the circumstances of the case, natural justice demands that both parties to an action should have the right to be heard. The right to a fair hearing should not be circumscribed, and it is to Scotland's shame that we have allowed the situation to persist for so long. In the interests of justice and fairness and of maintaining the dignity of our legal system, we should ensure that courts adjudicate only after hearing all the evidence, rather than half the evidence. There are further significant reasons why we should ensure that both sides to an action have a right to be heard. The European convention on human rights enshrines the right to a fair hearing in legal proceedings. Internationally, the expectation is that fair hearings be granted to all those who are involved in legal proceedings. For the sake of justice, and for Scotland's standing in international comparisons, we must endure that a day in court is available to the defendants of an action. I urge acceptance of amendments 46 and 47, and I move amendment 46.

I will press both the amendments. Natural justice should be overwhelming. In this case, I believe that the bill as currently drafted does not allow for that.

The SNP is prepared to allow the Scottish ministers to add protections to the bill where that is appropriate, but if they want to remove protections, they should have the courage to argue the case for doing so in Parliament. At stage 1, the Subordinate Legislation Committee, in particular, expressed concern that the bill gave too much power to ministers. Ministers argued that that was a result of the tight timetable for consideration of the bill and the need to replace poindings and warrant sales. However, their claim is not borne out by our experience of other bills. We can only surmise that ministers do not want scrutiny of their proposed legislation to be too close and prefer to introduce a series of statutory instruments that contain tiny pieces of legislation that we must put together like a jigsaw in order to get the big picture. I ask the Executive to prove that that is not the case by supporting amendment 49. The SNP supports amendment 48, which seeks to prevent the attachment of gardening equipment. I know that ministers will argue that part 2 of the bill relates to commercial debt. However, the minister has failed to separate commercial debt from domestic debt, with the result that a simple attachment, rather than an exceptional attachment, may be used to pursue a domestic debt. The consequences of that failure may be horrendous. The protections that exist under exceptional attachment orders and that are listed in schedule 2 do not apply to simple attachments to domestic debt. The Executive will have removed the protections that some debtors currently have.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. We covered the matter to a great extent at stage 1 and I submitted an amendment at stage 2. I support what Mr Sheridan and Mr Brown have said. Although I do not agree that not freezing contractual interest would cause a debt arrangement scheme to fail—that is over-egging the pudding somewhat—I believe that it would damage it. I hope that the Executive will reflect on the comments that have been made at stages 1 and 2 and support Mr Sheridan's amendment 36. I understand that Robert Brown is thinking of not moving amendment 45. If the Executive were to support Mr Sheridan's amendment, we would go some way towards achieving what many members would like to see.

Robert Brown and I submitted amendments similar to amendment 34 at stage 2. I am happy to support Robert Brown and I agree with what he and Donald Gorrie said. I do not agree with Karen Whitefield that amendment 34 is patronising. We all accept that local government employees provide independent advice. However, the person who is seeking advice might not see things that way, given that local authorities are often creditors. As Donald Gorrie said, all that we are trying to do is to provide people with a choice. What is most important is that an individual in debt gets advice. Anything that encourages them to come forward and take that advice is to be commended, so the SNP will be happy to support Robert Brown's amendment 34.

I warmly welcome the minister's statement and thank her for providing me with a copy of it in advance. In its plans to adopt a Scottish social rented housing standard, the Executive is following the lead of the SNP, which adopted that policy at its annual conference this year—although we are clearly further advanced than the Executive on the issue as we already have a timetable in place for its introduction. Similarly, the Executive's intention to extend the prudential borrowing regime to housing was whole-heartedly endorsed by the SNP in Inverness, and we agreed the issue of grants last month. However, the grant assistance over three years that the Executive proposes is half the level, in real terms, that new Labour inherited.

Yes. We usually have a preamble.

I seem to remember Mr McLetchie being given plenty of leeway when he is speaking.

There seems to be one rule for one member and another rule for others.

Over what period does the Executive intend to consult local authorities on its new-found flexibility over housing capital receipt set-aside? Local authorities with low debt burdens must be relieved of that as soon as possible, if the Executive decides to proceed with abolishing housing capital receipt set-aside. Does the Executive plan to restore the 30 per cent cut in the Communities Scotland approved development programme, which is now running at £100 million less than it was when new Labour came to power? Taking into account the concern of the Social Justice Committee that the future supply of affordable housing will not meet the rising demand, will the minister assure us that the Executive will be able to meet Scotland's housing needs fully, given the record level of homelessness over which the Executive now presides?

This debate has shown that the Executive is devoid of vision and ambition for Scotland. It is happy to accept the crumbs from London's table and unwilling to release our potential by demanding the powers of an independent Parliament. It is not even prepared to demand the powers that are enjoyed by the Isle of Man or Jersey, both of which have zero unemployment. The unionist parties continue to run Scotland down and to talk Scotland down. They say that we are too wee and too poor, and that we lack the talent. When we are denied self-esteem and self-confidence by being told continually that without London Government we can never achieve anything, it is no wonder that Scotland is in its current economic and social state. Of course the SNP knows that that is nonsense. We have only to look around the rest of Europe to see what smaller nations have shown can be achieved, even with fewer resources.

I do not recall saying that we could not achieve anything. I am saying that we cannot achieve our full potential and I shall move on to that. A recent United Nations report into child poverty showed that the gap is getting wider, not narrower. The Executive can move the goal posts in how it assesses child poverty if it likes, but it cannot deny that child poverty levels are higher in Scotland  than they are elsewhere in the European Union—a shameful legacy of successive unionist Governments. Of course, the SNP is committed to dismantling the obstacles to ensure that we have full control over our economy and the tax and benefits system. One or two members asked what the SNP would do. I will give some examples of what we could do, so that members cannot mump and moan and grump and groan and say, "You huvnae got any ideas of what you would do." Now that Fiona Hyslop, our vice-convener for policy, has left the chamber I can say things without the prospect of getting a severely spanked bottom for pre-empting some of our manifesto commitments. One of the reasons that my gorgeous pouting assistant, Linda Fabiani, was unable to mention such things in the debate was that the cold stare of Fiona Hyslop was bearing down upon her. We would of course establish a fund for future generations—a Scottish trust for public investment. We would eliminate the high rate of marginal taxation on pensioners with small occupational pensions. We would disregard council tax and housing benefit when assessing working families tax credit. We would invest in public assets, such as roads, railways, air links, harbours and vacant and derelict land. We would cut corporation tax to stimulate economic growth. We would allow local authorities to undertake prudential borrowing on their housing sector to invest in our public sector housing stock. For most of those things, we would need the powers of an independent Scottish Parliament. Linda Fabiani talked about the equalities gap and touched on Tom Clark and Alissa Goodman's report, "Living Standards under Labour", which was published in 2001. The report showed that in the first three years of Tony Blair's first Government the average income of the richest quintile in the population rose by 2.8 per cent, while the average income of the poorest fifth of our people rose by only 1.4 per cent. The Tories did better than that. In the seven years of John Major's Governments, the income of the richest 20 per cent rose by 1 per cent per year and the income of the poorest rose by 1.9 per cent. New Labour is doing worse than the Tories did—what an appalling record. Lyndsay McIntosh mentioned benefits. The Executive has lauded the fall in the uptake of unemployment benefit, but it should consider that in Glasgow alone—a city with a population of less than 600,000—64,000 men are on incapacity benefit, the highest proportion for any conurbation in the United Kingdom. That is the hidden unemployment in our society. Robert Brown talked about fuel poverty. He did not say that although the Executive is committed  to ensuring that tenants have central heating installed by 2004 in 31 of Scotland's local authority areas, in Glasgow the target date will be 2006. Clearly the Executive is not closing the opportunities gap for pensioner tenants in Glasgow. Jackie Baillie talked about pensioner poverty, but she did not say that the best way to reduce it would be to ensure that the Parliament has control over pensions. Nicola Sturgeon talked about many aspects of health. The suicide rate is at a record level as despair increases in our society. "Building a Better Scotland" talks about homelessness. It is astonishing that the document says: "By 2006 we will substantially reduce the number of households becoming homeless more than once a year." What an ambitious target that is. Of course, this is only a couple of weeks after the level of homelessness applications reached an all-time record. Since the Executive came to power, it has shown itself clearly to be incapable of stopping homelessness levels from increasing, let alone reducing them. We do not say that nothing can be done; we say that not enough is being done.

I am sorry, but I am in my final minute. I apologise to Jamie Stone, because I was slaying dragons on the astral plain while he was talking about the John O'Groats advertiser, or whatever it is called, so I cannot comment on what he said. Kenny MacAskill—the voice of reason in the Parliament—talked about the holistic approach and touched on the fact that inequalities are widening under new Labour. Members may recall that Tony Blair admitted that during in the Paxman interview. The apparatchiks, Karen Whitefield and Duncan McNeil, tried to do down Scotland's ambition. They slurred list MSPs by suggesting that, somehow, only constituency MSPs appear to know that there are problems. I hope that the three Labour and five Liberal list MSPs remonstrate with them later, because that was highly offensive.

It is clear that the Executive cannot achieve all that it wants to achieve. It never will unless we have the full powers of an independent Scottish Parliament, which we will get by voting for Scotland's party—the Scottish National Party.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Given your apparent ability to predict what members are going to say on points of order, could you tell me what Saturday night's winning lottery numbers will be?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether the proposed Glasgow housing stock transfer will take place on 28 November 2002. (S1O-5701)

I thank the minister for her rather evasive reply. Will she advise us whether the Scottish Executive intends to provide any additional funding to the Glasgow Housing Association to meet its targets? If so, how much will there be and from which budgets will the money come? Will she explain whether the delay in delivering the Glasgow transfer is the reason why tenants in Glasgow will have to wait two years longer than tenants elsewhere in Scotland for completion of the central heating programme, as outlined in the fuel poverty statement? Given that the date of transfer was a promise made to tenants that will now be broken, will she tell us what other promises will not be kept?

The member always welcomes them as well.

Be consistent for once.

Will the minister give way?

rose—

I have to say that I quoted many organisations. The minister says that we have not offered alternatives, but we have heard about loads of alternatives today, including bank arrestments and benefit deductions. I even quoted  several benefit deductions that are available. The bill is about negotiation. If the minister wants to protect the poor, why will he not ensure that those who are on income support, working families tax credit or disabled persons credit will not suffer from exceptional attachment orders?

The language is exactly the same.

rose—

I thank Lord James for accepting my intervention. He said that he supports legislation that has been well drafted. Speakers of all parties have made the point that, although they agree with some of the bill's principles, they do not accept that the bill is well drafted. How would Lord James improve the bill in order to make it more workable in practice?

Will the member allow me to ask him a question?

Will the member give way?

The Society of Messengers-at-Arms and Sheriff Officers described exceptional attachments as "unworkable in practice". What changes would the member introduce to make exceptional attachments workable?

Will the member accept an intervention?

But the member has been given five minutes plus time for interventions.

Will the member give way?

The Scottish Executive has made it clear that it intends the Debt Arrangement and Attachment (Scotland) Bill to fulfil its commitment to provide a workable but humane alternative to the enforcement procedure of poindings and warrant sales. The Executive also intends the bill to implement the recommendations of the working group as outlined in the report "Striking the Balance: a new approach to debt management", which was published on 6 July 2001. Proposals in the bill include a statutory national debt arrangement scheme to help people to repay  debts in a managed way free from the threat of enforcement action; new incentives for debtors and creditors to reach negotiated settlements out of court; a new, less intrusive enforcement procedure that will target only those people who can pay but will not; and provision of money advice and information in court within the court process. On 15 November 2001, Ian Brown, spokesperson for the citizens advice bureaux, said that current legislation does not protect consumers from unscrupulous companies. He related the story of a single parent on income support who was told that, if payment was not forthcoming, the bailiffs would be round within 72 hours to lift the beds and that she should not have children if she could not afford them. After the bill is enacted, such situations must become a thing of the past. Scotland's current debt collection regime takes no account of individual need and fails to address multi-indebtedness. People in debt feel shame. They are powerless to stop debts increasing, no matter how hard they try to pay them off. Debtors experience complex legal rules, limited assistance with unpredictable costs and variable availability and quality of help. They need better advice and information. Who is in debt? Not surprisingly, it is often the poorest and most vulnerable in our society. For example, an article entitled "Labour accused of victimising poor over social security loans" in The Independent explained that "people refused social fund loans are most at risk of falling into debt and into the hands of the loan sharks." Benefit deductions for repayment of social loans affect 1.22 million income support claimants in the United Kingdom. The largest group consists of disabled people and lone parents. Each year, debt increases. In 2001, citizens advice bureaux in Scotland dealt with 160,000 cases. Indeed, 71 per cent of agencies report an increase in case work every year and debt now averages £4,500 per debt-advice client in Edinburgh. As the minister said, people want to pay their debts. However, when the system traps them in a cycle of poverty, it is the system that is at fault, not the debtor. The SNP agrees with the broad policy objective of the bill—the need for negotiation and voluntary agreement without resort to enforcement. Although we do not want to throw the baby out with the bath water, we have major concerns about the practical difficulties of some of what has been proposed. Fears have been expressed about the ability of the bill to separate those debtors who cannot pay from those who will not pay. Other  fears include the need to obtain the consent of all creditors before a debtor is accepted on to the debt arrangement scheme. Notwithstanding the minister's comments, the SNP is also unhappy about the proposed exceptional attachment order. We believe that the bill does not adequately address summary warrants and their usage, given that they contravene article 6 of the European convention on human rights, an issue on which my colleague Colin Campbell will expand. It has not escaped our notice that, at present, debtors south of the border have better protection from undue harassment by creditors. We would like Scots to enjoy the same level of protection. We must promote independent advice agencies in tackling debt and poverty in Scotland and we must fund capacity to make a difference. It is vital to establish triggers at various stages of the debt recovery process to prompt debtors to seek early independent advice. We must introduce independent in-court advisers to every court in Scotland and compel loan firms and creditors to inform debtors of their rights before proceeding to diligence. The SNP endorses in principle the proposals for the introduction of a national debt arrangement scheme and recognises that it is supported by Money Advice Scotland and other organisations. In written evidence to the Social Justice Committee, the Scottish sheriff court users group noted: "The introduction of a debt arrangement scheme could provide the cornerstone for an effective system of debt collection in the 21 st century." However, concerns were expressed about the lack of detail in the bill relating to the debt arrangement scheme. For example, the Law Society of Scotland said that is was "concerned that a number of fundamental matters are to be dealt with by way of regulations, particularly when it is intended that these regulations will be subject to negative resolution procedure only." Citizens Advice Scotland suggested that the vast majority of their clients with multiple debt problems would be unable to meet the criteria set out in the consultation document. As Mr Sheridan has mentioned, Money Advice Scotland stated: "About 70 per cent of the clients who come to us for debt advice would not benefit from the scheme as it is currently set out."—[ Official Report, Social Justice Committee , 12 June 2002; c 3003.]

That is a major concern of the SNP  as well, as I shall outline in due course. Organisations such as Money Advice Scotland, Citizens Advice Scotland and Debt on our Doorstep agreed that the scheme should allow for the composition of debts and the freezing of interest. The SNP concurs with that and seeks assurances from the minister that that will be seriously considered. In giving evidence to the committee, Citizens Advice Scotland argued: "The important issue is not simply the length of time but whether composition of debts will be allowed and whether interest is frozen. The way in which those things are combined will be what makes the bill effective or ineffective."—[ Official Report, Social Justice Committee , 12 June 2002; c 3000.]

I fully agree with what Robert Brown has just said. Indeed, in the committee and during the debate on loan sharks, I mentioned the fact that some companies want people never to get out of debt but to keep paying interest ad infinitum. I told members about a company that offered me a credit card with a limit of £11,000, which I would have to pay off at £5 a month if I were daft enough to run up that much debt. I calculated that it would take more than 180 years to pay off the debt at that rate. As I do not consider myself to be immortal, I did not take up the kind and generous offer.

Absolutely. Meanwhile, back at the bill, debtors who can repay some money but have interest that exceeds or almost exceeds their repayments are often faced with a repayment schedule extending far beyond the lifespan of the debt arrangement scheme. The length of time to pay the debt must be more flexible and the freezing of interest must be possible if those debtors are ever to be debt free. As the Social Justice Committee report succinctly put it: "The Committee would be concerned if the scheme was only open to those debtors who were able to repay their debts in full, including interest if demanded by creditors, within a 3-5 year period." Section 2(4) of the bill says that a debtor's application for a debt payment programme has to incorporate the consent of all the creditors. However, section 7(2)(g) states that ministers might, by regulation, make provision about the circumstances in which  "the consent ... of a creditor or creditors generally may be dispensed with". Citizens Advice Scotland argued that "creditors can be less than co-operative when trying to negotiate a manageable debt repayment programme" and that "there is little incentive for creditors to actively co-operate in respect of the proposed arrangement". It is important that creditor consent is implicit rather than explicit and allows consolidation, rescheduling and repayment of multiple debts at a level that the debtor can afford. Placing a cash ceiling on the debt that a person may have prior to entering the scheme is unhelpful and will exclude many who wish to clear themselves of debt. The SNP strongly believes that the national debt arrangement scheme will work only if advice is provided by properly trained independent money advisers. We welcome the fact that the bill recognises that. One in five people are in arrears with household expenses, but the majority do not seek any advice, even when the debt proceeds to court. Research has revealed that six out of 10 people with problem debts sought no help or advice, even from family or friends. Only one in five made contact with their creditors and only one in three consulted a formal adviser, most often an independent advice agency or bank manager. Those who had sought advice said that it had made a significant difference, that advisers could often negotiate an agreement where they had failed and that a welcome barrier was placed between the creditor and them. Further research has shown that the rent arrears of those who did not seek advice rose by more than 100 per cent compared to 25 per cent for those who did. The detailed picture of a client's finances drawn up by debt councils can allow creditors to see the most effective ways of recovering a debt. The independent nature of the advice that is given is crucial and provides a balance in the relationship between debtor and creditor, as it is critical that the debtor trusts that the adviser will act only in his or her best interest. Debt on our Doorstep and Citizens Advice Scotland highlighted the fact that the bill does not state that the money adviser should be independent, which means that a money adviser who is employed by a local authority could be giving advice to someone who is in debt to that local authority in respect of council tax or rent arrears. Although local authorities might give impartial advice on the issue—I believe that they do—they might not be perceived to be doing so. The Executive has allocated £3 million in  resources to fund 75 additional money advisers, with £500,000 for training. Additional resources are to be welcomed, but that money is seriously inadequate for the demands that may be placed on money advice services if the scheme works as it is hoped. That money should be considered as a first step, rather than as a last one. Recognising the importance of money advice, the SNP notes that trust in advisers can come only from clear independence, good training and adequate numbers of trained advisers for the various roles that are envisaged. I am sure that many members will agree that some of the principal concerns about the bill relate to exceptional attachment orders, which have been called, in some circles, poindings and warrant sales by another name. In evidence to the Social Justice Committee, Citizens Advice Scotland said: "we remain opposed to this form of diligence." The Scottish Association of Law Centres believes: "Exceptional Attachment Orders are not exceptional enough." Significantly, the Society of Messengers-at-Arms and Sheriff Officers described section 46(2)(a) as "unworkable in practice", further commenting that it would lead to "unnecessary confrontation between the officers executing the attachment and the debtor ... The officer would require to arrange transportation prior to every visit, with no precise idea of what non-essential assets, if any, are going to be attached and removed." The firm of John Campbell, messengers-at-arms and sheriff officers, described the exceptional attachment proposals as "draconian, harsher for debtors than the present legislation. Many of the protections and 'diligence stoppers' which presently exist for debtors and third parties will be lost." The submission continues: "It is not clear how a creditor will be able to establish the exceptional circumstances under which the above order can be applied for without access to the debtor's assets to ascertain what the debtor's circumstances are. In addition to this there is no provision for what happens when an exceptional attachment order is breached." The SNP would have urged the minister to ditch exceptional attachment orders at stage 2. However, this morning it was made clear that that may not be possible. We are disappointed that, to date, the Executive has been unwilling to make it mandatory for sheriffs to decline the granting of an exceptional attachment order where it is known that the debtor is directly or indirectly in receipt of income support, income-based jobseekers allowance, working families tax credit or disabled persons credit. Deleting part 3 of the bill would have made such distinctions unnecessary.

I would like to take an intervention, but I have only two minutes left and I have a lot to pack in. The Scottish Consumer Council said: "The issue of summary warrants is not addressed in the Bill. In our view, this issue is central to the proposed new system." In a similar vein, the Institute of Credit Management stated: "We made a recommendation through the working group that the summary warrant system should be reconsidered. It is probably true to say that the summary warrant system is why we are here today. It requires serious review if we are to go forward." Also in oral evidence to the Social Justice Committee, the Scottish sheriff court users group stated: "It is vital that council tax collection under the summary warrant procedure is included in the debt arrangement scheme."—[ Official Report , Social Justice Committee , 12 June 2002; c 3008.] It was also noted that the Executive should give more consideration to summary warrants. "Striking the Balance" recommended that "the Executive should give further consideration to its policy on recovery of unpaid council tax and the use by local authorities of summary warrant procedure. The Executive's diligence review should take on board the Scottish Law Commission's recommendations for introduction of debtor protections within the court and enforcement processes for summary warrants." In written evidence, the Executive stated that its consultation on "Enforcement of Civil Obligations in Scotland" "was not considered the appropriate context in which to address the merits of whether summary warrant procedure should be available for use and by whom. Those principals are primarily for local government policy interests." The Scottish Consumer Council argues that there are natural justice and ECHR issues in relation to the summary warrant procedure. It suggests that "all debtors should be treated in the same way, whatever the reason for the debt." The SCC also argues: "summary warrant procedure may be found to contravene Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights (the right to a fair hearing), and is therefore subject to challenge under the Human Rights Act 1998." On that basis, the SCC would "like to see the abolition of the powers of local authorities to obtain summary warrants for council tax and community charge arrears." The Executive must make it clear that it is truly committed to abolishing poindings and warrant  sales in whatever guise. The SNP will seek to make radical changes at stage 2 should the Executive not do so.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to reduce under-age drinking. (S1O-5549)

According to the Executive's figures, 39 per cent of under-age drinkers who drank in the previous week took illegal drugs in the previous month, whereas only 1 per cent of non-drinkers took illegal drugs in the same period. Will the Executive recognise that alcohol is the main gateway into hard drugs for young people in Scotland? Given that in some courts in Scotland only 4 per cent of licensees who sell alcohol to children are prosecuted, compared with 100 per cent in other courts, will the minister urge the Lord Advocate to provide guidelines to ensure a measure of consistency on the matter?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Yesterday, a number of members from the other political parties said that the SNP should have chosen to use its time today to debate Iraq. This morning, they said that we should have chosen to use all the time for the debate on the economy and then they said that we should have devoted it all to the acute services review. Given the overwhelming view of the other political parties that the SNP should have more time to debate the  subjects that they avoid, will you consider giving us more than three hours debating time a month?

I am pleased to speak in a debate on an issue that has for many years caused great concern and frustration to many in the Greater Glasgow NHS Board area. I begin by paying tribute to my Conservative, Liberal and Labour colleagues in the unofficial cross-party group, which was formed in 1999 to address the provision of hospital services in south Glasgow, for their hard work and dedication to the issue over the past three years. I would like to ask for a point of clarification from Bill Aitken, who made an absolutely excellent speech today. He urged that we vote for the amendment. Did he mean to say the motion?

I thank Bill Aitken for that clarification. Last Saturday, I attended the annual forum of Glasgow's community councils. Many of the 140 delegates were angry and frustrated that consultation is devalued by the frequent refusal of the council, the health board or even the Scottish Executive to take any notice of the views—often passionately held and well researched—of community groups, staff and members of the public. The acute services review is a prime example of that. In the Glasgow Evening Times last Tuesday, under the heading "90 minutes to save hospitals", the minister's spokesperson stated: "The process has been discussed in Glasgow for 20 years and the proposals were based on extensive public consultation." Does anybody really believe that? On 17 January 2001, in response to the debate on acute service provision in greater Glasgow, Malcolm Chisholm, then the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care, said:  "The reviews offer an opportunity to assess strategically and objectively how the location of services balances local access with the scope and delivery of specialist services."— [ Official Report , 17 January 2001; Vol 10, c 323.]  That has not happened. It is clear that Greater Glasgow NHS Board has paid not a blind bit of notice to the views of the public, community councils, health forums and the like. Certainly there has been no objectivity on the part of the health board. Bar some minor tinkering around the edges, the proposals that have been submitted by the minister for approval are the same as those that were made a decade ago. As a result, confidence in the health board has been lost. On 13 August, the Glasgow health service forum south-east unanimously passed a vote of no confidence in a health board that it believes has treated the people of south-east Glasgow with contempt. Unfortunately, the minister has swallowed the health board line and supported plans that Gordon Jackson MSP described at that meeting as "an absurdity". Although, on Tuesday, the minister appeared unwilling to reconsider, his amendment is more flexible—but what guarantees can he offer that, this time, the consultation will be genuine? Will people throughout Glasgow be given ownership of the process and be offered real choices, or will they be confronted with the take-it-or-leave-it attitude that has recently prevailed? As we all know, the carrot of a new hospital at Cowglen was previously dangled by the health board—as, it now seems, a sop to those who were opposed to centralisation at the Southern general site, which was intended to kibosh the prospects of establishing a new Victoria infirmary. We now know that Cowglen was not a serious proposal, as the health board did not even get the basics right. It overestimated the site size by an incredible 36 acres and took more than two years to find that out. Specialisation is important, but why not have complementary services? Not all services have to be provided at one site: there can be complementary services at two locations. This time, we must get it right. Nicola Sturgeon's motion recommends that an impartial review be carried out within six months. That is a sensible suggestion that we all can and should rally round. We must get it right, not just for this generation, but for future generations. A review would mean that correct decisions can be made sooner rather than later and that much-needed improvements to acute services can be made at an early date. The minister's amendment would prolong the agony; it is, regrettably, a fudge. I therefore urge all members to support the motion.

This is a debate on the fuel poverty statement. Has Phil Gallie, or any other member of the Tory party, actually read the fuel poverty statement?

I welcome this debate on a topic that might not hit the headlines, but which is of fundamental importance to the hundreds of thousands of Scots who still live in fuel poverty. Indeed, I congratulate the minister on securing two hours for the debate. Unusually, I turn first to the Conservative amendment, which criticises the Executive's motion as self-congratulatory and then proceeds to be self-congratulatory as far as the previous Conservative Government is concerned. It appears that Bill Aitken realised he had to speak in the debate a minute before his amendment had to be lodged and simply flung something down. I do not think he has taken the issue seriously. As the minister stated—and as the fuel poverty statement confirms—fuel poverty can have a severe and, for vulnerable people, possibly life-threatening impact. Cold and damp homes not only make people ill but slow down, or militate against, full recovery. The minister has covered the statement well; however, I want to focus on a number of areas outlined in our amendment, some of which were touched on by the Social Justice Committee's report in response to the Scottish Executive's draft consultative statement on fuel poverty. For example, Energy Action Scotland estimated, when giving evidence to the Social Justice Committee, that there are up to 30 grant schemes throughout the UK, some of which overlap. That leads to confusion not only for the public, but for those who offer advice, which makes it difficult to ensure that the best advice is always provided. The Executive should undertake an assessment,  beginning with the schemes that are under its direct influence, with a view to establishing a single entry point while creating the most comprehensive and flexible scheme possible. Resources are fundamental, and training of additional gas installers is vital if programmes such as the central heating initiative are to expand, and if the Executive's target of eliminating fuel poverty by 2016 is to be reached. Transco and the Gas and Water Industry National Training Organisation have made significant strides in addressing that problem, about which Robert Brown and the Social Justice Committee have raised specific concerns. Although training is touched on in the minister's statement, SNP members seek reassurances that initiatives such as the retraining of 45 redundant NEC Semiconductors UK ltd engineers will be carried out throughout Scotland. That must be done to ensure that there is no delay in delivery, particularly in light of the Eaga Partnership's evidence to the committee, which described the significant step change in installations that will be needed over the coming winter and beyond. The capacity to target and assist vulnerable groups will exist only if staff are trained to install and maintain systems. As the statement acknowledges, there are a number of vulnerable groups living in fuel poverty that do not, as yet, benefit from the central heating programme. Although pensioners who have no central heating have, quite rightly, been prioritised, the time has surely come to consider additional qualifying categories, for example to include households that include at least one long-term sick or chronically ill person. Although we do not expect that to happen immediately, planning should be taking place now and a date should be set. Similarly, consideration should be given to extending the programme to families with children. A number of individuals in Glasgow have expressed concern about the inflexibility of the criteria that are used in deciding who does or does not qualify for the central heating initiative. I shall mention some specific cases that I have dealt with in recent weeks, the last of which was only yesterday. Mrs McFadyen is 93 and has lived for 65 years in Bucklaw Gardens, Cardonald. A tenant of the Western Heritable Investment Company, she has seen few improvements over the years. Fifteen years ago, with a cold home, she obtained two costly-to-run second-hand heaters to warm her four-bedroom house. Those heaters, which are now more than 20 years old, have denied her the central heating programme. What should she have done? Should she have suffered the cold and risked her health? She appears to be losing out simply because she acted, out of necessity, on her  own initiative. Mrs McFadyen is caught between a rock and a hard place. Should she give up the only heating that she has in order to obtain central heating, or should she cling on to what she already has? Mrs Irvine is 88 and lives in Chirnside Road, Hillington. She has a heart condition. Without even an inspection, she was refused central heating, because she has two wee heaters in her hall and living room. Her bedroom, however, is always cold. Mrs McCracken lives in Dormanside Road, Pollok. She moved from Craigbank because the house that she owned was scheduled for demolition through area clearance. Because she has not lived in her new home long enough, she has also been denied the heating that she needs. Mr Speirs of Balgonie Road, Mosspark has a bad heart and needs constant warmth. He would qualify but, as a council tenant, he must wait until the capital programme—likely to be delivered post stock transfer—gets round to him. If he owned his home, he would have a new system installed sooner rather than later. There are many similar cases. The lack of flexibility available to Eaga clearly means that individual circumstances cannot be considered if they are outwith the strict criteria that are laid down by the Executive. Discretion is vital if delivery is to assist our most vulnerable people, rather than its merely being a box-ticking exercise. The Executive must give Eaga more flexibility. There are a number of ways of eliminating fuel poverty; income maximisation is one of them. Both the statement and the Social Justice Committee reports make clear the importance of ensuring that those who qualify for benefits obtain them. High-profile campaigns to raise public awareness of benefit entitlement are therefore essential. Debt blocking, whereby consumers—often the poorest—can be denied the opportunity to switch to a cheaper supplier, is another scourge. Although energy suppliers are making encouraging noises in that regard and are undertaking a number of pilot projects, debt blocking remains a significant barrier to the elimination of fuel poverty. On pre-payment meters, the poor also pay a significant tariff compared with standard credit customers. Surely the target must be to ensure equalisation of tariffs across the board—something that Scottish Gas has already implemented successfully. The statement rightly points out that, along with income levels and fuel costs, poor energy efficiency in a home is a key contributor to fuel poverty. SNP members warmly welcome the measures for improving energy efficiency that are outlined in the statement, but we remain  concerned that the private sector—particularly the private rented sector, highlighted by the housing improvement task force—may fall behind. We believe that there should be a new decent homes standard across all tenures, to include dampness and condensation elimination, tackling serious disrepair, and that there should be energy saving measures such as insulation and fuel efficiency through the use of high-efficiency condensation boilers. Those measures are taken for granted in most of western Europe's small, independent and more prosperous nations. It is unacceptable in the 21 st century that 367,000 Scottish children and 119,000 pensioners live in properties that have dampness and condensation and that 39 per cent of all homes have their energy efficiency impaired because they require at least one urgent repair. In improving energy efficiency in the 90 per cent of homes that fall below current standards, it is important that people living in hard-to-heat homes, such as non-cavity-built houses, do not miss out because the insulation measures that are available to them are more limited. Special consideration is required to tackle their needs. I welcome the minister's announcement of the energy audit, but it is disappointing that the Executive has yet to set a target for improvement in national home energy ratings—a key recommendation of the Social Justice Committee.

If Phil Gallie wants us to have the power to ensure the availability of cheap energy, he will support our campaign for an independent Scotland. The Executive has taken great care to explain in the statement its definition of fuel poverty, no doubt because that is an area in which concerns were raised in evidence to the Social Justice Committee and by the Scottish fuel poverty advisory group. We may have to agree to differ on this point, Scotland's party being at one with Energy Action Scotland in believing that the Executive's definition "will falsely reduce the numbers of fuel poor and so wrongly influence future schemes and programmes designed to assist them". As Shelter Scotland argued, the Executive's definition will disproportionately reduce the number of private tenants who are seen as fuel poor because of high rents in that sector. COSLA and Citizens Advice Scotland also had misgivings about the definition. Unfortunately, those concerns  are not addressed in the statement. We would like the Executive to reconsider adopting the definition that was suggested by EAS: "A household is in fuel poverty, if in order to maintain a satisfactory heating regime, it would be required to spend 10% or more of its disposable income (excluding housing benefit and income support for mortgage interest)." As a representative of Glasgow, I consider it a disgrace that Scotland's largest city—a city with more than half of Scotland's poverty and its worst housing conditions—will have to wait two years longer than the rest of Scotland for all homes in its socially rented sector to obtain central heating, as outlined in the process milestones that are listed on page 38 of the statement. Only yesterday, the Evening Times revealed a 25-year conspiracy supported by successive Tory and Labour Governments to do down the city. The fuel poverty statement can only add to Glasgow's sense of being unfairly disadvantaged. I urge the minister to work for the completion of central heating installation in Glasgow simultaneously with the rest of Scotland. I move amendment S1M-3350.2, to leave out from "commends" to end and insert: "welcomes the publication of the Fuel Poverty Statement and the positive developments contained within it; accepts the need for a single entry point to the plethora of grant schemes and initiatives available; believes that, to eliminate fuel poverty, resources both human and financial must be in place to meet this aim; urges the Scottish Executive to extend the Warm Deal and Central Heating Programme to disabled people, the long-term sick and all pensioners with partial or obsolete systems at the earliest possible opportunity; considers the establishment of a Decent Homes Standard as fundamental to reducing fuel poverty, not least through energy efficiency measures; has serious concerns regarding hard to heat homes, the inflexible application of criteria used in the Central Heating Programme, the delay in installing central heating in Glasgow's socially rented sector and the Executive's definition of fuel poverty, and seeks the commitment of the Executive to liaise with Her Majesty's Government on issues such as debt blocking, pre-payment meters and benefit uptake."

Does the minister not accept—

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

It is. The minister should be aware that it is possible to have both quality and width.

The amendment that I will move is not the one that I wanted to move. Constrained by our standing orders, I could not lodge an amendment that made clear the SNP view that this document is a hastily flung together, ramshackle, tedious, repetitive and pointless publication that is written in the jargon of Execspeak. No wonder, then, that the minister did not speak with her usual panache. Let us look at the content of the document. In paragraph 19 of chapter 1, we read: "Communities are well placed to be able to develop and put into practice solutions to local challenges, and by working in this way we can build communities where ... people do not have to rely on public services". However, on page 26 core public services are defined as "the services that all people need for a decent quality of life and wellbeing. These include health, education, transport, jobs, and crime prevention." Those are, coincidentally, the First Minister's five key priorities. So, in paragraph 19 of chapter 1, the Executive is saying that we can build communities in which people do not have to rely on health, education, transport, jobs and crime prevention. Where will those mythical, unhealthy, uneducated, stranded, unemployed, crime-ridden communities be? St Kilda? The moon? Does the minister propose the adoption of Pol Pot's concept of year zero? Whatever happened to social inclusion? No wonder that even sympathetic media commentators are becoming exasperated by the  Executive. On Tuesday, the normally pro-Labour Glasgow Evening Times made clear its frustration at the failure of the Executive ministers and their Westminster colleagues to act decisively to reduce poverty in our most deprived communities, especially in Glasgow, where the gap is, if anything, widening rather than closing. Tuesday's Evening Times editorial stated: "For all her skilful delivery of exec speak theories and strategies, the Minister for Social Justice has failed to start moving Scotland's shameful mountain of social injustice." To be fair to Margaret Curran, she has not been in the job for two months. However, the fact that we have had three social justice ministers in barely half a year and four in 18 months shows how instability in the Executive has impacted adversely on its ability to deliver, with the increase in child poverty from 29 to 30 per cent last year an obvious symptom. Of course, poverty remediation is not one of the First Minister's fabled five priorities. Perhaps he sees no votes in it or it detracts from new Labour's "We are all Thatcherites now" philosophy, which is nakedly espoused by the architect of new Labour, Peter Mandelson MP. It is astonishing to read in the minister's foreword to the document phrases such as "The time for talking is over". It may well be, but we are now five years into a Labour Government at Westminster and three years into this Executive. Should not the talking have ended years ago? There are some classic motherhood-and-apple-pie statements in the document. On page 6, the Executive says: "we want to build communities ... where people want to live; where people have the opportunity to learn, work and play; and where people can grow up, work, bring up children and retire." This woolly, long-winded, hand-wringing document is full of all the usual Executive phrases, which appear to have been culled in an afternoon from a variety of more glossy predecessors to be presented in the graveyard shift on the last afternoon before the recess. It is full of words and phrases such as "prepare", "consult", "plan", "strategy", "shared vision", "develop potential", "partnership working", "flexible solutions", "building confidence", "framework", blah, blah, blah. There is plenty of rhetoric about "good examples of joint working and community involvement" on page 11 and "significant successes in some communities" on page 3. However, little evidence has been provided to back such claims. I will quote some more classic lines from this estimable publication.

In a second. How about: "We will work in a way that means that decisions are made by those best placed to make the decision"? I would go along with that. The document says: "We need to know where action is needed most." Who could disagree? The minister's introduction to the publication says: "For the first time we will properly measure the success of local initiatives." Why is that for the first time?

If the minister waits, she will hear answers to some of her questions. The document has a deep sense of urgency. Page 23 says: "Publishing this document is the beginning of the process". Page 25 says: "we will develop a detailed work plan to take forward this action plan ... by the end of 2002." Such a headlong rush to produce a plan to take forward the plan. The document shows how important it is to "develop a set of indicators that reflect the main issues that are important to our communities and which will allow us to track progress over a range of variables ". Overleaf, it says: "We have yet to decide what indicators we will include". Mañana, mañana. As the Evening Times pleaded in its editorial on Tuesday: "Stop wasting time and too many lives." Lives have been ruined by the grinding, hopeless poverty that afflicts hundreds of thousands of Scots, day in, day out, year in, year out. A quarter of the population in the minister's constituency of Glasgow Baillieston is affected. New Labour has made matters worse by switching resources from Glasgow, Inverclyde and Lanarkshire to more prosperous suburbia. For example, Glasgow's share of aggregate external finance has fallen year on year from 15.74 per cent to 14.71 per cent since new Labour came to power. If the city's share had remained constant, the city would have £64.923 million more to spend  this year on vital services. Glasgow City Council would not have had to cut £17.8 million from this year's budget, close more than 100 community facilities in the past five years, reduce the number of teaching posts—despite the lowest level of educational attainment in Scotland—or sack 4,500 council workers since 1997, while raising council tax to be the highest in the country. No wonder Glasgow City Council's director of finance, George Black, described that as a double whammy, and council leader Charlie Gordon said that it was a denial of social justice for Glasgow by the Executive. Of course, a cynic might suggest that closing the gap for Glasgow is less important than buying votes in the new Labour frontiers of East Renfrewshire and East Dunbartonshire. Members may care to note that while cuts in resources for Glasgow amount to £315.17 per Glasgow council tax payer this year, the £11.003 million extra for East Renfrewshire equates to a remarkably synergistic subsidy of £297.08 for each of its council tax payers this year. That is a case of Robin Hood in reverse, if ever there was one. If the Executive is serious about closing the gap, resources must be tailored to meet need, not the search for suburban votes. I do not doubt that some reactionaries in the north British Labour party will moan and groan about my robust critique and lack of positive alternatives and detailed solutions. In the day-long debate on regeneration in May 2000 and the three-hour debate on regeneration last year, we provided solutions. Members will find that the SNP's urban regeneration statement is about five times the length of the Executive's and that it is more detailed and contains more direct solutions to the problems of regeneration. If the Executive continues to insult the Parliament by cramming debates on important social justice issues into 90 or 105 minutes as they have in the past year, with the emphasis on regurgitation of previous statements and allowing the SNP only seven minutes to respond, should we play ball? I think not. Give us a proper three-hour debate, and we will give Labour the answers that it appears still to desperately seek. Finally—

Finally, I wish all members around the chamber a pleasant and relaxing summer recess. I move amendment S1M-3256.1, to leave out from "warmly" to end and insert: "notes with disappointment the content of the Scottish Executive's community regeneration statement Better Communities in Scotland: Closing the Gap ; believes that community regeneration is a topic worthy of serious  consideration, and demands that the Executive go back to the drawing board and come back when it has some well thought out, workable solutions to the problems faced by Scotland's deprived communities."

What assessment has been made as to how widespread the practice of loan sharking is? Will the Executive consider the proposal from my esteemed colleague Fergus Ewing that the ill-gotten gains of loan sharks should be subject to legal attachment proceedings?

I warmly congratulate Trish Godman on securing today's debate. Unusually for a nationalist MSP, I congratulate the Daily Record for its excellent campaign to expose the vile people who loan-shark at the expense of poor and vulnerable people in our communities. The Daily Record campaign has exposed how widespread loan-sharking is and I share its determination to root out such people from our society. I am talking about people such as Rab Donnelly of Pennilee in Glasgow, who was today exposed as charging 25 per cent interest per  week, and Patrick Martin of Whitfield in Dundee, who charges 50 per cent interest per week and who—illegally—takes the benefit books of those who owe him money and collects the payments himself. Then there are the so-called "Brothers Grim", David, Douglas and Henry Moodie, who charge a crippling 1,000 per cent rate of interest. One of their customers—for want of a better word—sadly killed himself due to his horrendous financial plight and the continuous threat of violence when he could not pay. Loan sharks are brutal, blood-sucking parasites who should be allowed to prey no more. The police must investigate every case that the Daily Record exposes. Loan sharks and their acolytes cannot be allowed to use violence and threats to exploit those who have nowhere else to turn. Victims of loan sharks and those who know of their activities must be encouraged to come forward and report those crooks so that the full force of the law can be brought to bear on them. There are victims such as Helen, a 28-year-old mother who had no access to credit and who borrowed to buy Christmas presents. There are victims such as Billy, who is an alcoholic who hands over his giro in exchange for just enough money to get drunk every day. What should be done? First, support mechanisms must be established to reduce the financial exclusion for the 700,000 Scots who have no bank account or access to proper financial advice. Examples of such mechanisms include the establishment of credit unions that Trish Godman talked about in some detail; the £3 million to provide an extra 75 money advisers; and the national debt helpline. Both the latter are warmly welcome. Secondly, action against the sharks is vital—the full weight of the law must be brought to bear on illegal moneylenders. Thirdly, we must ensure that benefits are maximised and we must introduce legislation to cap excessive interest rates and to eliminate irresponsible lending by companies that have no intention of seeing the debt paid off but want to keep people in debt for ever and a day. As I told the Social Justice Committee last week, I was recently offered a credit card with a £10,000 limit, which was great. I was told that I would have to pay only £5 per month, plus the interest. If I had borrowed that money and followed that advice, it would have taken more than 160 years to pay off the debt. It is quite clear that even "reputable" companies are lending irresponsibly, particularly to people such as me, who might not be here this time next year.

I knew that Brian Fitzpatrick would  be heartbroken—he is deeply concerned about my interests. It is unfortunate that the Consumer Credit Act 1974 is a reserved matter and that we must rely on our Westminster colleagues. Nevertheless, it is important that the Scottish Parliament does all that it can to eliminate the scourge that is loan sharks. I look forward to the minister's response to the debate. We must tackle poverty if we are to eliminate this scourge. The disease is poverty; we should treat it as well as the symptoms.

It is totally unacceptable that a minority of youths—only a minority are involved, as the minister pointed out—should inflict so much physical and psychological damage on communities and vulnerable people. Reports of youth disorder must be taken seriously and acted on swiftly. I am sure that all members know of elderly people who have contacted the police to report acts of vandalism or public drinking, only to receive a visit from the police as much as a day or two later. It is somewhat crass of Liberal Democrat MSPs to impugn the motives of MSPs across the party divide on the issue. I say to George Lyon that if he had given the speech that he gave today at the meeting that Johann Lamont and I attended in Cardonald on 23 April, he would not have got out alive. MSPs from all parties acknowledge the real concerns of people in their communities, but the complacency of George Lyon and his colleagues should be condemned. The Labour party has a better grip on the issue than he and his colleagues do. Long ago, the SNP recognised the need for an increased and more highly visible police presence. The north British parties have wrung their hands on that issue, but do not support the SNP's commitment to recruit another 1,000 police officers. This morning, even Lord James Douglas-Hamilton appeared to believe that redeployment is the solution rather than recruitment of more officers.

I will give way to the member in a second, as he had the courtesy to give way to me. We said that we should move officers from less troubled areas to more troubled areas. That is happening in parts of Glasgow—Johann Lamont will know that that is happening in her constituency. However, the neds also move from one area to another. There must be an increased police presence throughout Scotland.

I accept that that is not being delivered, but rather than producing guesswork, the Conservatives should examine the matter in more detail and suggest to Parliament—perhaps in their winding-up speech—what police numbers should be. We should, for example, at least have police forces that are fully up to strength. Young people are more likely to be victims of crime than are other age groups. Young people have told me that if they play in their local park they often get victimised or attacked by gangs, who have travelled from far away. Lack of facilities for young people is an important issue. More than 100 community facilities have closed in Glasgow in the five years since new Labour came to power. That shows the low priority that the Government gives on young people in the city. An 800-house estate has been built in Crookston, but it has no play area for young children. That is storing up problems for the future, as the young people there will have nothing to do. Children's panels have been discussed. There has, since 1990, been a year-on-year increase in referrals from 28,000 to 63,000, but resources have not kept pace. Incidentally, I say to Richard Simpson that those figures came from Jack McConnell. Because the children's panel has a backlog, some children do not go before the panel for several months, so they often do not realise why they are before it. They might have committed more offences and moved towards criminality in the intervening period. I acknowledge the issues that Paul Martin raised. I believe that consideration should be given to what has been done in England and suggested in Scotland by the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, such as bringing in youth anti-social behaviour orders. It is important that parents and young people are forced to consider youth disorder interactively. I certainly believe that the success of the projects in England should be examined and that they should be brought to Scotland. I am aware of time constraints, Presiding Officer. Without further ado, I shall allow the next member to speak.

Does that mean that the Conservatives now accept the SNP's proposal on the introduction of an extra 1,000 police officers in Scotland?

Does Brian Adam share my astonishment that Mr Gallie and the Tories appear to be against a rail link between Glasgow and Glasgow airport? Mr Gallie talked about a link between Glasgow and Prestwick, when all parties, apart from the Tories, are in favour of a direct link between Glasgow and Glasgow airport. That is what the business community, the local authority and everyone in Glasgow wants.

A country with ambitions.

Oh!

Will the member accept an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Does Mr Barrie accept that Labour-controlled Inverclyde has more than double the population of Clackmannanshire and also has no anti-social behaviour orders?

Will the member give way?

What happened to the Liberals? Oh, that was Donald Gorrie. I am pleased to be in Aberdeen. I drove up here last night, and drove along Union Street. I look forward to the day it is called Independence Street. Who knows, perhaps there will be a Tricia Marwick Boulevard, a Gil Paterson Avenue, and maybe even a teeny-weeny Mike Russell Close, hidden somewhere in the back streets of Aberdeen. I was going to say that this was an interesting  debate, but I would be lying, because for most people it has not been enlightening or interesting. However, I will try to sum up some of the comments that have been made. Challenge funding was mentioned. In all seriousness, I think that the minister has to address that funding, because challenge funding impacts particularly hard on small local authorities. When local authorities submit bids for money, smaller local authorities have to put in the same amount of effort as do larger local authorities, but they are not able to get as much money, because they are smaller authorities. They are probably also less likely to be awarded such funding. Local authorities are concerned that a lot of money is spent on preparing challenge funding bids, when it could be better spent on other things. Richard Lochhead raised the issue of linkage with rural areas. There is widespread concern across the chamber about rural Scotland, and whether it is being adequately served. It is clear from members' comments that more effort has to be made to ensure that rural Scotland is fully connected. Tricia Marwick talked about the commitment to IT of other countries, such as Estonia. It is good to see that the small, emergent nations of Europe are leading the way in that important area of government. The Executive should look to such countries.

As my distinguished colleague Dr Winnie Ewing has just said, how can Scotland lead when it is not at the top table? David Davidson said that our amendment was about nationalisation. It is nothing to do with that and it is clear that he has misread the issue. Mike Russell's speech was interesting, as at least it stimulated members. He talked about the Executive shaking off its insularity and about the fact that we should look outwith Scotland.

I will not, because I have only another couple of minutes and because Helen Eadie never takes interventions. Euan Robson talked about post offices. His speech was quiet but significant. Ken Macintosh made it clear that he has been living in a cave for the past five years, because he talked about criticising the Thatcherite approach, which is the approach that the Labour Government has taken. If he does not know that, he should consider the  privatisation of air traffic control and of the railways and the Executive's obsession with private finance initiatives. I am astonished that Ken Macintosh does not know that the Executive is Thatcherite. However, at least Ken Macintosh appeared to speak to our amendment; I look forward to him voting for it. He talked about East Renfrewshire Council, which has strong links with SNP-controlled Clackmannanshire Council. Given Ken Macintosh's speech, perhaps it will not be too long before he sits with SNP members. An important aspect of electronic Scotland on which the Executive must focus is electronic patient records. If medical professionals and pharmacists could access electronic records more easily, that would go a long way towards delivering more effective patient outcomes in the health service. I hope that the deputy minister will talk about that. Information websites are important, but no one would say that they are a substitute for service delivery. More focus must be placed on best practice. The deputy minister should describe the savings and efficiency improvements that have been made and which are quantifiable and can be explained in qualitative terms in relation to the Executive's strategy.

The SNP believes that the taxpayer should pay for government services. We should not depend on lottery money for basic services.

No, minister, it would not be 10p. Donald Gorrie said that knowledge was power and talked about strengthening democracy. His speech was short but telling. Keith Harding referred to subsidiarity. That is like the pot calling the kettle black, as everyone knows that the Tories started the undermining of local democracy. It is unfortunate that the Labour party has extended that with its control freakery in relation to local authorities. Fiona Hyslop talked about letting people access services and ensuring that services are delivered more effectively and efficiently on the front line. All SNP members support that. Public services must be delivered by a highly paid, highly motivated, well-trained and skilled work force. That is what the SNP supports and what our amendment is about.

Nurses now take on greater roles and greater responsibilities than ever before, but the average age of nurses is increasing. The average age in Scotland is now 47. The situation is particularly acute among nurses in general practitioner practices, as fully one third of them are over the age of 55. The profession has major problems with recruiting and retaining young people. Valuing nurses would assist retention and reduce the need to recruit in ever increasing numbers. Nurses in different parts of Scotland have different priorities: rural nurses may pay more in travel expenses; city nurses may fear violence at work when they do night shifts. I highlighted that issue in the debate initiated by Margaret Smith last September. Nurses work excessive hours for pay that is considered to be low for public service workers. The independent review's recent 3 per cent award was considered disappointing by Unison and the Royal College of Nursing. Although the return-to-practice programme is welcome, it is merely a pilot scheme. As Nicola Sturgeon indicated, the programme needs to be much wider in scope to attract back to nursing the number of nurses that is required to fill vacancies in the long term. The return-to-practice programme will bring more qualified staff into nursing, but it will not solve the demographic problem of our more experienced specialised nurses leaving for other jobs or retiring. The United Nations has opposed the importation of health care professionals from third-world countries. Nations such as the Philippines—where some 75 per cent of doctors who qualify and some two thirds of nurses emigrate—are denuded of professional expertise. With fewer people entering the labour force in future years, we must encourage more of our own people into the nursing profession. In fact, we could persuade people from other parts of the United Kingdom—or, indeed, Europe—to take up nursing as a profession in Scotland. If the current reliance of NHS hospitals on agency nurses is maintained, newly qualified nurses who work in NHS hospitals may be enticed to leave the NHS and work for agencies because  of the better pay and conditions that they offer. In a survey of 6,000 nurses, the RCN identified the key areas that would enhance the productivity and quality of nursing, thereby reducing absenteeism and reliance on agency nurses, lowering nursing turnover, improving morale and nurses' safety and reducing stress. Promoting the well-being of nurses would show that we value them and would create a happier work force. We need good employment practices under which flexible working hours are promoted and the needs of nurses with families are accommodated. Employee-friendly policies that help to promote a good work-life balance for nurses are essential. Where nurses are particularly stressed, psychological help and counselling should be available. We should also ensure that bullying and workplace harassment become things of the past. The RCN's most recent annual survey shows that dissatisfaction with nursing centres on key issues, including work load, staffing levels, hours, roles and responsibilities, having to undertake non-nursing activities and pay. The First Minister has said on the record that the SNP's idea of paying more money to attract nurses from outwith Scotland to Scotland is daft. I understand that nurses in London receive a London weighting allowance. Is not that intended to attract nurses to London from other parts of the United Kingdom? I am sure that if the minister checked, he would find that several hundred Scottish nurses work in London and that Scottish nurses work in other parts of the UK. Surely we should retain such people in Scotland. Throughout Europe, different countries have different rates of pay. In the United States, different states pay different rates. There is no reason for us not to create a competitive edge in Scotland by providing better pay than is provided in the rest of the United Kingdom. Nicola Sturgeon has mentioned in previous debates the difficulty in replacing NHS consultants at the Beatson oncology centre, because we have no competitive edge. That competitive edge should be not only for doctors, but for nurses. If we are to have the health service that everyone wants in the 21 st century, we must compete, do better and pay the rate for the job. Scotland must lead health provision in the UK and to do that, we must pay the rate for the job. Let us attract people from throughout Europe and the United Kingdom into nursing. Let us retain the nurses we have. Let us ensure that the profession is valued as we would like it to be valued.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking in order to reduce child poverty. (S1O-5165)

I thank the new Minister for Social Justice for her reply. Will she explain why, given that the Executive uses the same definition of poverty as do other European Union nations, child poverty stands at a scandalous 30 per cent in Scotland, which is an increase on last year? That compares with 2 per cent in Sweden, 4.5 per cent in Denmark and 8.3 per cent in Finland. Our figure is higher than that of any other EU nation. Will the minister concede that unless the Parliament gains the fiscal clout that is needed to eliminate child  poverty, the Executive will remain powerless to ensure that every Scottish child grows up in a poverty-free environment?

On a point of order. I do not think that the Procedure Committee at Westminster would be very impressed by the fact that, although six questions  were lodged and in spite of the unfortunate absence of the Conservative leader, we got through only three questions in 20 minutes. My colleague, Gil Paterson, had a very important question to ask. I suggest—as other members have suggested—that you should reconsider the time that is allocated to questions at First Minister's question time.

I pay tribute to Johann Lamont for valiantly introducing  the debate, despite the fact that she is feeling rather wonky today. I welcome our Shug to the social justice team and welcome back Margaret Curran from her swearing-in session. It has been a long, slow struggle to the top for her, but she has finally made it. Like other speakers, when taking evidence from around Scotland I was impressed by the passion, enthusiasm, commitment and professionalism of people working in the voluntary sector. As Johann Lamont indicated, the sector is diverse and flexible. Despite obvious financial constraints, it delivers first-class services through trained and highly motivated staff. As Johann added, the heart of the sector is vital. It must not be patronised, but it should be celebrated and taken seriously. The issue of funding played a major part in today's debate. Johann Lamont talked about the need for honesty when considering what the sector requires to function effectively. Real costs must be considered and core funding is crucial. I was heartened by much that the minister said on that issue. The voluntary sector's need for moneys to cover salaries, training, security, sick pay, pensions, heating and lighting costs, and, of course, inflation must be recognised. Keith Raffan talked about not reinventing the wheel and not— [Interruption.] It would help if I could read my writing—I should have been a doctor rather than a politician. Keith said that the voluntary sector does not exist to fund the statutory sector "on the cheap". He went on to say that we need to share best practice in the voluntary sector to avoid duplication and to ensure continuity. I am sure that all of us echo those sentiments. Linda Fabiani raised the issue of section 9 and 10 grants, and Hugh Henry dealt with that adequately. She also talked about the worry and pressure that voluntary groups feel when funding periods draw to a close and redundancy notices have to be sent out. Funding streams are too insecure and in many cases funding is unrealistic. Time scales for funding bids are unrealistic and great strain is placed on resources and the skills of people who work in the voluntary sector. Although innovation and new initiatives should not be the sole criteria for funding, groups should not be funded just because they always have been. That point was made in evidence that the committee took at Inverness. A balance needs to be struck. Concerns were raised in evidence that funding streams are too insecure to guarantee loans and benefit from the social investment Scotland scheme. I hope that the Executive will consider that issue in more detail. Cathy Peattie talked about groups having to reinvent themselves and develop skills in  response to continual changes in criteria for funding. I hope that we will tackle that waste of resources. Donald Gorrie said that funding was "an absolute disgrace" and that the sector is often seen "as a competitor and possibly even as an enemy" by organisations in the statutory sector. We must take that point seriously. Robert Brown proposed the establishment of a voluntary sector development fund. That seems like a robust idea. Brian Monteith touched on the new opportunities fund. It is heartening to see that the fund intends to implement the committee's recommendation that three to five-year funding periods be introduced, to enable realistic planning and the establishment of management provisions. Of course, the fund could have gone further to ensure that the poorest communities benefit disproportionately from resources. Later in my speech, I will take issue with Mike Rumbles on that point. A number of members referred to the independence of the sector and I am pleased that the minister recognised that. There will always be a trade-off between an organisation having the independence to follow its own agenda and the reality of contracting with those who fund groups. The role of an effective and efficient management committee is important in ensuring that statutory agencies are aware of the voluntary sector and the culture in which it works. It is fundamental that there should be equality of esteem between the sector and the Parliament. The Parliament has already established a compact with local government to ensure equality of esteem between both parties. Perhaps that should be widened to include the voluntary sector. Lyndsay McIntosh expressed concern about the possibility of parts of the voluntary sector being absorbed into government. She talked about how the sector could become beholden to public agencies. I echo the point that voluntary organisations should be seen as partners, rather than subjects. In Inverness, the comments were made that the compact is invisible, that it might as well not exist and that it is not worth the paper that it is written on. That concerned me and other committee members; we should address how the compact is working on the ground. The concern was emphasised that if a project is successful, local authorities or other agencies might take over the work when funding is exhausted and might take the credit for success.  Mike Rumbles talked about rurality. He seemed to have the hump about not having been notified of the Social Justice Committee's visit to his domain. However, I have here a copy of a letter that was sent to Mr Rumbles on 9 October. The letter says: "Dear Mike Rumbles

With respect, we based the report on the evidence that we took. We wanted to give the Executive the opportunity to come back on it. That does not mean that the subject will be done and dusted for all eternity. I am sure that other committee members will take on board the  comments that Mike Rumbles has made. There are no problems with considering the matter further. Robert Brown focused on the regulatory burdens that are imposed on the sector and the burden that the national insurance increase will have on smaller organisations. He talked passionately—as he has done many times before—about the impact of legislation on citizens advice bureaux. He made a plea for legislation on debt advice services. Other members talked about the lack of transparency in the regulatory framework, which we must address. Smaller organisations might find it difficult to be good employers that adhere to employment law. Staff in the voluntary sector often work longer than they are paid for and we must address that. Positive comments were made regarding the voluntary issues unit; people said that there were good relations with the Executive. However, some felt that the local infrastructure was often weak, that resources were inadequate and that organisations were being dragged away from the objectives for which they were founded. The sector is keen to know not just what decisions local authorities make—particularly regarding funding—but why they are made. Linda Fabiani mentioned social inclusion partnerships and Cathy Peattie talked about the need for black and ethnic minority people to be included in discussions on infrastructure. Volunteering is not cost free and it is important to review the level of expenses that are provided to volunteers to attract people from socially excluded and far-flung rural areas—I address that point to Mike Rumbles. In many places volunteers are in short supply, not only in remote areas but in Lothian, which was mentioned in evidence-taking sessions. The needs of disabled volunteers are not considered as much as they should be and we have to consider the possible divides between paid staff and volunteers and the fear that some paid staff have of litigation for negligence. We have to raise awareness of the benefits of volunteering and make an effort to retain as many experienced volunteers as possible. The minister will be aware that there are concerns about the apparent lack of progress of the Scottish Charity Law Review Commission. The front-page headline of last Friday's edition of Third Force News said: "Sector demands progress on charity law reforms". Councillor Jean McFadden, who chaired the Scottish Charity Law Review Commission, has made clear her frustration that a year after its report, which contained 114 recommendations,  was published no proposed legislation is in place. The SCVO echoed those concerns. Johann Lamont mentioned a timetable for making progress on that and Linda Fabiani echoed that point. I hope that the minister will take that on board. At the Social Justice Committee's meeting on 12 December, the then deputy minister said with reference to the social economy: "Stephen Maxwell from the SCVO is carrying out that review and will report to the minister later this month. The review will look at the contribution of the social economy to service provision and economic prosperity."—[ Official Report, Social Justice Committee , 12 December 2001; c 2722.] Although the committee made it clear that it does not doubt the Executive's commitment to the review, concerns continue to be expressed by the committee, the SCVO and others about the continued delay in its completion and publication. As Johann Lamont pointed out, the co-operative and mutual sector is important. In conclusion—you are giving me the cold stare, Presiding Officer—I will mention just one other thing. We must, as Johann Lamont said, avoid paralysis by consultation. Evidence suggests that realistic time scales are needed for organisations to canvass opinions. Linda Fabiani echoed that and said that it took the Executive, with all its resources, two months to respond to our recommendations. On behalf of the committee, I thank Johann Lamont, for convening it so well; the witnesses, who gave up so much time, effort and energy to provide evidence; the ministers, for responding so positively to our recommendations; and Uncle Tom Cobbleigh and all.

Does Mr Rumbles accept that members of the committee visited every region of Scotland including, of course, his own?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met representatives of Glasgow City Council and what issues were discussed. (S1O-5101)

Is the minister aware that Glasgow City Council's share of local government resources has declined, year on year, since new Labour came to power? This year, Glasgow's share is £56 million less—equivalent to more than £272 for every Glasgow council tax payer—than it would have been if it had remained at the level that new Labour inherited. Does he agree with Glasgow City Council's Labour leader, Charlie  Gordon, that that decline represents a denial of social justice for Glasgow, as it impacts on the city's ability to deliver quality services and deal effectively with poverty and poor educational attainment? Will he therefore take the necessary steps to ensure a fair deal for the city of Glasgow?

Will the member tell us why the level of child poverty is 30 per cent in Scotland but only 2 per cent in Sweden?

rose—

Mr McLetchie does not believe that change should come in the foreseeable future. Will he define "foreseeable future"? I have three children, aged nine, five and three. In the foreseeable future, they may want the opportunity to vote in an independence referendum. Mr McLetchie has spoken about choice. Will the Tories support calls for an independence referendum in the future? If so, when?

Will David McLetchie accept an intervention?

Will the minister give way?

Can the minister tell us which constituency in Norway has higher unemployment than Maryhill?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I did not.

rose—

On 16 January at the Chartered Institute of Housing conference, the Minister for Social Justice said:  "Tackling the perpetrators of anti-social behaviour in communities ... is a top priority of the Executive". Will the Deputy First Minister explain why, three months later, it is not apparent that any action has been taken to introduce interim anti-social behaviour orders, as promised in January? Does the Executive plan to develop children's anti-social behaviour orders as suggested by the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities? Will the Deputy First Minister accept that youth disorder and violent crime can be tackled effectively only by a full-strength, well-paid and highly motivated front-line police force?

This morning at the Social Justice Committee, in reference to the task force report, Iain Gray said that the Executive was coming to the issue late in the day and that the Executive should have taken action earlier in some areas. Will he be specific about where action could have been taken previously and whether any action can  be taken now?

In an answer to a question on 20 December, the Deputy Minister for Social Justice said that it would.

Does the member agree that one of the main issues is that the advice that is given to people who are exercising their right to buy is often inadequate? In particular, when elderly people on low incomes make a purchase, they are not advised of possible repair costs in future years.

I apologise to the minister—and the Parliament—for missing the first 90 seconds of her speech. For some reason, we thought that the debate was to start at 2.45 pm. I also apologise to the Parliament for my shocking performance in the football match between Glasgow City Council and the Scottish Parliament that took place just over a week ago. I truly was the weakest link in our 6-4 defeat. Nevertheless, I hope that we will beat Glasgow City Council on away goals when we play them in Edinburgh. I welcome the debate on the first report of the housing improvement task force. I pay tribute to those who have contributed to the production of the report and its 106 key conclusions. I also welcome the briefing session that the minister will provide for the Social Justice Committee next Tuesday. If that session had been held before today, it would have helped to inform the debate, although I realise that the minister's diary is perhaps fuller than the diaries of the rest of us. As always, one cannot cover a report of such magnitude in a relatively short space of time.  However, I will touch on several areas that require particular consideration. My colleagues will focus on specific areas, such as rural housing, houses in multiple occupation and house buying and selling. The evidence on which the report is based leans heavily on the 1996 Scottish house condition survey and it is hoped that the 2002 survey will inform the second stage report. Paragraphs 17 to 20 make clear the significant gaps in the database. Those gaps are highlighted in paragraphs 46 to 48, which deal with equalities issues. For example, the report states in paragraph 47, in reference to disabled people: "It is not known to what extent they also face problems arising from disrepair." Paragraph 48 states: "reliable national level data on the condition of the properties occupied by other disadvantaged and minority groups is not available." The fact that 17 of the key conclusions refer directly to equalities issues shows that more work is needed to assess and address the housing needs of some of our more vulnerable citizens who live, or aspire to live, in the private sector. Critical disrepair affects a substantial number of properties in the owner-occupied and rented sectors. The state of the latter gives particular concern, given the higher proportion of rented homes in poor condition. Although that is partly a result of the age of privately rented housing, lack of investment and shared repairing obligations are fundamental factors. Vulnerable tenants and those on low incomes endure poorer conditions. That area must be addressed if we are to ensure social justice for all private tenants. One of the most interesting sections of the report refers to properties that are sold under the right to buy. Paragraph 35 states: "Although concerns have been expressed that right to buy owners may be less well informed of their repair obligations or the need to invest in their homes there is no evidence from the SHCS that this is the case." There is such evidence, although it is not from the Scottish house condition survey. Last year, Hilland Ritchie Consultants carried out a detailed report and survey of owner-occupation for Thistle Housing Association in Toryglen, Glasgow, in which concern was expressed that tenants "may not have received proper advice at the time of purchase." Indeed, "Many indicated that their decision to purchase their home was based on the fact that they could pay less for a mortgage than rent." Paragraph 35 of the housing improvement task force report states:  "The fact that most right to buy owners live in areas containing large numbers of public sector rented properties will mean that their attitude to and capacity to undertake repairs or improvements could have significant implications for landlords investing in those areas." That is borne out by the Hilland Ritchie findings, which showed that "85 per cent of owners have indicated that they would require a grant to participate in the future repairs programme"— that is, the programme that was proposed for Toryglen. Furthermore, "89 per cent indicated that if the work was to proceed they did not know how they would be able to finance their share of the works". The works in question were the plans by Thistle Housing Association to upgrade its tenanted stock, which includes 456 owners, whose share of costs would average £4,150 per household. Clearly, the ability of owners to pay for the work that the housing association deems necessary but that 73 per cent of owners oppose will have a major impact on the work that is to be carried out on those homes that are still tenanted. Obviously, grants are available, but most grants have a ceiling of 50 per cent. Means testing will also be introduced for the grants and the minimum available grant is not index linked. Therefore, many owners will lose out, which will have an impact on all concerned. As the minister will be aware, Glasgow currently has a three-year waiting list for grants. The city's expenditure on grants has been slashed from £24 million to £6.3 million since new Labour came to power. The fact that that picture is repeated across Scotland is proof of the squeeze on local authority budgets in recent years. As the housing improvement task force makes clear in paragraph 119, "the limited resources now made available for grant funding by most local authorities acts as a disincentive to serve notices." Petition PE391, from Mr William Scobie, which was dealt with at this morning's meeting of the Social Justice Committee, raises the issue of tenants who have exercised their right to buy having repairs imposed on them by the local authority without their consent. During the passage of the Housing (Scotland) Bill, I raised that matter at the Local Government Committee. Obviously, a delicate balance must be struck in ensuring both that tenants in the social rented sector do not have necessary improvements delayed by intransigent owners and that owners are fully consulted. The converse of that occurs when owners wish to improve their property but the local authority or registered social landlord has inadequate  resources or different priorities. When work is carried out, the private sector and the public sector may have difficulty in recouping expenditure from the other sector because of the lack of adequate practical forms of redress. Paragraphs 93 to 108 examine the arrangements for communal repairs and maintenance work. The report examines the obligations, rights, quality and cost of such work. As the public sector ethos is different from the private sector ethos, resolving such differences in approach to everyone's satisfaction while ensuring overall improvement in housing conditions will be challenging. I hope that the housing improvement task force will address that issue in some detail in its second stage report. Under the heading "A strategic approach to the use of local authority powers", paragraph 114 explains that strategic planning suffers from particular difficulties: "apart from the tolerable standard, there are no benchmarks against which housing quality more generally can be measured or targets for improvement set." Even on that basis, it could take between 10 and 20 years to eradicate all remaining below tolerable standard houses. That is not acceptable. As the report continues, "there is a need to re-assess the tolerable standard, in order to address existing patterns of housing quality failure". We agree with that statement. We seek assurances from the minister that a review of the tolerable standard and benchmarks of housing quality will be carried out at the second stage. As always with social justice issues, there are also matters that the report defines as cross-cutting and reserved. SNP members hope that issues that are reserved to Westminster, such as consumer protection and VAT rates on repair and improvement works, will be considered for discussion in the second stage report. We also hope that the Scottish Executive will press for action as necessary from its colleagues south of the border. For the SNP, it is obviously a cause for regret that the Parliament cannot act in Scotland's interest on such matters, but we believe that that will change in the fullness of time. Shelter Scotland has raised a number of issues with which members will be familiar through that organisation's briefing. In particular, it has expressed unease about the fact that the report focuses on conditions without examining the rights of private sector tenants. Issues such as the lack of regulations on the charging of rental deposits, the inequality in bargaining power between landlords and vulnerable tenants and the lack of tenure security in the private rented sector all deserve attention. The remit of the task force  should not exclude discussion of the possible introduction of a minimum set of rights for private tenants. Indeed, such rights could make it more difficult for landlords to charge high rents for properties in disrepair. The Chartered Institute of Housing has suggested that targets should be set for the eradication of poor housing conditions. That seems eminently sensible. Paragraph 1 of the report comments: "About 66,000 (5%) private homes may remain in poor condition in the long term." The SNP would not support the continuation of that. The paragraph goes on to say that "poor condition housing is a problem for all those who live in it. It is associated with health problems particularly in young and older people and creates social and economic problems for individual households and communities." There is clearly a long road ahead to secure decent living conditions for all in the private sector. However, I hope that, when the minister sums up, he will concur that it is unacceptable to accept that 66,000 homes—or anything like that number—will remain in poor condition indefinitely. The Conservative amendment is, I feel, rather sour. The report is not perfect and could be improved on—it may not be as focused as we would all like it to be. Nevertheless, the report is necessary and at least illustrates the condition of Scotland's private housing and the problems on which we have to focus. As our amendment suggests, the SNP is keen to ensure that recommendations that emerge from the second stage report are, where appropriate, acted on before the end of this session of the Parliament. We accept that it may be difficult to ensure the passage of legislation prior to spring 2003, but we believe that such legislation can at least be commenced and progressed. That is the minimum that the private sector can expect. I move amendment S1M-2982.1, to leave out from "meeting" to end and insert: "examining the wide range of issues facing the private housing sector in Scotland; looks forward to debating the Task Force's recommendations for action and timescale for implementation following completion of its second stage report; seeks clarification as to when publication of the second stage report is anticipated, and calls on the Scottish Executive to propose that time is provided in the parliamentary process to ensure that any necessary legislation that may emerge will be progressed prior to the end of this session of the Parliament."

May I ask the minister whether she enjoyed the recess? [Laughter.]

To ask the Scottish Executive what support it will provide for regeneration of the River Clyde. (S1O-4915)

The minister will be aware of the appalling scenes of dereliction that scar both banks of the Clyde along much of its course from Glasgow to Dumbarton and Greenock. What action will the Scottish Executive take, not just to restore derelict and vacant land to productive use, but specifically to decontaminate all the toxic sites that are adjacent to the Clyde? By what date will that task be completed?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

Will the member give way?

The minister is obviously not in favour of devolving the benefits system to Scotland. However, will she tell us how Scotland would be adversely affected if that happened? Furthermore, although the minister would undoubtedly agree that Jackie Baillie delivered an excellent speech, did it not remind her of the song on the album "Hats" by The Blue Nile, which contains the lines: "I know it's over But I can't let go"?

Will the member give way?

I welcome the debate on the homelessness task force and its final report. My one concern—which is shared by many members and organisations that deal with homelessness at the coalface—is the length of time that has been allocated to the debate, given that the report has been much anticipated and was two and a half years in the making. A full Wednesday afternoon or Thursday  morning would have allowed more members to contribute and allowed the minister to detail further his plans on the recommendations. My colleagues will attempt to deal in greater detail with what I am unable to discuss, given the comprehensiveness of the report. First, I pay tribute to those who have contributed to a thorough report, the recommendations of which the SNP is happy to endorse. The Conservatives may disagree, but we think that the debate is not about which recommendations are or are not acceptable, but about how and when they are implemented. I have no doubt that the Social Justice Committee will wish to provide detailed scrutiny. Shelter raised a number of issues with members that they will be familiar with through their briefing. Some of those are mentioned in my amendment—for example, "a commitment from the Scottish Executive to produce an action plan for implementation of the 59 recommendations within six months" and, significantly, full resourcing of the recommendations, with the comprehensive spending review this summer taking the report into account. It is obvious that, as some recommendations relate to reserved matters, the Executive must rely on the good will of colleagues down south. I ask the minister whether we would be able to address the issue of homelessness more effectively if at least benefits were a devolved matter, as Mr Sheridan asked. Surely that would aid the Executive in providing a holistic, joined-up approach—to which the minister referred—across all areas of social justice. Mel Young, the director of the The Big Issue in Scotland, wrote in issue 364: "It would be much better if benefits were devolved to Scotland as part of an integrated anti-poverty strategy". In addition, Shelter suggested that an annual report on homelessness to the Parliament by the minister responsible would sustain the momentum behind the task force report. That seems eminently sensible. Perhaps the minister, in summing up, will advise members on the monitoring group's membership and how often it will meet. I am aware that the Executive intends to bring forward a homelessness bill—indeed, the minister confirmed that today. I urge him to ensure that no slippage in the timetable takes place, given the tight time scale for a bill as the next election approaches. The minister referred to the great amount of parliamentary business in the autumn. Of course, it is important to acknowledge that the Labour Government is in its fifth year and  homelessness is at a record level. The minister suggested, somewhat defensively, that perhaps we should not trust the statistics. I accept his comments on that and commend his comments about making data more robust. However, we must work with the information that we have. According to the report, homelessness applications rose from 40,989 in 1996-97 to 46,023 in 2000-01, the last year for which figures are available. Some areas have done well, but other areas have not done so well. We have seen a 33 per cent increase in homelessness applications in Fife, a 40 per cent increase in Inverclyde and a shocking 65 per cent increase in West Lothian.

Yes. As I tried to say before I cited those figures, I acknowledge what the minister said about statistics. I welcome the minister's intention to make the data more robust. Nevertheless, the data that we have show a trend and it is important that we consider the trends. I have no doubt that, if the trends were in another direction, the Executive would be making hay from them. It is shameful that homelessness has not been accorded a higher priority by the Executive. It is a scandal that council housing investment has plummeted by more than £1 billion in the past five years; that grants to the private sector have fallen by two thirds; that housing capital set-aside has drained money from local authorities; and that housing association grant has fallen.

I fully accept the point that the member makes. In 1990-91, at current prices, the Thatcher Government allowed borrowing of £176 million in Glasgow for capital investment, which is some £100 million more than is being allowed at present. New housing partnership moneys have often remained unspent and council rents have soared by some 131 per cent above inflation in Glasgow over the past 16 years. It is obvious that those actions have had an adverse cumulative effect on  housing supply and affordability. That is why it is important not only that the recommendations of the homelessness task force are accepted, but that they are fully resourced and that the cost should not fall on local government. On 31 January, I secured a debate on the issue of young runaways. The authors of "Missing Out—Young Runaways in Scotland", the report that informed the debate, estimated that some 6,000 to 7,000 children under 16 run away in Scotland every year for the first time. Around a thousand of them do so because they are forced to leave home. For those vulnerable youngsters, who are at risk from sexual predators, possible physical assault, cold and hunger, the only refuge in the United Kingdom is in London. The Housing (Scotland) Act 2001 ensured that all applicants who are over 16 have a right to be registered. However, the decision of the previous Conservative Government to remove benefit entitlement from 16 and 17-year-olds has impacted on the number of young homeless. Despite the fact that it opposed the legislation when it was introduced, London Labour has done nothing to rescind it, although the number of homeless people under the age of 18 has risen by 20 per cent since Labour came to power. The cost of such a policy would be approximately £10 million a year, according to a House of Commons parliamentary answer to a question that was asked by John Swinney two years ago. Surely that cost is less, in economic and human terms, than the cost of maintaining the status quo. As a result of the current situation, many young people find themselves homeless and in despair unnecessarily. As the homelessness task force's report makes clear, the younger a person is when they first become homeless, the more difficult it is for them to avoid remaining so. Although the issue of benefits is covered and 16 to 24-year-olds are mentioned in the report, 16 and 17-year-olds specifically are not mentioned. Last week I asked the minister a question on the matter and his response was that, if the report "does not comment on the issue that he raises, that is perhaps because the experts feel that it is not the issue that has the greatest impact on homelessness."— [ Official Report , 28 February 2002; c 9835.]  That is fair enough. However, on 9 November, Lyndsay McIntosh, Mike Watson and I addressed a conference that was held by the Scottish Council for Single Homeless at which not only was unanimous support expressed by the 120-strong audience for the repeal of the law that excludes 16 to 17-year-olds from benefits, but similar support was expressed for such a move by both Lyndsay and Mike. Given the fact that there is cross-party support for such action, it is obvious that an independent Scotland would not only repeal that  harmful policy, but work to ensure that such policies were never again imposed on an unwilling nation.

We do not believe for a minute that the appalling situation whereby Scotland has proportionately 50 per cent more homelessness than the rest of the UK would occur in an independent, self-confident, prosperous, socially just and outward-looking Scotland. Does anyone seriously believe that decisions affecting homelessness in Denmark should be taken in Berlin, that decisions affecting homelessness in Switzerland should be taken in Paris or that decisions affecting homelessness in Finland should be taken in Moscow? Of course not. None of those prosperous European nations with per capita incomes far in excess of that of the UK would accept being told that their nation was too small, too poor a—

I will close, Presiding Officer. It is time for the North British parties to stop undermining Scottish self-belief and to accept that this Parliament needs powers that are taken for granted even on the Isle of Man and Jersey to deal with Scotland's concerns in the same confident way as our European neighbours. It is time for independence. I move amendment S1M-2838.2, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: "notes the final report of the Homelessness Task Force, Helping Homeless People: An Action Plan for Prevention and Effective Response ; regrets that, five years after the election of New Labour, homelessness in Scotland is higher than when they took office; seeks a commitment from the Scottish Executive to produce an action plan for implementation of the 59 recommendations within six months; believes that, for homelessness to be eradicated, the recommendations in the report must be fully resourced, and acknowledges than an independent Scotland, with full control over the benefits system, would be much better placed to tackle homelessness than an Executive dependent on the decisions and goodwill of Westminster."

I will  certainly be brief, Presiding Officer, not only because a number of members wish to speak but because Johann Lamont made many of the points that I wanted to make. I commend Johann Lamont for securing the debate at what is an important time, given that international women's day is tomorrow. I also commend her for highlighting the work of the Women Together group in Pollock. It is obvious that women still get a raw deal in society. As Johann Lamont pointed out, they have less economic clout, they receive lower wages and more women work part time. One expects and hopes—certainly, one anticipates—that, at some point, the superior educational attainment of girls in our schools will feed through and that the executive directorships that Johann Lamont talked about will be shared equally by men and women. It is extremely important to those of us who have mothers, daughters and sisters that women get a raw—that women get the best possible deal in our society. [Laughter.]

It was not quite Freudian. The tremendous turnout—possibly the highest for a members' business debate since the Parliament was established—shows the importance of the issue, but much work remains to be done. I hope that the Executive will address the fundamental issue of gender proofing. I understand that some work on that has been done and undoubtedly the Deputy Minister for Social Justice will speak about that work, on which we would like more rapid progress to be made. We must, for example, acknowledge the work that women do in looking after elderly relatives, which has a clear impact on how budgets should be distributed. We must consider the international dimension. In many societies, women get a much worse deal than they do in our society. We all saw the suffering of women in Afghanistan when, under the Taliban, women were not allowed to receive care from a male doctor, but could not become doctors because they were prevented from participating in education. Progress is being made in some third world countries. The Green Bank in Bangladesh tries to lend money to women's groups to allow women to develop small businesses independently of men and to get away from the patriarchal nature of society there. The SNP has a distinguished female president in Winnie Ewing. Two of my parliamentary colleagues are in Barcelona for international women's day. Linda Fabiani, who has been at the forefront of the women's movement and shares  many of Johann Lamont's ideals and views, wanted to speak in the debate but was asked to represent the SNP at the European Free Alliance women's network meeting in Barcelona. The network is an organisation in which parties share information and experience, co-ordinate activities, provide mutual support to women and promote the aims of self-determination for our nations and regions. The events in Barcelona culminate with a women's march on Friday night. Linda Fabiani has also attended the Women's Federation of Latin American Politicians, which was inaugurated in Peru and which tries to ensure that women in nations that have lower levels of economic and social development are able to be represented at all levels of government. On behalf of Linda Fabiani, I highlight the work of Fokupers, which is a women's human rights organisation in East Timor that works to ensure civic education for the women of East Timor so that they can take their place in running one of the world's newest democracies. It is important that women fight for their rights in this country and that they encourage men to help in that struggle. It is also important that women maintain international links with their counterparts throughout the world for mutual support and the sharing of experience and ideas. I am pleased to be able to speak in the debate and I am pleased with the patience that the Presiding Officer has shown me.

To what extent does the minister believe that the withdrawal of housing benefit to 16 and 17-year-olds by the Tories in the 1980s impacted on homelessness among young people? What representations—if any—has the Scottish Executive made to Her Majesty's Government over the past three years to seek the restoration of those benefits?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to regenerate Glasgow. (S1O-4591)

Is the minister aware that the December edition of "Glasgow Economic Monitor" predicts only 2 per cent job growth in the city in the coming five years, compared with 7.5 per cent over the past five years? Does the minister accept that one way of expediting the regeneration of Glasgow is to speed up construction of the M74 northern extension, which would secure 55,000 jobs? We should also ensure that that construction is linked to simultaneous derelict and vacant-land reclamation next to the road, which would provide the industrial sites that the city so desperately needs.

Will the minister explain why Glasgow, unlike Lanarkshire, has never had an enterprise zone? Will one be constructed next to the M74 northern extension?

The minister means a diverse cross-section of the Labour party.

Will Mr McAveety take an intervention?

Will the minister accept an intervention?

I wonder how the minister's priorities are going to be achieved, given the paucity of last week's local government settlement, which led to a cut of £17.2 million for Glasgow and a cut of 79 teaching posts. How will the council improve the education of Glaswegian youngsters if there are 79 fewer teachers?

I am pleased to have secured this debate today on a subject that has, regrettably, not previously been given the consideration it deserves. First, I pay tribute to Jim Wade of the University of York, the Aberlour Child Care Trust, Extern, Children's Promise and the Children's Society for producing the excellent "Missing Out—Young Runaways in Scotland" report, which was the catalyst for the motion. I would also like to thank Martin Henry, who is the child protection co-ordinator of the Edinburgh and the Lothians child protection office, for his advice, and the 36 MSPs, from every party in the Parliament and none, for signing the motion and making the debate possible. Runaways can be defined as children and young people under 16 who run away from home or care. One in nine children run away or are forced to leave home before the age of 16 due to difficulties in their lives. The authors of "Missing Out—Young Runaways in Scotland" estimate that 6,000 to 7,000 children under 16 run away in Scotland every year, that 9,000 run away in total and that the total number of incidents is between 11,000 and 12,000. Of those who run away, around 1,000 do so because they are forced to leave home. Three quarters of the young people who run away do so once or twice, but a quarter run away three times or more. Disturbingly, half of habitual runaways first ran away before the age of 11. There is little difference in the rates of running away for young people living in cities, towns or rural areas, and there is only modest variation according to income. However, running away is  more likely to occur among young people living in lone-parent or step-parent families than among those living with both birth parents. Young people who have experience of living in care are almost five times as likely to run away as those who have not, and they do so more often—although half of children in care who ran away first did so when living at home. For those in care, running away is strongly correlated to an unstable placement. For those who have had 10 or more moves, the incidence of running away is four times higher than for those in a stable care environment. Females are more likely to run away, but males are more likely to run away for longer. Although problems at home—such as emotional and physical abuse, neglect and rejection—influence almost 80 per cent of runaways, there is also a strong correlation between running away and truanting or other difficulties at school such as bullying, isolation, exclusion or hating school. Personal problems with the police, alcohol, drugs, boyfriends or girlfriends, feeling fed up, lonely or depressed, or having low self-esteem may also trigger running away, perhaps because of parental reaction to the young person's behaviour. The risks of running away are high. Almost one in six young people who run away overnight report that they have been physically or sexually assaulted while away from home. More than a quarter report that they have slept rough. One in seven resorted to risky survival strategies such as stealing, begging and survival sex. Although running away may provide temporary relief from pressure, a large number of young people found themselves, lonely, hungry and frightened. I will quote some of the things they say. "I didn't take anything with me, not even a coat.... I didn't have much money and couldn't afford to buy any food, so I couldn't even sit in a cafe to keep warm." "I had no choice. If I stay at home I get smacked around. If I run away I might get beaten or robbed but at least I might not. At home I know I will." "I had no money, was upset constantly, in bad health and became a thief and a prostitute." "Nowhere to sleep, no food, have to beg and shoplift, always cold. You get into a lot of trouble if not careful." "I didn't know help existed. Advertising is needed to let people know what is available." Once a pattern of running away becomes set, effective interventions are harder to achieve and the life chances of those young people become modest at best. What services are currently in place? Unfortunately, there is no clear national policy on how local agencies should respond to the problems of young runaways. Most go home or are returned by police or social services, but little help is available in sorting out the underlying  problems they ran from. Understandably, the police tend to focus on missing children whose lives might be in danger, while social services concentrate on runaways who enter care or are child protection cases. Excellent work is being done in a number of areas, not least by child protection workers. However, the absence of a national framework has several drawbacks. Local authorities do not have to establish specific services in relation to runaways, or develop joint protocols between agencies. Runaways who run across council boundaries or move care homes since previous incidents might slip through the net. National helplines might find it hard to refer runaways to local services because appropriate services for young runaways do not always exist. To exacerbate the problem, the recent closure of three of the four safe houses for young runaways in the United Kingdom—that leaves only the London centre—has left young people with few options. In research and consultation, young runaways have themselves made clear the chronic lack of information available before and after running away. They feel that services do not listen or involve them in decisions that affect their lives. What is required to address effectively the issue of young runaways? It is vital to have national leadership from the Scottish Executive to create a policy and service framework that will establish agreed joint local protocols between police, local authorities and the voluntary sector. I am aware that the Executive discussed creating a national strategy on 4 October at a meeting with child protection committees. Such a strategy would link the issues of young runaways and child prostitution, and establish a national working party that reflects the experiences of those working in the field and draws on expertise from north and south of the border. That is to be welcomed, but I am concerned that no further progress has been made in the 17 weeks that have elapsed since that meeting, although the briefing document for the debate hinted at a recent meeting of Executive departments to discuss the issue. I therefore ask the minister to progress the matter with great urgency. The national policy framework should include a range of preventive services for children, young people and families to address the underlying problems that cause children to run away; services that provide early intervention for those who run away for the first time; services to meet the needs of young people with a repeat pattern of running away; a database, established in co-operation with our UK and European partners, that can track runaway children across Scotland and beyond; and greater  resources for hard-pressed children and families units. Preventive measures should include the incorporation of the issue into personal and social education programmes in schools; discussions in settings where young people gather such as youth centres or residential units; and peer counselling. It is necessary to train professionals who work with young people to improve their ability to recognise the signs that prompt running away and link youths to appropriate services. The evidence about the immediate and long-term risks of running away points to a need for focused preventive services such as family mediation and family group conferencing. There is a need for accessible information about the services that are available locally and for strategies to publicise them, such as user-friendly publicity in schools, health and leisure facilities, on the internet and in the media. The lack of structured activities that are available to young people reinforces the pattern of spending time on the streets and getting into trouble. Providing young people with a greater range of educational and leisure activities can reduce the incidence of running away and of youth offending. Independent interviews are needed to assess young people's reasons for running away, to identify risks to which they might be exposed and to agree an appropriate response. Those interviews must be backed by resources to provide further support. Young people should be returned home only after there is an agreed plan of action. To avoid the risks on the streets, young people need access to a safe place to stay when a direct return home might place them at risk. The Children (Scotland) Act 1995 provides for local authorities to offer refuge directly or through an independent agency when young people are at risk of harm, but the powers enshrined in that act remain underutilised and no refuge provision exists in Scotland. The type of shelter that is envisaged would be safe, secure, homely and small in scale. It would offer young people space to gather their thoughts, obtain advice and counselling and plan their next steps. Research identified outreach work as a primary approach for meeting the needs of the most vulnerable and hard-to-reach young people on the streets. There is a lack of infrastructure and guidance to support best practice. Most existing projects are based in urban areas; the provision should be extended to small towns and rural areas. Projects that model good practice have shown the way forward. For example, the ASTRA—alternative solutions to running away—project in Gloucester has cut the incidence of repeat running  away by 61 per cent and has saved the police 75 working days on missing persons cases. Running away is a symptom of great distress. If left unchecked, it makes young people highly vulnerable to social exclusion in adulthood. I ask the minister to act on the issue with all speed.

Does Paul Martin agree with the SNP that we should have an extra 1,000 police officers on the beat in Scotland?

The minister will be aware that, in Glasgow, even before 11 September, only 65.2 per cent of the city's male working-age population was in employment, according to her figures. Does the minister accept that 24,000 jobs will therefore have to be created just for resident Glaswegian males in order to reach average employment levels throughout Scotland? Given that 40,000 Scots are now working in the booming Irish republic, what measures will the Executive take to stimulate demand—specifically in Glasgow and not just in the wider Scottish economy—to prevent the loss of skilled workers and secure increased job opportunities and enhance urban regeneration?

The minister is aware that Scotland represents more than 30 per cent of the British landmass. What extra investment will be spent in Britain in the next 10 years and what percentage of that will be spent in Scotland?

Will the member take an intervention?

Do Mr Mundell and the Conservatives agree that we cannot possibly address the issue of Scotland's underlying economic problems, when the coalition is so divided? In their brief for this debate the Liberal Democrats say that they "are the only party committed to investing in future prosperity through prioritising resources for skills and learning." and that they "will reform Labour red tape". Surely the coalition cannot work while it is split on such key issues. Would Mr Mundell agree with a statement of the Liberals that "Small nations have an advantage in this fast moving world as they can be light on their feet and are more cohesive." Surely that is an argument for independence.

Will the member take an intervention?

I acknowledge the member's concern regarding expenditure on research and development. However, does she accept the comment in The Scotsman of 5 December that there has been an "evident and continuing deterioration" in research and development spending in recent years? Does she accept that under the current Government, research and development expenditure is falling?

Will the member give way?

I thank the member for letting me in. In the year to June 2001, manufacturing output grew for the UK economy while it fell by 4.8 per cent in Scotland. Does not the member accept that that shows that the failed policies of the Tories have been equalled—indeed exceeded—by the failed policies of new Labour?

Will the member give way?

Mr Scott is not being transparent either.

Mr Scott is not being transparent. He accused the minister of not responding, but did not allow her an opportunity to explain.

On 14 June 2001, the minister said in reply to a question that I put: "In the most recent quarter, Scotland's growth rate had accelerated to a higher rate than that of the UK. Sadly, the Irish rate is heading in the opposite direction."— [ Official Report , 14 June 2001; c 1646.]  Does the minister accept the Executive's statistics, which show that gross domestic product growth in the UK is 2.5 per cent, whereas it is 0.3 per cent in Scotland? A growth rate of 0.3 per cent is one twentieth of the Republic of Ireland's 6.1 per cent growth rate. Does she accept that the Executive has completely failed to deliver growth in Scotland? Whether one uses the model of Finland, Norway or Ireland, she must accept that small, independent countries are doing well.

I applaud the minister's candour in addressing this hitherto neglected issue. The minister spoke in her statement of local authorities establishing joint-working protocols. What cognisance has been taken of projects such as the Blackford Brae project—a partnership run by Barnardo's in co-operation with City of Edinburgh Council—which has been highly successful in returning children with emotional or behavioural difficulties to mainstream schools and helping them to achieve academic success? Although that project does not deal exclusively with looked-after children, it shows the expertise that exists in the voluntary sector in relation to vulnerable children. What can the Executive learn from the voluntary sector and what plans does the Executive have to involve the sector in the education of looked-after children?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether former Scottish Homes tenants in Glasgow will be eligible for the same repair and improvement grants as will be made available to all former council tenants who bought their home under the right-to-buy legislation should the proposed Glasgow housing stock transfer take place. (S1O-4329)

Is the minister aware of the recent study by Hilland Ritchie Consultants for the Thistle Housing Association? Its report stated: "The repair and improvement grants currently have a backlog of 3 years and the Council are not in a position to confirm when grants would be available. The grant budget has been constantly reduced, in 1995/96 there was a budget of £24m, this years budget is £6.3m." The report also stated: "Many of the owners would be eligible for Care and Repair Grants but ... the waiting list is about 4 years. The reality for elderly owners ... is that Care and Repair Grants are not available." What will the minister do to reverse that disgraceful situation?

My intervention does not relate to the point that the minister is making, but I am concerned to ensure that he touches on the issue that I raised about automatic registration and deregistration. Will he consider that point, as an accurate electoral register could enhance turnout?

The member is being too nice.

Will the member take an intervention?

Is Mr Rumbles saying that, before 1999, when the Liberal Democrats opposed holding joint elections, they were expressing contempt for the electorate? Was that humbug? Does he agree with Keir Bloomer, the chief executive of Clackmannanshhire Council, who said in a submission to the Local Government Committee that "The existence of separate elected bodies with their own democratic mandates at national and local levels is a critical component of any pluralist society"?

It is important that the local government ballot dominates local government elections. The difficulty in holding two elections on the same day is that the focus would depend on the perceived electoral chances of the political parties in specific contests. For example, if the seat were a marginal parliamentary seat, one would expect at least one of the parties to put more emphasis on the parliamentary issues to the detriment of local issues. In the same situation, a party with no chance of winning the parliamentary seat might put more effort into the local election. That would cause a distortion of approach across Scotland. In the previous debate on the subject, Iain Smith talked about the Liberal Democrats continuing to campaign on local issues. Perhaps he could clarify what local issues the Liberal Democrats campaigned on in Ayrshire, where the party contested none of the 92 seats.  There are great differences in the way in which people vote in different elections that are held on the same day. However, that is often because different political parties contest different elections. As was mentioned in our previous debate on the subject, in 1999 the Liberal Democrats and the Conservatives both failed to contest half the seats and Labour failed to contest 262 of them. That demonstrates the fact that the range of candidates in local elections is often completely different from that in other elections. Iain Smith said that he did not want this debate to rehash previous debates—although he went on to rehash what he had said previously—so I will raise a new issue: voter registration. Tommy Sheridan mentioned automatic registration, which is an important issue that the Executive should consider. However, there should also be automatic deregistration. Of the 608 registered voters in the Tarfside Oval multistorey flats in Pollok, only 118 voted in the Westminster election. However, further examination showed that, although only four of the flats have no registered voters, 66 of them were empty before the election. In some two or three-roomed flats, five surnames are registered. Particularly in areas where there is a high turnover of residents, percentage turnout is often far higher than the archaic registration system suggests that it is. We should address that. Civic education must also be addressed. Furthermore, when examining anomalous voting patterns, we should remember that tactical voting might have a part to play. I support a lot of what Trish Godman said and agree that the minister has a duty to clarify some issues. In the previous debate on the subject, the minister said: "if Scottish Parliament and local government elections are to take place on the same day, the same rules should apply to both sets of elections". The SNP agrees with that. The minister continued: "The Secretary of State for Scotland has indicated that, in relation to future Scottish Parliament elections, it would be sensible to legislate for pilots and provisions similar to those that we are discussing today. The Electoral Commission, together with the Scottish Executive and others, is considering the matter. The issue is not a matter for this Parliament".— [ Official Report , 22 November 2001; c 4089.]  I hope that, in summing up, the minister will clarify when the matter will be discussed so that there is some coherence on the issue of pilot schemes. The last thing that we want is to have to wait many years between the successful implementation of the pilots for local government elections and their implementation for Scottish Parliament elections. As has been said, that would make a nonsense of the elections, as people would have to vote in two different places.  We think that the elections should be kept separate because we want electors to be able to vote on the records of individual councillors, not just on party-political issues. As the Deputy Presiding Officer is indicating that I should wind up, I will do so.

Can Iain Smith tell us how many seats the Liberal Democrats have won since the general election?

Will the member give way?

I thank the member for his praise, which is always welcome. First, does he accept the fact that his argument does not hold for an STV system, in which people compete not only on a party basis but with each other? Secondly, PR enhances turnout. For example, this week at the Portuguese council elections, which used PR, there was a 65 per cent turnout—higher than that at the UK general election.

Anyone who has read "A Cornucopia of Pharmacopeia" by Father George Rutler of New York cannot fail to be impressed by the phenomenal contribution that Scots have made to the betterment of mankind. Although our nation's population accounts for less than one in 1,200 of the Earth's population, 11 per cent of all Nobel prizes have been awarded to Scots. Indeed, throughout modern history, Scots have contributed significantly to all areas of human development, not least in medicine. Scottish medical pioneers include William Leishman, who perfected the typhoid vaccine; William Smellie, the founder of modern obstetrics; John Hunter, the father of comparative anatomy; John Macleod, the discoverer of insulin; Joseph Lister, the founder of antiseptic medicine; James Young Simpson, who was the first to use chloroform in surgery; and Alexander Fleming, who discovered penicillin. There have been many others. A nation that has contributed so much to—and still has a worldwide reputation in—medicine now has an Executive that, in the provision of cancer services, has failed to deliver the level of treatment that is so desperately needed by vulnerable patients. In the recently published "Cancer in Scotland: Action for Change",  Mr Chisholm's predecessor reiterates the Scottish Executive mantra that cancer "is one of our three top priorities". One can only wonder at the provision of services that are not among the top three priorities of this coalition. The Beatson is in crisis. Years of mismanagement, malaise and underfunding have demoralised staff, delayed treatment and adversely affected the prognosis for patients. A critical shortage of specialist consultants, a catastrophic reduction from £8.5 million to £3.5 million in medical equipment expenditure in Glasgow during new Labour's first three years in office and an abysmally low expenditure on cytotoxic drugs cannot fail to impact adversely on patient outcomes. An action plan has been produced, although it is of the closing-the-stable-door-after-the-horse-has-bolted type. We hope that it will be successful, but will it be enough? Will it be enough to overcome the loss of crucial staff, the erosion of confidence or the years of underinvestment? How long will it be before waiting lists fall, waiting times are  reduced and the Beatson becomes a centre of excellence in which Europe's finest oncologists aspire to work? Is the minister even able to hint at a time scale and the implications for patients in the intervening period? Ministers ignored warnings in April that the centre was lurching from crisis to crisis and sat complacently on their hands. Can they be trusted to turn around the situation now? If Glasgow is to lose its title of Europe's cancer capital, the Beatson must be turned around. However, that can only be done by listening to staff at all levels, examining the reasons why four consultants have resigned and acting swiftly to reverse the conditions that forced them to resign in such dramatic fashion. At the Victoria infirmary, 500 women who have received breast cancer treatment might have to wait a year for scheduled checks. As one patient, Karen Jenkins, said in The  Herald yesterday after being told that she would have to wait until January 2003: "I am very worried. I fear that some of the people involved could die if they have to wait as long as me". Dr Iain McColl, a general practitioner at Thornliebank health centre, said in the same newspaper the previous day: "Patients with early treatable cancers are having surgery delayed beyond the curative stage. As a nation we cannot allow this to continue." We must recruit specialists now, even if that means paying increased salaries and expediting equipment purchases, the construction of the new Beatson centre and the provision of more beds. Specialists must be headhunted, even if only on short-term contracts, to ensure that patients do not die because of the crisis in cancer services. Money cannot be the problem. We should remember that in the past financial year, at a time when the service was crying out for funding, we had the obscenity of a £143 million underspend in the NHS in Scotland. Lack of financial resources can no longer be considered an adequate excuse. The Executive has paid only lip service to cancer prevention. By its own admission, smoking is "by far the largest preventable cause of cancer". However, smoking rates among the disadvantaged have barely fallen and the Scottish Executive has not only failed to deliver on its own promise in "Making it Work Together" to "ban tobacco advertising by the end of 1999" but appears to be less than supportive—to put it mildly—of my colleague Nicola Sturgeon's bill on the issue. Hugh Henry is very interested in the issue of tobacco advertising, and I hope that his addition to the ministerial team will mean that that  issue will be addressed. If the Executive is serious about reducing the incidence of cancer, backing the Tobacco Advertising and Promotion (Scotland) Bill would mean that it could deliver—albeit it two, or more, years late—on at least one pledge.

The problem is that young people nowadays do not respect their elders, are ill-mannered and do not respect property. That is what Plato said some 2,500 years ago, and some members appear to be reiterating that view today. Like most other people, I do not accept that analysis. The SNP amendment is an important extension to the motion lodged by the Minister for Education and Young People. It does nothing to detract from the vital issues raised in her motion, but it provides greater depth to the issue at hand. It calls on the Executive to examine more fully the roots of youth offending, particularly in areas that need "to be seen in the wider context of social justice". According to NCH Scotland, the majority of children referred to the youth justice system are from families on low incomes and in public housing provision, and have suffered some form of adversity in life. Children who commit crime tend to be victims of crime themselves. A 1995 report by the Prince's Trust found that 75 per cent of young people who had been convicted of serious offences and assaults and were held in secure care or custody had been victims of physical, sexual or emotional abuse. In 2000, the Scottish Prison Service published "Young People in Custody in Scotland", which found that 49 per cent of young female prisoners were victims of some form of abuse. That link is further seen in the referral process between police and the reporter. A recent study by Lothian and Borders police showed that three quarters of referrals associated youth offending with child abuse or domestic violence. Suffering from abuse can often entice a young person to run away. The latest research published by the Aberlour Childcare Trust showed that 43 per cent of young people who run away overnight place themselves at risk of rough sleeping or staying with a stranger, using dangerous survival strategies and suffering physical and/or sexual assault. The situation for those who run for longer intensifies. Those youths often resort to begging, stealing and drug use. They may suffer abuse through prostitution and sexual exploitation, and may find themselves becoming actively involved with crime. Sometimes, they may even commit an offence with the sole purpose of being arrested so  that they can have a warm, dry place to sleep for the night. Any concept of self-esteem will thus be shattered for such individuals. We need to pay attention to the red flags that signal that a youth is at risk of becoming involved in offending or persistent offending. They include poor school performance, truancy, substance abuse, mental health problems, lack of family stability, gang affiliation and running away. We all recognise that early prevention is the key, but our ability to provide correct services for youths at risk—whether that is crisis accommodation, individual or family counselling, tutoring or substance abuse treatment—is equally important. It is vital that resources are available and accessible in all areas and that there are qualified workers. That point brings me to the crisis in the social work sector. There is a serious problem in recruiting and retaining social workers who are essential to run youth projects, as Irene McGugan pointed out and the minister acknowledged. On 13 November, The Herald reported social work staff shortages. The number of children and family staff in Glasgow City Council is 17 per cent down. Sixty per cent of staff in Edinburgh are aged 50 or over. In North Lanarkshire, where there are 170 staff, there are 25 vacancies. In Inverclyde, there are15 vacancies out of a social worker complement of 93. Those vacancies exist at the same time as child and family social workers are experiencing an ever-increasing work load. Child protection inquiries are increasing, more children and young persons are being looked after by local authorities and referrals to the children's hearing system have increased by close to 50 per cent in six years. Even when vacancies are not an issue, increased work loads are difficult to meet and case loads are difficult to manage. However, if the crisis is given the attention that it deserves, those difficulties will be lessened. Romy Langland, the former head of children and family services for Glasgow City Council social work department, who is currently with the Aberlour Child Care Trust, said: "The Executive has not addressed how the manpower can be supplied at a time when recruitment, and retention, is a national problem." If we are to secure a better future for our youth—in particular, for the most vulnerable, who may be drawn into offending—staffing and retention of social work staff must be prioritised.

I am taking the place of my colleague Tricia Marwick,  who is unwell and unable to be with us. I welcome the minister's statement as the first of what I hope will be many statements in the coming months. Ministerial statements are becoming as rare as snow on Christmas day. I remind the minister that it is the convention for ministers to supply their statements to the SNP and Tory front benches an hour, not 20 minutes, before they are made. In evidence to the Local Government Committee on 13 March, George Black, director of finance at Glasgow City Council, stated: "in real terms, the level of aggregate external finance for Glasgow at the end of 2003-04 will be about £50 million less than in 1996-97. The impact of that reduction is well documented. We have had council tax increases of 19 per cent, 22 per cent and 9.4 per cent in the three years since 1996-97."

I am leading up to one. Mr Black went on to say: "We have had about 4,500 council job losses. We had what is commonly termed a double whammy; we had to reduce services while dramatically increasing council tax."—[ Official Report , Local Government Committee , 13 March 2001; c 1665.] Mr Black also made it clear that, over the same period, Glasgow's share of aggregate external finance had fallen from 15.7 per cent to 14.7 per cent of the Scottish total.

Given that Glasgow contains 79 per cent of Scotland's most disadvantaged enumeration districts and more than half of the poorest 10 per cent of districts, will the minister say by what date he will have restored fully, in real terms, Glasgow's level of aggregate external finance to what it was before new Labour came to power, excluding new burdens? Mr Kerr made welcome comments on the additional flexibility that councils will have over their finances to allow them to govern, rather than to administer locally, thus reducing the high level of hypothecation and ring fencing that the Executive imposed. However, is not it the case that most of the new moneys that the minister announced are to fund personal and nursing care and the transfer to councils of responsibility for people in residential care homes and nursing homes? Will the minister confirm that the rate poundage that he announced will still mean that Scotland has a rate poundage that is 10 per cent higher than that in England? Finally, will Mr Kerr advise us  why specific grants for social work training, mental illness, and in-service training for teachers will remain at a standstill from 2002-03 to 2003-04, forcing local authorities to pick up the tab for those areas?

I mentioned it.

Does the Executive believe that any national strategy for Gypsy Travellers should be centrally funded, or does it expect funding to be provided by local authorities?

I said in my speech that the money that is required should come directly from the Scottish Executive, and I gave reasons for that. The committee's recommendation 24 says: " Consideration should be given by local authorities to ring-fencing or top-slicing resources for specific initiatives and interventions".  The report itself—not just the Executive—makes that point.

First of all, I would like to thank the minister, who at least applauded my speech—perhaps she does not agree with Michael McMahon. In any debate there will be a difference of opinion. I was trying to say that, although social justice is important, social responsibility is important too, and society in general is not always to blame for the specific problems suffered by specific groups. Often, such problems are due to  the way of life that those groups choose. I was trying to say that for certain individual children, the model that most people in society adopt is probably the best. If my children were bullied at school, it would not be an excuse for them to opt out of the educational system—they might have to go to another school or deal with the issue in school. That is the point that I was trying to make.

It is detailed in the SPICe report.

I am pleased to be able to speak in the debate. In the report of the Equal Opportunities Committee, several observations and recommendations are made as a result of evidence that was taken. Although evidence was taken between 23 May 2000 and 19 June 2001, it appears to me that some aspects of the report are built on sand. For example, as the Scottish Parliament information centre research note  admits, there appear to be no accurate figures on the number of Travellers in Scotland—population estimates range from 3,000 to 23,000—or on their broad geographic distribution. It is surprising that numbers are not better known, as a considerable proportion of Travellers are settled. Similarly, although we have a snapshot of the appallingly low life expectancy of Travellers in Argyll, volume 2 of the report admits a lack of accurate health statistics for Travellers in the United Kingdom as a whole and in Scotland alone. Without detailed research, how can we act appropriately to reverse apparently very high levels of mortality? Research that suggests that Gypsy Travellers in Argyll, for example, can expect to live only two thirds as long as non-Travellers—which Kate MacLean touched on—is cause for alarm. In addition, accidents, suicides and chronic health problems are generally more prevalent among Gypsy Travellers than they are among non-Travellers. Those conditions are worsened by a lack of access to health education, not to mention health care facilities where Travellers might experience discrimination—in the form of negative attitudes and refusal of treatment—by GPs and their staff. Accessibility to community care—a service that, in theory, is provided by local authorities—is also lacking in some instances. In practice, many Gypsy Travellers experience extended delays in the assessment and implementation of their requests as a result of yet another example of discrimination. It is clear that there exists an abundance of discrimination and a deficit of cultural awareness and knowledge about Gypsy Travellers and other travelling peoples. That is further reflected in how some members of the police force treat their communities. The behaviour of some of the police towards Gypsy Travellers is characterised by frequent site visits for checks on vehicles and property; an obvious lack of awareness of Gypsy Traveller lifestyles; an ignorance of the rights that those people hold; and intimidating and threatening attitudes during evictions. Recommendation 34 states: "Racial diversity strategies and training materials for the police and other relevant bodies in the criminal justice system should include reference to Gypsy Travellers as a separate ethnic group." The thrust of that recommendation is synonymous with that of most of the other recommendations in the report, which refer to travelling people as a distinct ethnic group and assign terminology to refer to all Traveller groups as Gypsy Travellers, although Travellers may fall into distinct cultural groups, such as new age travellers, Gypsy  Travellers and show and fairground travellers. It might be easier for us to lump all Travellers together under one label, but doing so diminishes the identity and culture of each group. To classify all Travellers as an ethnic group when it appears that not all wish to be so labelled looks merely expedient and ignores specific needs and community desires. For example, in Elizabeth Jordan's report, "Traveller Pupils and Scottish Schools", show and fairground travellers reject the term "ethnic" and describe themselves as a business community. Just because those who discriminate against Travellers consider them all to be the same, it does not mean that the Parliament should. On mobility, we have a snapshot from Save the Children's 1996 report, "The Right to Roam: Travellers in Scotland 1995/96", but no detailed information to enable us to deal comprehensively with the requirements of differing Traveller groups and their children. Such research is urgently needed and I urge the Scottish Executive to undertake it. Education is a key issue that deserves attention. I have said that a lack of cultural awareness contributes heavily to the exclusion of Gypsy Traveller children, but other factors also contribute to that exclusion. We have information on Traveller education that makes it clear that 80 per cent of children in those communities fail to attend secondary school and that 59 per cent fail to attend primary schools. No information is provided on how many Travellers participate in further or higher education. Although low participation is undoubtedly exacerbated by bullying and discrimination, does anyone seriously doubt that the most significant factor is frequent travel from area to area and the inevitable disruption to education that that causes? A fortnight ago, a report in The Herald made it clear that moving school is a traumatic event for any child, who will lose six to nine months of educational attainment on average as a result. I remember moving school when I was eight and how distressed I was to leave my old home and friends. How much more difficult must it be if that occurs regularly in a child's life? Therefore, we must question the practicality of eliminating educational exclusion from semi-nomadic communities and whether such lifestyles are appropriate in serving the educational needs of Traveller children in the 21 st century. My concern is that the rights of individual children to an equal opportunity to reach their full potential would be inevitably compromised if—

Yes.

What is important is giving all children an equal opportunity in life. Society is not always to blame. The lifestyle choice of Traveller parents has an influence on their children's education. Pursuing such a lifestyle may be the parents' choice, but it may not necessarily be the choice of their children.

Perhaps the member should listen to the rest of my speech. However, I certainly think that children do not have a choice of lifestyle. Even if all the recommendations of the Equal Opportunities Committee report are implemented, and even with good will and full co-operation from all public service agencies, a modern education and the social and cultural enrichment that it provides may remain out of reach for many Traveller children, as will choices for them in later life. I quote from Elizabeth Jordan's report: "You spend all night reorganising your groups and teaching plans so that they won't be isolated [in the class], and then they don't come back! It gets a bit frustrating, but it's just their culture. We're used to it here." Those are the words of a teacher in a school with regular comings and goings of Gypsy Travellers. They sum up the reality for schools that try to accommodate Traveller children. Although society must reach out to this disadvantaged group, it is important that Travellers work with schools and respect their circumstances and need for communication and co-operation. Flexibility is stressed in the Equal Opportunities Committee report and is a two-way street. The Equal Opportunities Committee report makes six recommendations on education, ranging from assistance in purchasing school uniforms to providing "community rooms or portacabins on sites to facilitate educational provision". Although the former recommendation will undoubtedly assist social inclusion, the latter  appears to do the opposite by discouraging attendance at mainstream schools. As with so many aspects of the report, the themes of inclusion and autonomy seem to run counter to each other. The committee appeared to acknowledge that by stressing "the importance of a place to stay as a basis of service provision, that having no address (or an address that was identified as Gypsy Traveller site accommodation) may lead to subsequent refusal or difficulties in accessing service provision and a general disenfranchisement from the democratic process". In that respect, recommendation 21, which appears to encourage adult learning and the dissemination of information, is welcome. With a full census of the numbers of Gypsy Travellers, new age travellers and show and fairground travellers, important recommendations on matters such as consultation and participation in local authority decision making and public service provision can be made, not least the provision of resources for community development and capacity building. However, the Scottish Executive would have to issue clear guidance on the provision of funding to, and by, local authorities. If Travellers move across local authority boundaries, the local authority of origin might be reluctant to continue to provide resources. Furthermore, in such cases, health boards might feel that responsibility would no longer be theirs. Distinct budgets might also impact more directly and unfairly on individual councils. As a result, it might be more effective to allocate moneys directly on behalf of Traveller communities through local authorities and health boards. Public service provision could then follow mobile Travellers in a more joined-up way. To achieve that, the Scottish Executive would have to provide resources directly and ring-fence them for no other group. Ring-fencing of funding by local authorities, as suggested by recommendation 24, would be too inflexible. It would lead to budget overspend and underspend as Travellers moved from area to area and populations fluctuated. A centrally directed budget for all Traveller public services would allow more focused, long-term and seamless provision for this disadvantaged group. It would also make it easier for mobile and nomadic Travellers to liaise with and consult public service agencies in a more co-ordinated way rather than having to do so with all eight police boards, 15 health boards and 29 mainland local authorities. That would allow the development of long-term relationships and partnerships. A particular concern is the condition of so many of the sites that are available to Gypsy and other  Travellers. A lack of basic amenities in this day and age is unacceptable and discourages a more settled and socially inclusive lifestyle. As a result, recommendations on enhancing site facilities are to be commended. We particularly welcome the provision of play facilities and barrier-free and adapted amenity chalets. However, we should explore the possibility of community ownership, tenant management co-operatives and registered social landlords. Although there are many laudable recommendations in the Equal Opportunities Committee report, there is no suggested timetable for action. Surely if real progress is to be made, SMART—specific, measurable, attainable, realistic and timed—goals must be set. However, we appeared to have been presented with more of a wish list than a set of achievable objectives. There is also an absence of information on whether the Traveller communities across Scotland agree with some or all of the report's recommendations. As a result, it would be useful if the minister could advise us which recommendations the Executive partly or fully accepts and of the timetable for consultation, participation and delivery.

Many members have eulogised Jackie Baillie today. So why was she sacked? Was it because she failed in her job or was it because she failed to back Jack McConnell? Was it incompetence or cronyism?

What did the Tories do to eliminate inequality and poverty in the 18 years in which they were in office?

Will Jackie Baillie give way?

I do not remember Jackie Baillie taking any interventions previously.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Mr Harding said that he could not take interventions because he had only four minutes for his speech. He took only three minutes and seven seconds. Is it appropriate for a member to under-use his time and still complain that he has no time for interventions?

Will the member give way?

Go on, give way.

I congratulate Iain Gray on his appointment as the Scottish Parliament's new Minister for Social Justice—our third in 14 months—and I wish him every success in his new post. I also congratulate Margaret Curran on coming through this week's ministerial cull unscathed. It hardly seems a year since we debated the previous social justice annual report. Last year, we had two hours for the debate; this year, we have only 90 minutes. Given the importance of the subject matter and the detail of the report, I hope that the issue will be given sufficient time next year so that it can be debated adequately.

I did not read my speech from last year, although I did read the speeches of some of my colleagues, so I am sure that I will not repeat myself. This year, I will focus on a specific subject.  I had intended to compliment the minister in a couple of minutes, but perhaps I will not bother doing so now. Considering the paucity of Labour's record in social justice, perhaps, to spare the Executive's blushes, we will have even less time to debate the subject next year. Obviously, it is not possible in seven minutes to detail our concerns regarding each of the 29 social justice milestones, so I will focus on only a couple of them before turning to the SNP amendment. I was pleased to hear the minister's comments on disaggregation, which I focused on in last year's debate. The SNP analysis, which used the same sources of data as the Executive, showed that the coalition is failing to deliver on 13 social justice milestones, needs to raise its game or has made data unavailable on nine milestones and has succeeded on only three. Milestones 4, 21 and 28 are the successes, although one could argue that, in terms of quality and full-time provision of child care, more could be achieved. Regrettably for Scotland, the Executive is failing with regard to milestones 2, 3, 6, 7, 9, 10, 12, 14, 16, 19, 24, 27 and 29. That fact, no doubt, contributed to the political demise of Mr Gray's predecessor who, until a couple of minutes ago, was sitting behind him like Banquo's ghost. A recent study showed that Scotland has the third highest level of child poverty in the European Union, after Portugal and Greece. In Scotland, 30 per cent of our children—more than 320,000 children—live in poverty. That is a sad indictment of successive Conservative and Labour Governments. Child poverty is the denial of a child's basic right to an adequate standard of living. It is a multi-dimensional problem, which starts with inadequate family income. Its exclusionary effects, in terms of access to resources and participation in everyday activities, means that children who grow up in poverty are likely to do less well in school, to have fewer recreational, social and cultural activities and to be more at risk from crime and anti-social behaviour than other children. The life circumstances of children have a powerful influence on how they will live in the future. That impacts fundamentally on the life chances of the succeeding generation. Overcoming child poverty is a fundamental challenge to our society. What happens to the poorest, most vulnerable and least secure children reflects on us all. Opportunities for children depend not only on social provision, but on family, local community and the wider economic and social environment. However, ending income poverty is not enough on its own to ensure decent opportunities for all children. How far child poverty can be ended and  children's opportunities improved without confronting the broader inequalities in society is open to question. Nevertheless, by focusing on the income and opportunities of the poorest, a start can be made on reducing child poverty. The impact to date shows that much more remains to be done if the goal of ending child poverty in a generation is to be achieved. Last year, the Scottish Executive moved the baseline for measuring poverty back from 1997-98, as set out in their 1999 document, to 1996-97. That was a feeble attempt to allow the Executive to claim that there had been a fall in child poverty, when the percentage had, in effect, remained static since the early 1990s. Through a series of written questions, the SNP has gathered information from the Executive, including figures that are often inconsistent. Perhaps as a consequence of such questions being asked, the disclosure of figures has stopped. According to the Executive—and as confirmed by the Scottish Parliament information centre—the number of children, pensioners or people of working age will not be divulged until the accuracy of the figures can be ascertained. Thus, the veracity of ministerial comments earlier in the debate must be open to doubt. Milestone 12, on rough sleeping, is an area in which Labour has also failed. Prevention of rough sleeping is an area of particular concern. In some areas, half or more of the number of rough sleepers are under 24, yet the Scottish Executive is helpless to enact legislation to restore benefits to 16 and 17-year-olds, because that matter is reserved to Westminster. All charities for the homeless agree that that would be a significant element in preventing much of the homelessness and, ultimately, rough sleeping among young people. The UK Government's approach to poverty is to concentrate resources on the poor by means of greater selectivity and means testing. Increased support is then rapidly withdrawn from those with more earnings, which extends the poverty trap. There is a danger of creating a situation in which poor families with no pay or low pay receive modest levels of income support or working families tax credit and other similar families receive little state support. If the condition of the poorest families is improved, but not that of families on lower than average incomes, the incentive to self-help may decline. Thus, while the new Labour approach emphasises responsibility and the desirability of more self-reliance, its selective strategy might be undermining what it seeks to encourage. A way forward would be for the UK Government to disregard council tax benefit and housing benefit when calculating working families tax credit.  It is obvious that the policies that are necessary to reduce child poverty revolve mainly round reserved areas. For Scotland to eliminate poverty at the earliest opportunity, independence is the key. As everyone in the chamber knows, the most prosperous nations in Europe are small and independent. They range from Iceland, with fewer than a quarter of a million people, to Sweden, with fewer than 9 million. Austria, Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Ireland, Luxembourg, Norway, Sweden and Switzerland have only a fraction of our poverty, a higher standard of living and greater social inclusion. Let us consider Finland—the current favourite of Wendy Alexander—as a model for Scotland. Finland emerged from the Russian empire in 1919 with a largely uneducated, poor and mainly rural population, most of whom lived at subsistence level. Over the next 80 years, it transformed itself. The level of poverty in Finland is a fifth of that in Scotland and its economy is competitive in world markets. In Nokia, Finland has a company with global recognition. Unlike ourselves, Finland is a full partner in the European Union. Does anyone seriously believe that that could or would have been achieved had Finland remained part of Russia—something that members of other parties would no doubt have argued for had they been politicians in Europe at that time? Since the Boston tea party, umpteen nations have gained independence from Britain. Is the minister aware of any nations that now wish to surrender that independence? No, because only independent nations—as Scotland should, and will, be—have the power that is necessary to transform their societies quickly through direct decision making and the harnessing of human and material resources, focusing directly on the elimination of poverty while securing economic and cultural renewal. By supporting the SNP amendment, members will acknowledge that independence will set Scotland on its true path to a stable and inclusive future for all. I move amendment S1M-2492.3, to leave out from "the progress" to end and insert: "the slow progress in addressing social inequality and believes that the Parliament could best succeed in driving forward the social justice agenda if it had the powers of an independent sovereign state."

The individual who is now the First Minister stated publicly that Labour brought in the electoral system for this Parliament to create a glass ceiling whereby the SNP would need 50 per cent of the vote to get a majority, rather than the 40 per cent that we would need under first past the post. Does Scott Barrie accept that the reason Scotland was made one constituency for European elections was to wipe out the left in his own party, rather than to introduce more democratic accountability?

I point out to Peter Peacock and Iain Smith that, had it not been for SNP electoral strength, there would have been no push for a Scottish Parliament in the first place. The Liberal Democrats certainly moved  nowhere towards that in their generations in the political wilderness. As for Keith Harding's outlandish comment that we could change and improve local government simply by changing boundaries, I wonder how that would improve the Tories' standing in Pollok constituency, where they got 109 votes at the last election. Keith Harding is totally ignorant of PR. He said that AMS would improve the ward-member link, but councillors in Highland Council would have to represent the entire area. Iain Smith should talk to his party members about PR, because when Trish Godman and I visited Shetland and East Renfrewshire, the Liberal Democrat group in Shetland supported first past the post, but in East Renfrewshire the Liberal Democrats supported the alternative vote system, not even AV-plus. The Liberal Democrats should get their act together before they lecture everybody else. I will talk specifically about the STV system of PR, which is about choice. As I pointed out in an intervention on Peter Peacock during the debate on the Scottish Local Government (Elections) Bill last week, in much of Scotland voters have no opportunity to cast a vote at council level, let alone a vote for their favoured party, or to see their party of choice elected. STV would increase voter choice between candidates, not just parties, and ensure that no vote was wasted. Electors would not have to consider tactical voting or supporting a candidate of dubious merit out of party loyalty, or be fatalist and assume that no one else could win the ward. Voters would not be stuck with a candidate who had been deselected from another area and selected unopposed in a smoke-filled room. The electorate, not the selectorate, would have the power. Over time, voters would weed out less-effective members, and improve the calibre of councillors and the quality of representation. There would be no hiding behind party colours, because the merit of individual representatives would be the most significant factor in peoples' being elected. STV would eliminate the anomaly that ensures that Labour wins overall control of Aberdeen City Council and City of Edinburgh Council on 32 per cent of the vote, while the SNP in Midlothian gains 31 per cent of the vote and no councillors. It is not acceptable for a party to retain sole political control when it has lost the support of more than two-thirds of the electorate. STV would mean an end to discrimination against parties that appeal across the social and geographic spectrum and in favour of those that, traditionally, have a much narrower focus and a relatively concentrated vote. Parties that are unable to contest every seat under the current system would be more able to select and field candidates, which would lead to fewer uncontested wards or wards in which voters have  no opportunity to vote for their favoured party. Political parties would gain strength where they are under-represented and would benefit through an improvement in the quality of councillors where they are already successful. Hung councils would inject more co-operation and innovation into local government. Committee and executive meetings would be more meaningful, as policy would be debated and analysed thoroughly, and more councillors would be involved in the decision-making process, leading ultimately to better service delivery. As for the ward-member link, each elector would have an equal link to several councillors and a choice of whom they wished to advocate for them. I find it amusing that some Labour councillors who squeal about ward links have often contested three or four different wards in the musical chairs game of deselection and reselection that is continually played. With the boundary changes that took place in 1995 and again in 1999, and as the result of retirements, the ward link is already tenuous. Indeed, as one Labour MSP confided, the ward link often consists of changing the election date and the name of the ward on a leaflet every three or four years. In East Renfrewshire, there are 20 wards. Under STV there might be four wards, each with five members; each ward would cover a quarter of the council area. The council area mirrors exactly the Eastwood constituency. To argue that the link would be lost is to argue, in effect, that the constituency MSP—cuddly Ken Macintosh—cannot represent a constituency four times the size of a ward under STV. If Labour really cared about member-constituency links, it would not have abolished Scotland's European constituencies to make Scotland one giant constituency. Mr Jack McConnell cannot buckle under the forces of Jurassic Labour, the voice of vested interest: people who care not a jot for local democracy, but who wish to save their political skins; councillors who lack the self-confidence to stand against political opponents and colleagues without the odds being heavily stacked in their favour; and MSPs who rely on the nomemklatura of councillors, their spouses, relatives and acolytes for selection. And what about the Lib Dems? On 9 September 2000, Donald Gorrie said in The Scotsman : "If we don't get it"— electoral reform on the statute book before the next council elections in 2002— "I believe most of my colleagues and the party in general would decide that the coalition should stop. This is my personal guess." That optimism was sadly misplaced.  We should remind Labour members that if we had had PR at Westminster before 1979, we would have avoided 18 years of Tory misrule. Introducing the single transferable vote is best for democracy, best for local government and best for Scotland. The time for change is now.

Neither will you.

Will the member give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Two minutes and three seconds into my speech yesterday, you chided me for not addressing the motion. We are now six minutes into Mr Peacock's speech—any chance of him talking about PR in local government?

They say that revenge is a dish best served cold. It certainly appears to us that, in assembling his new team, revenge has been the central motive of a First Minister who seems to have a taste for the bizarre. We thought that it was a wind-up when we saw some of the names that were coming forward, but it was very much reality. Perhaps some of us will wake up tomorrow and find that it is not true, but I doubt it. The cull of McLeishites means that some of those Caribbean holidays and trips to Ikea have been cancelled in favour of more time spent with their families. However, we should not shed too many tears for those who are now saying farewell to their ministerial cars and quaking at the thought of finding themselves in that new Labour gulag, the Subordinate Legislation Committee. [Laughter.]

My colleague made her point of order short—just like the meetings of the Subordinate Legislation Committee, the last of which, I understand, lasted approximately seven minutes. Of course, we should not be too sympathetic to Mr McLeish's acolytes. Where were they when he was being put through the wringer a few weeks ago? It is quite clear that, with one or two notable exceptions, they were invisible in the media, and they have paid the price. What we have today is not a new ministerial team but a fan club. Perhaps the names of the McConnellites were just put in a hat and drawn out at random. After today, 29 Labour MSPs will have served on the Executive.

I know that you do not possess it, Presiding Officer, but patience is indeed a virtue. I am just coming to that point. The announcement of Mr Gray's appointment as Minister for Social Justice sees Mr Gray coming off the subs bench as Susan Deacon joins the ranks of the ministerial undead. To us, it appears that it was a panic appointment. Perhaps it was to balance the east of Scotland purge that saw three ministers and a deputy minister from Lothian given the boot and only Malcolm Chisholm promoted. In his speech, Mr Eulogy talked about how wonderful Mr Gray was and said that he was widely respected. Well, Mr Gray is widely respected, but if he was so great why was he not Jack McConnell's first choice for the post? If it is not about cronyism, why ditch Jackie Baillie? Does the First Minister believe that she failed? We certainly believe that she failed. We believe that she failed to eliminate rough sleeping, to invest properly in housing, to reduce child poverty significantly and to spend £122 million of her budget last year. If she has failed, what will Iain Gray do differently? Will the policies be different, or will it just be the same old same old, albeit with a new face who is a devotee of the First Minister? What we have today is not so much the best team for Scotland as the best team for Jack. The  Executive takes the Forrest Gump approach to politics. We look at who is going to be in the Executive next, but we just never know which one we are going to get.

In the manner of Euan Robson, formally moved.  Motion moved,  As an amendment to motion S1M-2488 in the name of Mr Jack McConnell (Appointment of Ministers), leave out "Iain Gray".— [Mr Kenneth Gibson.]

Does the minister agree that community regeneration should be community-led, not least in arts and culture? What role will KickStart play in that process?

What about the Scottish National Party?

Surely people have to make different choices. In the most recent local government elections, there was no SNP candidate in 165 wards, no Labour candidate in 262 wards, no Conservative candidate in 499 wards and no Liberal Democrat candidate in 612 wards. Surely there must be a difference in the percentages between parliamentary and local government election simply because political parties do not contest all the wards.

The bill is a missed opportunity. As McIntosh suggested, local government elections should be held at the mid-point between Scottish Parliament elections, with the current three-year cycle changing to a four-year one from 2005. Elections scheduled for next year should go ahead to ensure that voters have an opportunity to vote not on national issues, but on local ones. We understand that the majority of councils have said that they want a delay to the elections that are due to be held in 2003, but turkeys do not necessarily want an early Christmas and, of course, most of those councils are Lib-Lab local authorities. Tricia Marwick mentioned that, in 1999, Scottish voters were told of the two Scottish parliamentary ballots but not of the council ballots. Indeed, this year the farce was intensified, as Scottish voters heard from television adverts that there were going to be council elections this year, whereas in fact the adverts were referring to English council elections. That shows how abysmal advice to the public has been; it also shows how important it is that we in Scotland have control over broadcasting in this country. The consultation on the bill was announced in a reply to a written question—before that question had been published—on the day of the Anniesland by-election and after that day's close of parliamentary business. I do not believe that the consultation has been as genuine, open and alive as the minister said it was in evidence to the Local Government Committee. One issue that has not been talked about—although Tommy Sheridan touched on it—is the habit of voting. In many countries in Europe—in fact, in almost all countries in Europe—people vote more frequently than people in this country do. They also have greater turnouts and PR. There is a habit of voting whereby people get used to voting every year or every second year. However, if we put all our eggs into one basket and have an election once in a blue moon, people  are turned off by voting and do not believe that their votes count.

Perhaps PR is the solution, so it is regrettable that Iain Smith's party distances itself from that. I take issue with paragraph 22 of the Local Government Committee's 14 th report in 2001, which states: "while the McIntosh report favoured mid-term elections, the Kerley report, on balance, called for local government elections to be held on the same day as those for the Scottish Parliament." Sylvia Jackson reiterated that point. In fact, the Kerley report did nothing of the sort. Paragraph 100 of the Kerley report, which Tricia Marwick referred to, states: "higher turnout could not be claimed as an increased democratic mandate for local government: it would not bring additional voters to the polls because of their involvement in local government issues. In fact, coincident elections would tend to reduce the electorate's focus on local government issues. Conversely, separate elections would ensure that local government issues are at the heart of local government elections: this seems to us an essential part of democracy and democratic renewal." The report was produced by an all-party working group, the majority of whose members were, I understand, Labour party or former Labour party members. Liberal members did not dissent from that view so I wonder what has changed their minds since the report was published. The bill is not about strengthening local government, as Peter Peacock claimed. He should have been honest: it is about strengthening the Liberal and Labour parties in local government. The Labour and Liberal parties have undergone a road-to-Damascus change in attitude on the issue. I remember, as will Tommy Sheridan and Bill Aitken, that all parties in Glasgow City Council supported holding elections on separate days. The change came about because the Labour party thinks it can gain an advantage. That scion of the Labour movement and well-known conviction politician, Peter Peacock, has contempt for Labour and Liberal voters. He obviously believes that they are not committed to local government and are less likely to get out of their scratchers to vote—which disadvantages the electoral prospects of the coalition parties—unless council elections are tagged on to parliamentary elections. I do not share the contempt shown by Peter Peacock and the Liberal and Labour parties  towards Labour and Liberal voters, who I believe are just as likely to come out to vote regardless of when the election is held. People are more likely to vote if the negative, victory-of-fear-over-hope style of the 1999 campaign is not repeated. Of course, when the Liberals made their submission to the McIntosh commission, they did not advocate waiting until the experience of the 1999 elections. I wonder what other recommendations of the McIntosh commission, apart from those relating to PR, they have distanced themselves from. I say to Donald Gorrie that, if he intends to wind up for the Liberal Democrats in a debate as important as this one, it would help if he turned up for more than 10 minutes of that debate. A number of important issues have been touched on. Sandra White talked about improving access for disabled people.

So speaks the invisible man. None of us managed to see him. Colin Campbell argued that mid-term elections, rather than coincident local government and Scottish Parliament elections, would maximise turnout. We agree with him. I am sorry that my old sparring partner Frank McAveety was unable to attend this morning's debate.

No doubt he is busy pledging himself in turn to each of this afternoon's candidates for the office of First Minister.

Bill Butler wants to increase turnout. Could that be achieved by introducing proportional representation? That would ensure that every council ward is likely to be contested in Scotland. At the previous elections, 59 wards had only one candidate.

What did they campaign on?

Those are their national issues.

Will the member give way?

Scotland is only one constituency.

What guidance has the Scottish Executive issued to local authorities on the funding of agencies that provide debt advice?

I have two points. First, the information that we have been given refers to prevalence per 100,000 population, which makes the incidence appear considerably greater than the minister has indicated. Secondly, does the  Executive have any information on why the incidence of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy appears to have increased substantially during the past 20 years? For example, there has been an increase from 17 cases to 228 cases among males. Is that because of improved diagnosis or because the disease is becoming more prevalent? Do we have any data on that?

I thank Johann Lamont for securing this debate today. I pay tribute to the sterling work of the Cardiomyopathy Association and to Christine Grahame, who has also done excellent work in this area. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is an excessive thickening of the heart muscle without obvious cause. It can strike those who have inherited the  dominant gene, even though only minor symptoms have been evident, and lead to tragic and sudden death. As has been said, an investigation such as an ECG might not always detect the condition. No cure has been found and, of course, further research is needed. It is important that we consider the findings of research that has already been done, not only in the UK, but overseas. The disease is fairly new in that it has been known about only for the past half century. However, a substantial number of families are affected by it. The SPICe briefing says that 16,800 people in Scotland have died of the disease in the past 20 years. Interestingly, 9,500 of those have been women. Perhaps research has to be done into why women are 20 to 25 per cent more likely to suffer from the disease than men are. It is important that we have screening not only for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, but for familial hypercholesterolemia, which is another disease of the heart that can strike suddenly with fatal consequences. It has a high prevalence among the south Asian population. Cathy Jamieson hit the nail on the head when she talked about insurance. The Association of British Insurers does not ask those with a family history to take a genetic test but it requires to be informed if a test has been taken. In that way, the benefits of life insurance might be denied to the families of sufferers. All family members must be screened if those with the condition are to receive treatment. That circle has to be squared if we are to provide justice for families who suffer from the illness. I pay tribute again to Johann Lamont for securing this important debate and for the way in which she spoke about the family in her constituency and others who suffered tragic deaths because of the disease. I hope that the Executive can provide some answers to help to prevent future deaths from this awful condition.

I am pleased that the minister has now decided to join my campaign to reverse Scotland's declining birth rate. I wish her all the very best over the coming months and years. This afternoon, I will speak very much as the vice-convener of the cross-party group on survivors of childhood sexual abuse. Sexual abuse is obviously an horrific experience for any child. However, not only might the psychological and emotional consequences of sexual abuse in childhood have a profound impact on the victim at the time, they might significantly damage his or her ability to function successfully in society throughout adulthood, seriously impair personal relationships and in many cases result in serious mental health problems. Sexual abuse that is perpetrated during the formative years of childhood undoubtedly has the most traumatic impact of all mental health difficulties in terms of severity and duration. Alongside struggling to achieve and maintain meaningful relationships, victims can frequently demonstrate individual emotional and psychological conflicts through repeated self-harm and other detrimental behaviour such as drug and alcohol abuse. Other victims present themselves to the psychiatric services with less dramatic but still prolonged mental illness. It is well documented that a high proportion of people committing suicide suffered sexual abuse in childhood. Such factors combine to pose major problems for mental health services, most obviously in relation to admission rates to hospitals. A recent study conducted on behalf of Fife Health Board, "A Safe Place to Talk", identified that 10 to 20 per cent of all admissions of both sexes to psychiatric units involved a history of serious sexual abuse. The same study showed a disturbing fourfold increase in the referral of victims of sexual abuse  to psychological services in Fife over a three-year period. Furthermore, it provided an assessment of the views of service providers and users that highlighted the many limitations of existing psychiatric services, especially in the prevention of repeat admissions by sufferers. Statutory and non-statutory systematic evaluation of the services on offer highlighted patchy distribution, lack of co-ordinated resource planning and absence of shared best practice. In addition, given the identified inconsistencies in service provision, all participants agreed on the need for increased awareness and well-constructed training programmes for service providers. The study's conclusions highlighted the need to develop a variety of services to address individual needs ranging, for example, from specialist psychotherapy to respite in crisis. The greatest emphasis was placed on the need to recognise the essential role played by non-statutory organisations within a properly co-ordinated national strategy. Two recent studies conducted in Glasgow and Lothian produced broadly similar findings. Given the shortcomings that the Fife study referred to, if replicated throughout the country, such a scenario would imply that many thousands of sufferers are being denied the treatment and support that they justly deserve. Also, by interpretation, statutory services are already heavily involved with the problem, but in a way that does not resolve the deep-seated trauma endured by victims. Evidence from across Scotland indicates that the level of funding of non-statutory services varies considerably from area to area and might be short term. That may impede the continued development of such services or, at worst, threaten their very survival. In changing mental health law, we must fully recognise the extent of the problem of childhood sexual abuse within a national framework for mental health, given the victims' reliance on psychiatric services. That recognition should be reflected centrally in the requirement of psychiatric and social services in each locality to incorporate within their mental health strategies the development of services that are specifically designed to tackle the mental health problems of people who have suffered childhood sexual abuse. Each area should also clearly identify the level of funding that will be apportioned to develop non-statutory services on a continuing basis. In developing services, we must pay attention to the need for a range of services and, given the particular difficulties of sexual abuse victims, the ability to respond with flexibility and sensitivity at a local level. The policy statement rightly comments on  protection of mentally disordered adults, although it does not mention victims of childhood sexual abuse. I hope that in future discussions about mental health—and, indeed, when the bill comes before Parliament—that matter will be addressed. I also hope that the deputy minister will respond to that in his summing-up speech.

On 25 October, The Scotsman had four separate articles relating to the murder of Surjit Singh Chhokar,  following the Lord Advocate's statement in Parliament the previous day. One of the headlines was: "Catalogue of incompetence and failure". Another was: "Chhokar family broken-hearted by verdict". Like so many families who have come to Scotland in search of a better life, the Chhokars would have had faith in their new country, in its institutions and in its sense of justice and fair play. That faith has been sadly betrayed. Surjit Singh Chhokar was a victim not just of those who dealt the fatal blow, but of a system that failed to provide justice for the family by ensuring that the perpetrators of this heinous crime were punished. Indeed, Mr Darshan Singh Chhokar said of the reports by Dr Raj Jandoo and Sir Anthony Campbell QC: "They offer me and my family nothing whatsoever. I do not understand how they can say these things about us when my son is dead". The family has waited years for justice, yet insult has been added to injury in the reports. The Lord Advocate stated today that the reports are "robust, comprehensive and authoritative". However, there have been concerns throughout that the inquiries were carried out in private, and that Surjit's sister and parents did not give evidence to Dr Jandoo. Individuals who were criticised in the Jandoo report have not been given an appropriate opportunity to put forward their views. Given the controversy surrounding the appalling way in which the Crown Office handled the Chhokar case, surely the only way to ensure the best possible resolution and the clearest way forward is to hold a public inquiry, as demanded not only by the CRE and the STUC but—significantly—by the Chhokar family themselves. As Shona Robison said, public scrutiny is vital. The Lawrence inquiry was an important catalyst in creating a real climate for change and for society to face up to racism in its midst. The issue of resources has been raised—rightly—by a number of members. Although additional moneys will be invested by the Crown Office, it is important that resources keep up with demands on the service. As has been said by Jim Keegan and today by Roseanna Cunningham, if fiscals are not to be placed under unbearable pressure, and if there are not to be year-on-year increases in cases marked "No proceedings", resources must not simply be increased above the rate of inflation, but increased so that the system works well and not just adequately. Victims and witnesses must be able to see that justice is being  done and the system must have time to treat people with sensitivity, humanity and justice.

Will the member give way?

I genuinely believe the point that I made, as does Shelter Scotland. As Paul Martin knows full well, the reason why there was no orderly queue of other local authorities is that Glasgow has more empty housing units than anywhere else in Scotland. Glasgow participated in the scheme because, although it would not make a direct profit, the cost of having its houses refurbished would in effect be paid for by the Home Office. I genuinely believe that it was a cynical manoeuvre by Glasgow City Council to get those houses refurbished and that there was no further thought for the community or the asylum seekers.

As Robert Brown said, during time for reflection before the debate Mrs Ravinder Kaur Nijjar of the Scottish Inter-Faith Council made a heartfelt plea for us to "tear down ... walls" and barriers between faiths. Although Mrs Nijjar was talking about an  increase in inter-faith tension since 11 September, she could just as well have been talking about asylum seekers. How will barriers be broken down by the introduction of the modern equivalent of the yellow star—the smart card? How will barriers be lowered by the forcing of asylum seekers into detention—sorry, accommodation—centres? How will barriers be removed by the exclusion of asylum seekers from communities?

I will certainly not withdraw my remark. As we all know, the yellow star has been used throughout the centuries, not just during the second world war, to identify some ethnic minorities or people of different religions—as in Afghanistan now. Asylum seekers are being targeted because they will have to carry an identity card that is being imposed on no one else. I stand by my comment.

The smart card is a way of identifying a group in society.

As I have already taken an intervention from Mr McAveety, I will continue.

Mr McAveety's sanctimoniousness is noted—he could have been a contender. From the start, new Labour policy has been flawed. Johann Lamont wanted to praise Glasgow City Council, but it is clear that she has a short memory, because Glasgow City Council saw asylum seekers as a commodity—it saw them as a resource to seek money from the Westminster Government that it could use to refurbish some of its poorer accommodation. I had a meeting at the  SNP party conference at which Shelter Scotland agreed with me that Glasgow City Council exploited cynically a vulnerable group of people.

No. I have already taken interventions from members opposite. No effort was made to prepare the host community. No effort was made to prepare the asylum seekers. No effort was made to prepare local services. Where were the translation facilities? Where were the trained social workers who would have been able to deal sensitively with issues? They were not there. It was only when difficulties emerged in recent months that Glasgow City Council started to change its tune. Mistakes were made and now, belatedly, effort has been made to rectify them. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton made an important point about clustering of asylum seekers. I spoke to one of the local housing managers in my constituency who said that 40 flats are available in Tarfside Oval for asylum seekers. I suggested that it would be helpful if those 40 families came from the same culture, faith or ethnic group. That would allow them to communicate with each other in their new environment. When the first 27 families arrived, they were found to speak 21 different languages. Clearly, those folk had been bundled on a bus and sent north without any care or interest having been taken in them. Imagine how we would feel if we were put somewhere in eastern Europe, Africa, the middle east or wherever and were unable to communicate with the people next door in a strange society. That issue must be addressed. Asylum seekers need respect. They must be treated with dignity. The abolition of the voucher system must take place now. Why must we wait until August 2002 for the system to be abolished? The Executive has invested in language classes, education of locals and the integration of locals and asylum refugee groups. However, London Labour seeks to introduce accommodation centres to house asylum seekers away from society. It is also seeking to refuse support to those who do not attend what it calls its induction course. The Scottish Executive is providing asylum seekers with legal facilities and a law centre. However, London Labour has no plans to introduce similar measures and is intent on continuing its detention policy. The Scottish Executive is also providing hundreds of thousands of pounds of funding to support communities in Glasgow, in particular communities that host refugees and asylum seekers. London Labour continues to see the solution to the asylum issue as being to hold asylum seekers in the  aforementioned accommodation centres. What should we do? We should compile a list of immigration specialists in Scotland who can provide legal advice to asylum seekers. We should ensure that a standard of Scottish legal advice is provided to asylum seekers that will allow help under legal aid in filling in forms and in representation at immigration and nationality directorate interviews. We should provide an independent interpretation service. We must call for the immigration and nationality directorate to set up a base in Scotland so that asylum seekers from Glasgow need not travel to Liverpool for interviews. We must call for a review of the system of detention. Last, but not least, we should extend from 14 to 28 days the time that is available to successful asylum seekers for obtaining accommodation. Asylum seekers must be treated with respect, dignity and humanity.

I note that the minister welcomes the package of measures that Mr Blunkett introduced. However, was the minister consulted on those measures, and if so, when?

As we all know, life emerged in the seas. In the past half billion years, there have been six major extinctions on the planet. The best known is the extinction of the dinosaurs some 65 million years ago, which wiped out some 65 per cent of all species on the planet. One of my great concerns is that we are now going through the seventh great extinction, which is being inflicted on the planet by humanity itself. We have already exterminated many species on the planet, such as the Caspian tiger,  the great auk and the Caribbean monk seal. I would not want to see other species of sea mammal, fish or coral go the same way. In bringing the debate to the chamber, Tavish Scott has done the Parliament a tremendous service and I welcome what he said. However, we must look beyond Scotland as far as possible—not just to Westminster or even to Europe. If we are to ensure a long-term, sustainable future, not just for our children and grandchildren, but for ourselves as a species over the centuries and millennia, it is important to have an international regulation of life in the sea that is as tight as possible. Over recent weeks, many of us have been absolutely captivated by the TV series, "The Blue Planet", which has been a fascinating exposé of life in the deeper oceans. Although half of all known species are in the sea, 97 per cent of the planet's biosphere is below the surface of the waves. As Nora Radcliffe said, it is interesting to note how much of that has still to be explored. Stewart Stevenson made a significant comment about the lungs, kidneys and bowels of the planet. I am concerned that industrial waste, sewage and munitions have been poured willy-nilly into the seas over many years. Indeed, Beaufort's dyke contains huge quantities of munitions from the second world war and since. The entire Minch area should be designated as a particularly sensitive sea area by the International Maritime Organisation. I would like to hear the minister's view on that. Humanity can work together to clean up the seas and ensure a sustainable future. The hole in the ozone layer has been reduced by strict action on chlorofluorocarbons, and that should be a model for international co-operation. We will not be held in high regard centuries from now if we bequeath not only a devastated landmass, but polluted seas denuded of the fish that we hope will be the main food source for our species over future generations, as well as providing so much life for the rest of the planet. I whole-heartedly support Tavish Scott's motion.

In his opening speech, the minister mentioned exposure to beauty. I wonder whether he was influenced by having that vision of male beauty, Frank McAveety, sitting so close behind him. Alex Johnstone talked about a bottom-up strategy. I wonder whether it was such a bottom-up strategy that influenced the name of the drama that is mentioned in the Tory amendment. Several members have welcomed the cultural strategy, but they have also said that they have not read it. I find that somewhat perplexing. However, I have looked at it. The aim of key priority 2.2 is, apparently, "To conserve, present and promote interest in and knowledge of Scotland's history and cultural heritage", but does anyone actually believe that? Despite the gobbledegook of the Executive's glossy report, we all know that even basic Scottish history remains untaught in Scottish schools. A nation of inventors, medical pioneers, explorers, economists—

I am talking about Scotland's  contribution to world civilisation. I have two children at school and I can assure Mr Stone that they are not taught Scottish history and culture. When will Scotland be taught about its flourishing medieval Baltic trade? When will Scots children be taught about the tobacco lords or about the contribution of the Scottish cotton and sugar trades, warts and all? When will they be taught about the development of political economy, geology and conservation? Will Scottish children ever be taught across the board about the Scottish enlightenment? Scottish children must know where we are from before they can know where we are going. Many children grow up in depressed parts of Scotland and do not know that 120 years ago Scotland was the richest nation per capita on earth. They think that we are a wee, backward country on the edge of Europe that has never contributed anything to the world. We have contributed much and still have much to offer.

I have only three minutes, otherwise I would give way. Under successive unionist Governments, Scotland has slipped from first to 20 th position in the world economy. In economic terms, we are now more like Arbroath than Celtic, which Frank McAveety would no doubt like us to be. If Scotland is ever to reach its full cultural and economic potential, it must be taught everything about its culture. Perhaps certain unionist politicians do not want Scotland to reach its full economic and cultural potential because it might then be realised that Scotland can best be served by being an independent state. To digress somewhat, I want to mention Glasgow museums, about which there was a members' business debate not long ago. Glasgow's museums are much more popular with the public than are Edinburgh's museums, but they are clearly discriminated against in terms of funding. Glasgow's museums—such as the Burrell collection—are of national importance. I hope that the minister will explain why they are discriminated against and what he intends to do about giving Glasgow its fair share of resources for its museums.

Say that again.

Will the minister confirm that the full central heating installation programme will be delivered in Glasgow, regardless of how tenants vote in a ballot on stock transfer, and that elderly people in Glasgow will have to wait no longer than pensioners in other parts of Scotland for the completion of the programme?

To ask the Scottish Executive what resources it will make available to Glasgow City Council for investment in housing should tenants vote against housing stock transfer. (S1O-3929)

Does the minister agree that, regardless of whether stock transfer takes place, housing debt in Glasgow should be dealt with by the Treasury? Will she press the Chancellor of the Exchequer for debt transfer without preconditions? Does she accept that tenants will see failure to do so as little more than a crude attempt at blackmail and proof that their interests come second to new Labour dogma?

Will the member accept an intervention?

I thank the member for having the grace to give way, unlike the minister. Does the member agree that it is important that children are allowed to be children? Our children go to school at a much younger age than do the children of many of our continental neighbours. Is it not somewhat shocking that five and six-year-olds are being burdened with homework when they should be out playing on their bikes, climbing trees, picking brambles and enjoying themselves? The issue is not just about school and sport; it is about children having the ability and time to play, enjoy themselves and be children.

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister take an intervention?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to restore the overall level of improvement and repair grants to what it was in 1996-97. (S1O-3864)

I thank the minister for her amusing, if rather predictable, reply. Does the minister accept that by slashing grants to the private sector from £71 million to £41 million since new Labour came to power, her party has shown contempt for people in private housing, particularly people in pre-war housing, which is desperately in need of refurbishment?

I thank the Presiding Officer for accepting my plea. I do not consider nursing to be a female profession but a caring profession. Although there are many things I would like to say, I will touch only on one issue that has not been mentioned. The safety of nursing staff has caused great concern to a number of members over the past few months. Assaults on nursing staff have been accelerating each year. Every day, nurses go into hospitals thinking not only about caring for and treating patients—or even making a cup of tea for a distressed relative—but wondering whether they  will be physically or verbally abused during their shift. In this day and age, it is totally unacceptable that nurses have to go through that. I urge the minister to address that issue in his response.

As a consensus politician—which I clearly am—I found myself in a rising panic at the prospect of talking  about the bill. Every speaker chipped away more and more of the fairly puny speech that I had prepared. I hope that I can do as well as Bill Aitken did in speaking from the heart. Both Bill Aitken and Trish Godman made excellent speeches and—as I did not give her the credit that she believes she deserves for her contributions to the voluntary sector—I will mention the good work that Tricia Marwick has done on this issue. We have arrived at a consensus on the bill. Trish Godman highlighted issues that still have to be resolved, but I think that we are heading in the right direction, especially on whether the minister will or will not intervene. I am pleased that the minister has decided to amend the bill on the issue that appears, according to the report, to have caused the most irritation to local authorities—that of all constituent authorities having to consent to allow moneys to be carried forward. During the evidence gathering on the bill, Michael McMahon put his finger on a number of important points when interrogating Firemaster Williams—although "questioning" is perhaps a better word than "interrogating". Michael McMahon expressed concern over how fire brigades would be able to fund themselves in the long term if there were more call-outs than the budget allowed for. The fact that he focused on that point will be significant in ensuring that resources are made available to address that issue. None of us wants there to be too many phone calls and not enough fire engines, or for firemasters to be concerned about moving a fire engine from one local authority area to another because of a restriction on budgets. I am therefore pleased that the minister has addressed that issue. Some members have expressed concerns about the pension fund. In the Local Government Committee, it was said: "There is a difference of about £22 million between the amount that the Scottish fire service needs this year and the amount that it needs in 2005 to cover pensions. The service's total annual budget is just over £200 million." Clearly, that issue will have to be addressed. As Trish Godman said, we were told that "there is no equivalent ministerial control over the general fund for councils or their housing revenue account."—[ Official Report , Local Government Committee , 4 September 2001; c 2135-37.] I thought that it was brave of her to throw a hand grenade at the minister on that issue. As Michael McMahon pointed out, one of the great things about devolution is the fact that the Parliament can introduce bills that are very specific—although I am sure that independence will enable us to do that to a greater extent and over a wider range of subjects. The bill could not  have been introduced at Westminster and the fact that it has been introduced now is a great testament to the system in which we work. I realise that the issue that the bill deals with may not be of much interest to the massed ranks in the press gallery or the hordes of people in the public gallery. I also realise that this debate may not be as thrilling as some that we have had. Nevertheless, it is essential and I look forward to participating—perhaps in a more involved way—in such debates in the future.

Will the minister explain why, at a time when the social justice budget has an underspend of £122 million, the contribution of the Scottish Executive to the central heating initiative over the next three years has been slashed from £108 million to £96 million? Those figures are confirmed in her answer to written parliamentary question S1W-17377.

It is not, but it is better than £718 million.

Jamie Stone spoke like a man with some ambition.

That is likely to be unfulfilled.  The first thought that springs to mind is: come back, Jack McConnell, all is forgiven. At least he kept the underspend down to a relatively modest £430 million. It is sad that the Minister for Finance and Local Government gave us not only arrogance and a whiff of complacency, but the stench of incompetence. Last year, Henry McLeish's crown prince was Deputy Minister for Justice and did not realise that sex offender legislation fell within his remit. Now he does not appear to realise that good financial husbandry falls within his remit. I would like the minister to tell me which local authorities he would allow to have a 31 per cent underspend. I was astonished that Peter Peacock did not leap in and correct the Minister for Finance and Local Government when he made something of a faux pas and said that the education budget was £3 billion. That is correct for local authorities, but according to the written answer that the minister gave Mike Watson on 19 September, the Executive's education budget is £280 million and the underspend is £86.5 million. Before the minister signs off the answers that his civil servants write for him, he might want to read them.

The minister has used 45 seconds of my four-minute speech. He can sit down now.

The SNP in Falkirk was in control for less than six weeks before the end of the financial year—

Throughout the course of the Parliament, we have had spin, spin and more spin from the Executive. One example is KickStart—a wonderful innovation, which the SNP supported and which was launched on 4 November 2000 to help disadvantaged community organisations to access community fund moneys. The money was announced in November and reannounced in February. No money had been spent 10 months after the launch. Further, by the end of the financial year, nothing had been spent on the central heating initiative that was announced on 15 September 2000. As for new housing partnerships, I am sure that we all recall the balls-up that Wendy Alexander made when she went to Glasgow in May 2000 and announced £12 million of new money that had been announced 15 months earlier and of which not a penny had been spent. The underspend in the social justice budget has more than doubled from £57 million in 1999-2000 to £122 million in 2000-01. The culprit in both instances was the new housing partnerships fund. Because of the massive slippage to which the minister alluded in the housing stock transfer programme, that fund cannot meet its targets. That problem is compounded by the fact that the wholesale debt relief that the new housing partnerships budget was designed to facilitate has been available in England from the Treasury as a matter of course. We have been informed only now that our Executive intends to take the same route, which will mean that money that was allocated to be spent on NHPs has probably never been needed. How long has the Executive known that Treasury money was available? If it did not know, what was it playing at? If it did know, why did not it spend that money on Scotland's crumbling housing stock? Vast sums of money have not been spent. Today, Glasgow City Council was reported to be at odds with the Executive on stock transfer. Why is money not being spent in that city, which is desperate for investment? On the day when the Executive's own press release says that homelessness applications have risen again, we are considering a £122 million—18 per cent—underspend in the social justice budget. The number of households in temporary accommodation, including those with children, has also risen. The Executive trips over itself to provide good news but is not so desperate to spend where money is needed. Jack McConnell sounded a fanfare when a measly £12 million was allocated for additional repairs to school buildings, yet £86.5 million is sloshing around, much of  which could have been put into that programme. As for the complacent statements of "Oh yeah, a wee bit of end-year flexibility, blah, blah, blah," why are there underspends of 0.2 per cent in the audit budget and of 31 per cent in education and an overspend of 1.7 per cent in forestry? The minister may laugh, but several organisations and departments are desperate for resources and are not receiving the money that they need. It is about time that the Executive did what it said in its press release. It must improve its financial planning and management. That should have been done already for this financial year. The Executive should get its act together.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. When Mr Fitzpatrick was a member of Pollok SNP, he often heard that phraseology being used.

rose—

He just liked the uniform.

Where is John Young?

I warmly welcome this debate and agree wholeheartedly with much of the minister's speech and the objectives and aims that she outlined. Increasingly, the Parliament has recognised the third sector's invaluable contribution to Scottish life. Without it, how could we begin to tackle poverty, regenerate communities or promote active citizenship? How could society function with any real quality of life and how could we replace volunteers' ceaseless commitment and their massive contribution to the Scottish economy and society? In previous debates, I have been impressed by the commitment that members across the chamber have shown to the voluntary sector and by their clear understanding of it. Those members include Cathy Peattie, Des McNulty, Robert Brown, Jamie McGrigor, Keith Raffan and George Reid, to name but a few. Although the SNP is broadly supportive of the Executive, I wish to raise a number of points. Across the voluntary sector, the issue of funding is often at the forefront. Financial support must not come at a price. Organisations must retain their  independence without big brother looking over their shoulder. No doubt Bill Aitken will cover that point when he speaks to his amendment, which specifically addresses the issue. I am pleased that the minister has offered reassurances with regard to the Scottish compact on that matter. The public must have equality of access to independent advice and information services and the Executive must ensure an even spread of services across Scotland. As the minister will acknowledge, much essential work has still to be done in that area if social exclusion is to be tackled effectively. The Government and Executive should consider the impact on the voluntary sector when implementing legislation or making changes in benefits. For example, 77 per cent of Department of Social Services forms advise people to go to citizens advice bureaux for help and advice, but little thought has been given to the increased work load that such a suggestion places on CABx. The need for additional resources in such circumstances is often ignored. It should not be. The minister mentioned additional resources for the voluntary sector. The SNP welcomes funding increases even if, in some cases, they simply fill a gap left by cuts elsewhere, but as the minister is aware and as the SNP amendment points out, a number of concerns about statutory funding procedure remain. At last week's Social Justice Committee meeting, the SCVO raised a number of matters that our amendment touches on. For example, high transaction costs might arise when a voluntary organisation applies to a variety of funding schemes that all have different timetables, compliance regimes and application forms. The smaller the organisation, the greater the hurdle to overcome. The Executive has acknowledged that problem in the past and, in the voluntary sector debate on 23 September 1999, the former Minister for Communities, Wendy Alexander, committed the Executive to resolving the issue. However, it has not been entirely resolved. Consistency among public sector funders is essential if we are to have a true measure of how effective an organisation is. Standardised audit procedures, funding periods and inflation costings would go a long way to ensuring that consistency. Pilotitis—a great word for "Call My Bluff" aficionados—is the issue that causes most irritation to voluntary organisations and was touched on in the minister's opening speech. Pilotitis is the funding of exciting and innovative new projects that are unproven, which soak up resources that are urgently required by established organisations that provide vital services, yet which often struggle to survive, let  alone excite or innovate. A more appropriate balance must be struck to ensure that new projects can emerge without cannibalising money that is required by existing, successful ventures. One hopes that the power of community initiative that is to be introduced will secure leadership in the public sector in relation to the cocktail approach to funding, which can, on occasion, cause voluntary organisations to divert considerable staff resources and time to the accessing of funds. I trust that the minister will address that issue in her winding-up speech. The lack of agreement on the scope and rationale of core funding impacts on any voluntary organisation. Having read our amendment, the minister touched on that matter in her speech. Placing emphasis on projects rather than organisations can lead to instability in the sector, making it more difficult to make long-term plans and leading to a detrimental effect on morale, staff retention and the day-to-day running of an organisation. Direct funding is a nettle that has been grasped south of the border, yet it is still to receive proper consideration in Scotland. Robert Brown may want to elaborate on that issue in his speech, in the context of citizens advice bureaux. The SNP agrees with the SCVO that more thought should be given to the changing children's services fund—the specific role of which we hope the Executive will soon clarify—to the development of child care services and to community empowerment funding. As the minister will know, an uneasy feeling remains throughout the voluntary sector that real empowerment is still elusive, with resources remaining tightly controlled by the Executive through local government, social inclusion partnerships and so on. I am sure that the minister will agree that that issue continues to vex the voluntary sector, which seeks genuine community empowerment. I am pleased that the secondment that the minister mentioned will work towards addressing that. Members will recall a rather heated debate last spring on the phasing-out of relief from water and sewerage charges for charitable bodies. During that debate, members from all parties raised concerns regarding the impact that that could have not only on small and fragile organisations, but on larger groupings that may have to cut staff as a result. In May, the Executive announced the postponement of the phasing-in of its policy until April 2002, but 40 per cent of reliefs will be withdrawn in the first year, which will cause hardship. Even if the Executive introduced a new, more targeted relief scheme, as suggested by the Transport and the Environment Committee, the overall loss to the sector would be considerable. We could argue about statistics—for example, the  withdrawal of relief would cost the voluntary sector £4 million in the first year according to the Deputy Minister for the Environment and Rural Development, compared with £54 million according to my colleague Richard Lochhead—but whoever is right, the withdrawal of relief will have an adverse impact, which could outweigh the additional support that the minister has recently allocated to the sector. Therefore, the SNP endorses the view of the Scottish Charity Law Review Commission that Scottish charities should receive at least 80 per cent relief from water and sewerage charges. The SNP also shares concerns about the role of the national lottery. The UK Government is funding more and more statutory bodies via that route, which will undoubtedly impact on the voluntary sector; for example, the community fund is set to decline. Although the lottery is a reserved matter, the Parliament must develop a role in holding national lottery funding distribution bodies to account. I am sure that this afternoon's debate will be positive. However, everything is not quite rosy and much remains to be done. I urge members to acknowledge that fact by supporting the amendment in my name. I move amendment S1M-2245.1, to leave out from "the commitment" to end and insert:  "additional direct funding, while acknowledging that many issues such as transaction costs, consistency, sustainability, leadership, core and statutory funding and the adverse impact of planned phased removal of water reliefs from charitable organisations remain to be addressed."

Will the member take an intervention?

I congratulate Mary Scanlon on securing the debate and on her excellent contribution and I thank her for the compliment that she paid me in her presentation. For every 100 girls born in the United Kingdom, 106 boys are born. The reason for that is that through the ages men have always been physiologically much weaker than women. It is regrettable that we develop much more slowly and suffer higher levels of mortality and morbidity. Men have lower life expectancies not just in this country, but across the world. Of course matters would be much improved if males just occasionally took greater responsibility for their health. That is why this debate—and Mary Scanlon's raising of the issues related to it—is so important. The issue must be not only highlighted, but directly addressed. Lifestyle is key, but so are having regular check-ups and overcoming the frank embarrassment of seeing a health professional and discussing often intimate matters. Women manage to do it and if men were as brave as they like to think they are, they would have the courage to do it too. As Dr Richard Simpson pointed out, one of the  concerns about prostate cancer is that men often do not want to know and leave it far too late. Many of us males have an ostrich mentality when it comes to our health. I am one of the worst people in that respect. Despite the fact that I was once a medical representative, I suffer from a phobia about people in white coats. Luckily, Richard Simpson rarely wears his in the chamber, so I do not feel too intimidated by him.

Only when we are together in private, Dr Simpson. Mary Scanlon touched on the important issue of suicide. One in four men under the age of 35 who die in Scotland, die by their own hand. That is an astonishing figure, given the fact that many people who die under the age of 35 die from causes such as road accidents and cot deaths. The figure for females under 35 is still high, but it is lower than that for men: one in nine. The issue of suicide has to be addressed. We should think about mental health as well as physical health. We must examine our culture and the macho ethos in which many of us were brought up. My father, for example, had a wonderful set of teeth. He was famous for his set of teeth when he was young. No doubt, my mother married him partly because of his beautiful, shiny, gleaming white teeth. However, he did not take care of them and by the time he reached his late 30s his teeth had started to deteriorate. When he was in his 40s, his teeth fell out, but he did not care, because in the group that he socialised with it was not an issue. Perhaps he took the attitude that he was married and did not have to look nice for the girls. A fatalistic attitude has been taken towards health, particularly in the west of Scotland among men who care deeply for the health of their children, parents, spouses and partners. If anything, the debate must highlight to men how fragile they are and how important it is to take off the macho mask that many of them wear and have the courage to have a check-up and look after themselves. Men do not have to change their lifestyles absolutely. They do not have to take up a macrobiotic diet suddenly, as Alex Johnstone has been thinking of doing, but they must alter their lifestyles and, as has been suggested, have an MOT at least occasionally. If men do not take responsibility for their health, little progress will be made, despite the best intentions of the Executive and the Parliament.

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it plans to have with local authorities regarding possible changes to local authority boundaries. (S1O-3733)

I thank the minister for his reply. Ken Macintosh has said in his local paper that he will accept the incorporation of Eastwood into Glasgow "over his dead body". The leaders of Glasgow City Council and South Lanarkshire Council have responded in similar fashion. Given those comments and the comments we have heard from members across the party divide today, will the minister exclude the possibility of boundary changes from the cities review? Will he further acknowledge that the real issue is, as Andrew Welsh said, the level of funding? According to the finance director of Glasgow City Council, George Black, in evidence to the Local Government Committee, funding for Glasgow has fallen by £50 million since new Labour came to power.

To ask the First Minister what the remit of the Minister for Social Justice will be in relation to asylum seekers. (S1F-1228)

The SNP welcomes the decision to give responsibility for asylum seekers to the Minister for Social Justice, even if the remit is constrained by the limited powers that have been devolved. Does the First Minister agree that asylum seekers could be dealt with more humanely and with greater sensitivity if the Executive had full responsibility for their plight?  Will the First Minister inform the chamber of the Executive's views on the demeaning voucher system, incarceration of asylum seekers in the detention centre at Dungavel and the flawed dispersal scheme?

Does the minister recognise that the social justice agenda would be more deliverable if the Minister for Finance and Local Government had not  recently cut—sorry, I meant to say realigned—£35 million from the social justice budget?

I congratulate Annabel Goldie on securing this debate. I also congratulate her and Elaine Smith on their passionate and informed speeches. As I have a mother, a wife and a daughter, this issue is important to me, just as it is important to many of the women who are here today. I find it bizarre that in the 21 st century, although this disease has been known for many decades—indeed, for many generations—we do not appear to have advanced very far in its diagnosis or treatment. It is extremely important not only that more resources are dedicated to research into this painful condition, but that we examine how other societies deal with it. Unfortunately, it is clear that many women are ignorant of endometriosis. As has been said, many may have the disease but be unaware of it. As is the case in many debates that we have on health issues, it is clear that there is no joined-up thinking on this matter. There is no doubt that there are examples of best practice in Scotland and further afield, but we do not appear to be able to bring them together to ensure that the maximum number of women in Scotland benefit. If we can put a man on the moon, surely we must be able to find a cause and a cure for endometriosis. Perhaps we have not been looking hard enough. I regret the fact that Scotland's first Parliament has not shown as much interest in endometriosis as it should have done. Only one parliamentary question has been asked about the condition—I am pleased that my colleague, Kay Ullrich, lodged that question. Some money is being dedicated to  research, but £200,000 is insufficient to address the full implications of the condition. Elaine Smith said that GPs need to be educated on the diagnosis of endometriosis if we are to avoid some of the problems that she mentioned in her speech. GPs must be taught to deal with the condition sensitively, particularly if it leads to infertility. That tragic circumstance has affected many women. If we are to allow more women to go through life without having to endure this extremely painful condition, we must advance our knowledge of endometriosis and prioritise finding a cure and a better way of diagnosing it.

What?

First, I wish to pay tribute to the spirit of self-sacrifice of the Minister for Finance and Local Government, who did not attend last night's do so that he could perfect his speech for this morning. As he will be aware, Scotland's local government community continues to have a number of concerns regarding the budget process as it relates to local authorities. Foremost in much of the evidence that was received by the Local Government Committee was the issue of ring fencing, which has been mentioned this morning. Representatives of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities stated in evidence to the Local Government Committee: "virtually every penny of additional resources that has been made available for the next three years is directed centrally by the Executive. That puts considerable pressure  on local authorities to deliver on their core services."—[ Official Report , Local Government Committee , 8 May 2001; c 1916.] Written evidence that was provided by COSLA stated: "There needs to be more honesty in settlement announcements". David Davidson spoke profusely about that this morning. The COSLA evidence also said that "it is disingenuous for ministers to suggest that previous cutbacks in the funding of core service provision have been recognised". A partnership approach needs to be developed and local flexibility, trust and discretion are required. COSLA believes that we are not quite there yet. The £440 million funding gap between grant-aided expenditure and budgets must be narrowed. That is an issue not just about distribution, but about the size of the cake. Transparency, which Mike Watson spoke about first this morning, is important. It is fair to say that COSLA has been irked by announcements about additional resources that turn out to be mirages. In evidence that was submitted to the Local Government Committee, COSLA made it clear that £70 million that had been allocated to tackle road and bridge repairs over the three years to 2004 was expected to come from existing budgets. However, the Executive's implication when it made the announcement was that the money was additional. Such irresponsibility only results in raised public expectations and puts undue pressure on hard-pressed local authorities. Dundee City Council, Falkirk Council and Perth and Kinross Council expressed concern over capital allocations and expressed the view that their assets are continuing to deteriorate. Capital allocations are not enough to outweigh the deterioration of capital assets, let alone to clear the backlog in, for example, repairs that are required to bring school buildings up to 21 st century standards. Such difficulties cannot be avoided by spin; we need a clear picture of what is happening, not a presentation of everything in the garden being rosy. Like Mike Watson, members of the Local Government Committee were disappointed that the issue of gender was not considered. That was widely discussed by the committee last year and this year, and we feel that the matter should be brought to fruition next year. I hope that, in his summing up, the Deputy Minister for Finance and Local Government will advise us about what he intends to do on that matter. There has been too much focus on process, rather than on outcome. For example, it is  important to identify what is expected in new build and maintenance, rather than merely identifying the resources that are being invested in that area. Mismatch is another issue that the Local Government Committee highlighted. Six years after reorganisation, half a dozen councils—Argyll and Bute, Dundee, Glasgow, Inverclyde, Midlothian and West Dunbartonshire—have budgets that are significantly in excess of grant-aided expenditure. As a result, council taxes in those areas are substantially higher than the Scottish average, even although more than half the deprivation in Scotland is to be found there. If such areas are to benefit from increased services, it is important that the Scottish Executive recognises the mismatch that exists. At its meeting in Inverness tomorrow, COSLA will express great concern about the fact that the Executive is continuing to ignore the issue of the 75 per cent housing capital set-aside. We need flexibility in that area, and we need it soon. In its report, the Local Government Committee expressed reservations about PFI projects and their cost to the public purse—an issue that Richard Simpson has already raised. In particular, that committee is concerned about the viability of PFI projects in rural Scotland. I welcome the changes in the budget process, but I am sure that the minister will agree that much work remains to be done.

I, too, warmly welcome the debate and I congratulate my colleague Michael Matheson on securing it. Lung disorders are a major cause of suffering,  pain and death in Scotland and around the world. However, the scale of the problem is grossly under-recognised. Lung disease affects people of all ages, but lung damage in the very young might have long-term consequences and lead to serious lung disease in later life. Many diseases can affect the lungs, such as asthma, bronchitis and emphysema. They are collectively known as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease—COPD. As the research paper that was provided by the Scottish Parliament information centre shows, mortality from COPD has increased in Scotland from 2,381 in 1981 to an alarming 9,581 in 1999. In the past 19 years, 120,248 people have died from such diseases—three quarters of which deaths were caused by tobacco use. Those diseases share common symptoms such as coughs, wheezing and breathlessness. For people who suffer from lung disorders, a major issue is access to smoke-free air and smoke-free public areas. Experts agree that the main indoor air pollutant is cigarette smoke. According to the UK's independent Scientific Committee on Tobacco and Health, environmental tobacco smoke—also known as passive smoking—is a cause of lung cancer and childhood respiratory disease. It makes respiratory conditions much worse. Indeed, the impact of other people's cigarette smoke on people who have asthma is immediate. Cigarette smoke is a highly common trigger of asthma attacks and it causes difficulties for up to 80 per cent of people who have asthma. Young children are particularly at risk from tobacco smoke. Exposure to passive smoking increases dramatically the risk of cot death, acute and chronic middle-ear disease, asthma and impairment of lung function. Up to 50 children a day, or over 17,000 each year, are admitted to UK hospitals because of the effects of other people's cigarette smoke. In Scotland, the figure is five children a day or almost 2,000 children each year. In 1999, the World Health Organisation stated that passive smoking was a real and substantial threat to child health. The Froggart report, published in 1998, attributed 300 lung cancer deaths each year to passive smoking. The death rate for Scottish women from lung cancer is five times the rate in France, partly because of passive smoking. The General Register Officer for Scotland, in evidence that was published in the British Medical Journal in 1997, estimated that passive smoking leads to a 26 per cent greater risk of contracting lung cancer. What is the Executive doing to help and support people who have lung disorders in their daily lives, or to prevent young people from being exposed to passive smoking from an early age? I regret to say that it is doing very little. Vulnerable groups of  people who suffer from lung conditions are discriminated against. A lack of smoke-free public places means that they do not have smoke-free access to shops, restaurants or cafes. That restricts their basic freedom of movement. A national survey that was undertaken last year by Action on Smoking and Health (Scotland) and the Health Education Board for Scotland exposed the lack of policies on smoking throughout the leisure industry. It was revealed that more than half of the establishments that were surveyed, including shops, cafes and community centres, did not have any form of smoking policy in place. A shocking 58 per cent of businesses allowed members of their staff and the public to smoke on their premises. In areas of deprivation the figures were far worse, with 92 per cent of pubs and bars allowing the public to smoke throughout their premises. The Executive's failure to implement policies to restrict smoking means that the general public and, in particular, vulnerable groups such as children are not adequately protected from the health risks of passive smoking. Since the survey was undertaken, the Scottish Executive has introduced a voluntary charter on smoking in public places, which is welcome. A year on, however—albeit that it was a step in the right direction—the voluntary approach is proving to be woefully inadequate, because it is failing to protect public health. We must introduce, as a matter of urgency, legislation to restrict smoking in public places. Passive smoking is a major public health risk, especially for vulnerable groups such as lung-disease patients and children. We need a national public information campaign on the risks of passive smoking to educate and inform the public and to support those in our society who are discriminated against and who suffer the burden of respiratory disease. I commend Michael Matheson's motion and the work of the British Lung Foundation's Breathe Easy clubs, ASH Scotland and the other groups in the Scottish cancer coalition on tobacco. I also commend all those who are fighting for clean air and an effective national strategy on lung disease.

Will the First Minister explain why, since new Labour came to power, the backlog of school repairs throughout Scotland has grown from £1 billion to £1.4 billion? Is he aware that, in evidence to the Local Government Committee, both Falkirk Council and Dundee City Council advised that capital depreciation on assets—including schools—is twice the current level of capital expenditure? Does he agree that the Executive's stinginess has led to the continuing state of chronic disrepair of many of our schools?

The minister will be able to say that devolution is the settled will of the Scottish people when they are asked whether they prefer devolution to the normality of independence. I welcome the minister's positive statement, particularly given the difficulties, shall we say, that he endured when the topic was discussed in Parliament on 18 January. The SNP warmly welcomes the statement, but, as always, we have a number of questions for the Executive. The review of quangos was narrowly focused. Many bodies remain under the authority of Westminster. Will the minister discuss with Her Majesty's Government the transfer of responsibility to the Scottish Parliament for any quango that has a function that is currently reserved, but which operates within Scotland? At least that would ensure that duplication—a concern that the minister talked about—would not occur. If the minister will not do that, what will the Executive do to ensure that Scotland and its Parliament have a direct input in the functioning of such quangos? Annexe C of the Executive's "Review of Public Bodies" discussion paper asks: "Could the Function be put under Local Democratic control?" I regret that the minister has failed to answer that question. The absence of any detailed reference to the relationship between NDPBs and local government is particularly surprising given the Executive's recent consultation paper on the  power of community initiative, which acknowledges the important strategic role of local government. In "The Report of the Commission on Local Government and the Scottish Parliament", it is recommended that "transfer to local government should always be considered in any review of other bodies delivering public services; and likewise where new services are developed, prior consideration should always be given to whether local government should be their vehicle, subject to consideration of efficiency and cost effectiveness." Even the detailed advice from the UK Cabinet Office states: "All options should be assessed equally on their merits and there should be no presumption at the start that any of the options is to be preferred over the others". As local government is directly accountable and accessible to its citizens, does the minister agree that it is inappropriate that bodies that deliver local services should not be accountable locally? Has the minister fully investigated the benefits and merits of having public bodies held accountable by local government?

On a point of order. Members are not allowed to answer questions. The minister said that he would like to hear from me, but he is the one who is answering the questions. Regrettably, we are not allowed to come back.

During that woeful, cowardly rant, the minister tried to score cheap political points by talking about cheap political points. We should return to the issue. Last Thursday, in response to my question on the Executive's central heating programme, the First Minister—I am pleased that he is with us now—said: "It is the essential forms of central heating that we must put first into the homes of those who have maximum priority".— [ Official Report , 14 June 2001; c 1653.]  However, on the previous day, the Minister for Social Justice said in the debate on the Housing (Scotland) Bill that "central heating is required in fewer council houses, because Labour local authorities have acted in the interests of tenants by installing central heating."— [ Official Report , 13 June 2001; c 1526.]  It is obvious that the minister is unaware that in Glasgow—Frank McAveety's former fiefdom—the Glasgow energy initiative, involving a partnership deal with Scottish Power, was terminated three years ago, for three reasons, of which I had confirmation from Glasgow City Council only this morning. The three reasons were a decision of new Labour not to transfer the city's housing debt, prioritisation of new housing partnerships and the subsuming of the central heating initiative within the stock transfer package. The ministers talked about vulnerability. Everyone would agree that the most vulnerable people should have central heating first, but in the ministers' view, that should happen only if they do not live in Glasgow or any of the other authority areas that are subject to stock transfer. Those people will have no central heating installed.

I am speechless; Margaret Curran is trying to intervene after refusing to take any interventions from SNP members. If Margaret  Curran had accepted an SNP intervention, we would have accepted one from her. She knows the rules of the game in this place. As a result, thousands upon thousands of tenants who were promised central heating in Glasgow and other local authority areas are still waiting. So who is right? Is it the First Minister, saying that the question is one of priorities, or the rather smug and complacent Minister for Social Justice, who seems to believe that no problem or need exists? Perhaps she should have said so when her predecessor announced the project.

You are another one who would not take an intervention. Sit back down, mate. At that time, the party of the Minister for Social Justice was still trying to placate pensioners over the woeful 73p increase. Perhaps that had something to do with the timing of an initiative on which not a penny piece was spent until recently. Can the minister confirm how many households qualify for central heating under the initiative? No, she cannot. She cannot be specific about the number of households over and above those that are having central heating installed as of right during normal council investment programmes. I notice that the minister has made no comment about where the mythical £350 million was supposed to come from, let alone any comment as to why those who live in the seven stock transfer authorities are currently being discriminated against. In the case of the Executive, investment is never going to happen now: it is always mañana, mañana. The statement was made last September. How much has been spent to date?

Come on, Frank: you have been told already, mate. Sit down and behave yourself. I do not want to hear one of your Shakespearean quotations; we have a serious topic to discuss. Last Thursday, the First Minister stated: "We will meet our programme for Government commitment that every council and housing association tenant and every elderly person has central heating by April 2006, and we are already examining how the programme can be extended."— [ Official Report , 14 June 2001; c 1652.]  It is interesting to note that the Executive talked about extending the programme way back in February, five months after the initiative was announced. Around that time, Tricia Marwick asked a question about the number of local authority houses that had no central heating. Jackie Baillie's answer was: "The information requested ... is not held centrally."— [ Official Report, Written Answers , 19 March 2001; Vol 11, c 209.]  That means that Jackie Baillie, or rather her predecessor, announced the initiative without having any idea as to who could or would benefit from it. When is the date for completion? The Executive amendment mentions 2005. If it is 2005, we will welcome that, but is it 2006? A figure of 100,000 or 140,000 homes, or whatever the figure is, has been mentioned. The implication is that every month 2,000 to 3,000 homes will have central heating installed. Is that the number? Will the minister say what the figure is? I ask Jackie Baillie: is it 2,000 to 3,000 a month? If so, where? Does not the minister want to intervene to let me know? As I asked the minister earlier, how many heating systems will be installed in Glasgow? We are disappointed that the minister has side-stepped any mention of extending the categories of potential beneficiaries of the programme to include vulnerable groups such as the long-term sick and families with young children. We are disappointed that she has not clarified the position of those with partial or inefficient central heating systems. The minister will be aware of research that was carried out over the past couple of weeks, not by the SNP, but by the Sunday Post— not exactly a stalwart in the campaign for Scottish independence. Some of the figures that were alluded to earlier by Mary Scanlon were found by the Sunday Post . They showed that people are being betrayed up and down Scotland—

The information received by the Sunday Post was from each council; when the paper telephoned the local authorities, they confirmed the information that the SNP had given the paper previously. Given that the Executive has promised that all pensioners will have central heating installed, it would have been of benefit to be told how many pensioners living in housing association or private sector housing have benefited to date. We know what the answer would have been. Time and again, we find the Executive living in a world of spin and of relaunch. The Executive has been so embarrassed by the SNP's exposure of this sham that it has had to look at the situation once again. Bill Aitken talked at length about the issue. However, given that the Tories were in power for 18 years, they should take some responsibility for the issue. During that time, you did nothing to ensure—

Does Bill Aitken accept that one of the reasons for the failure of the Glasgow energy initiative was the same under new Labour? It failed because the Tory Government, with Lord James Douglas-Hamilton as minister, did not transfer Glasgow's housing debt. Robert Brown pointed out how successful an independent nation such as Sweden has been in eliminating fuel poverty and winter deaths. I look forward to the day when this nation is independent. We can then take similar steps to protect our most vulnerable people, as do other independent nations in northern Europe. Tricia Marwick made an excellent contribution, in which she exposed the cynicism and arrogance of the Executive. Frank McAveety ranted about resources, but did not mention where those resources would come from. It takes more than eloquence: perhaps a bit of substance would help.

I am on my last bit. Mr Rumbles talked about misinformation. This is the guy who told Aberdeenshire Council that it would get the most wonderful local government settlement this year, and it ended up with the biggest council tax increase in Scotland. He outdid his colleague George Lyon in the obscenity of his sycophancy towards the Executive. I urge colleagues of all parties to accept the SNP motion. I am pleased that we have been able to put this extremely important issue back at the top of the political agenda.

rose—

Will the member give way?

Will the people of the city of Glasgow benefit from the initiative in the current financial year?

I don't know—I think she should.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it estimates that Scotland's rate of economic growth will reach that of the Republic of Ireland. (S1O-3568)

Is the minister aware that the Irish economy grew by 11 per cent last year—10 times Scotland's economic growth rate? Does she realise that the standard of living in oil-poor Ireland is 25 per cent higher than that in the UK, never mind that in oil-rich Scotland? Will she accept that independence is the key to Ireland's prosperity and also the key to Scotland's prosperity? Only with independence—nothing less—will Scotland realise its true economic potential.

To ask the First Minister what progress has been made to date regarding the Scottish Executive's central heating initiative. (S1F-1151)

I am somewhat perplexed by the First Minister's answer. Is he aware that 15 local authorities have said that not a single pensioner in their area will qualify for that initiative, because of restrictive eligibility criteria? Does he agree with Highland Council that the initiative is a "cruel deception"? Does he accept the view of Age Concern Scotland that "there is clearly something wrong with the Scottish Executive Scheme when only one in 60 pensioners qualify"— 8,000, rather than the 100,000 promised? Does the £350 million promised for the initiative actually exist, and what will he do to save Scotland's poorest pensioners from shivering through yet another Scottish winter?

I am disappointed that we cannot debate amendment 12. I move amendment 12.

On a point of order, can you wake up Ben Wallace?

The minister will recall that I went into considerable detail during stage 2 in respect of means testing. I will not repeat the specific  concerns of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, North Lanarkshire Council and Glasgow City Council that I quoted at some length in the committee, but I will quote further concerns that Glasgow City Council has raised. In a submission to the Local Government Committee, David Comely, the council's director of housing, stated: "The proposed means testing regime is likely to be difficult and costly to operate and its cost effectiveness is seriously open to question. There does not appear to have been any systematic appraisal by the Scottish Executive of whether the savings from means testing will outweigh its costs. Most fundamentally, there is no indication that adequate resources will be made available." He told the committee that "in the Glasgow context, means testing is likely to make it harder to achieve comprehensive renewal".——[ Official Report, Local Government Committee , 23 January 2001; c 1454.] The Local Government Committee concluded: "The Committee remains unconvinced by the proposals for means-testing, and calls on the Executive to consider further, together with the housing improvement task force, whether more suitable arrangements can be brought forward." That was echoed by the Social Justice Committee, which said: "The committee is not yet persuaded by the proposals regarding means testing". At stage 2, it became clear that none of the analysis that was mentioned by Glasgow City Council had taken place. We do not know therefore whether means testing will ensure more resources for those on low incomes who are seeking grant or whether it will simply be swallowed up by the bureaucratic cost of the test itself—the minister appeared concerned about that in respect of amendment 174. I therefore ask members to support amendment 179 and reject means testing. Amendment 180 recognises the serious level of disrepair in many private homes and the struggle that householders have to meet the necessary costs of improvement and conversion, particularly in older, post-war housing. The amendment thus seeks to increase the percentage grant of the total cost available to a more realistic level. Amendment 181 is simple and straightforward in that it simply locks the level of maximum expense at £20,000 in real terms. Even with inflation at 2.3 per cent, the value of the maximum expense will fall to £19,540 after the first year as the bill stands and it will decline year on year thereafter. That obviously discriminates against those who apply for a grant each year after the first and, while ministers can alter the amount, it is simpler and more straightforward to make it inflation-proof. Such inflation-proofing had the unanimous support  of the Local Government Committee. At stage 2, the minister made it clear that modifications would take place from time to time. Surely ministerial work loads—about which I am greatly concerned—would be reduced and the interests of applicants secured if grants were inflation-proofed. It is 14 years since the last review was undertaken and it would be grossly unfair to expect owners to suffer grant erosion over time: £20,000 should be the same in real terms in the future as it is now. On amendment 182, each of the paragraphs of which it is comprised would inflation-proof the bill and simply update for each type of grant the amounts that were laid down in the Housing (Scotland) Act 1987. Just as the Executive has doubled the maximum grant that is available, the cash amounts that are detailed in amendment 182 simply double the maximum amounts of grant for each standard amenity for which an improvement grant can be sought. To be frank, it is a little sneaky of the Executive to increase the maximum grant from £10,200 to £20,000 without uplifting the amounts for standard amenities, which is what amendment 182 seeks to do. Without that uplift, the value of grant would simply decline year on year. Of course, that may be what the Executive really wants. Amendment 182 also seeks to set grant percentages at a more realistic and up-to-date level. Amendment 185 seeks to do the same for repair grants as amendment 180 does for improvement grants. I will not move amendment 186. Amendment 187 seeks to inflation-proof the grant limits for fire escapes in houses in multiple occupation. The issue concerns public safety, so I hope that the Executive will look more fondly on the amendment than it did on my stage 2 amendment. Amendment 188 would increase the grants that are available in housing action areas to ensure that, in terms of percentage, grants are at a level that will encourage the upgrade of homes that are in a state of severe disrepair. I urge members to support all the amendments in this group. I move amendment 179.

On the rate of inflation, it is pretty desperate stuff. The reality is that when people apply for grants, the lowest quotation is the one that is accepted. If builders were to do what the minister suggested, they would soon find themselves out of business. We are talking about the retail prices index generally, not just building works, so the argument is clutching at straws. The minister's concern that only high-income families, or the "extremely well-heeled" as they were called at stage 2, would benefit is nonsense, because as was pointed out at stage 2, only those who are in council tax band E and below would qualify. Given that that limit is £80,000, which would not buy more than a one-bedroom flat in Edinburgh, I would hardly call such people extremely well heeled. The big issue that has not been addressed is resources. One of the reasons why so few people can get grants is that in Glasgow, for example, the  amount of owner-occupied grants has been reduced from £18.95 million to £3.5 million over the past four years, which is a fall of more than 80 per cent. If the jam is spread thinly, it is the fault of the Executive. I hope that the Executive will address that issue. Glasgow City Council, which is not in COSLA, still opposes means testing, and we still oppose means testing, because as Glasgow City Council and others have said in committee ad nauseam, the Executive has not provided any detail over the past five months to suggest that the bureaucratic cost would not outweigh the perceived advantages of means testing. I urge everyone to support my amendments 179 to 188. Lastly, as for the point that Bill Aitken made about amendment 179, I have no idea what he was talking about. I am perplexed. Perhaps he can tell me later.

As many colleagues will know, the management of many local authority homes is devolved to tenant management co-operatives. However, we are greatly concerned that, with wholesale voluntary stock transfer on the horizon, the autonomy of those co-operatives could vanish. Amendment 170 would allow tenant management co-operatives to become registered social landlords in their own right, thus protecting their integrity. As members will know, tenant management co-operatives are a successful and tested model of community input and self-management based on co-operative principles without ownership of the properties. Nothing in the bill states that an organisation must own properties before it can become a registered social landlord. The amendment would ensure that tenant management co-operatives could continue to function independently following stock transfer, where transfer takes place. We must prevent the undermining of existing tenant management co-operative structures at the whim of a post-stock transfer landlord, the minister or lenders providing development funding. I urge members to support the amendment and so protect the concept of true co-operation in housing by securing the rights of tenant management co-operatives. I move amendment 170.

I speak in support of amendment 158. At stage 2, the Minister for Social Justice rejected the idea behind amendment 158 because "the causes of pressure—are essentially area based. We have considered carefully house-type shortages and have found that they are reflected in area pressures, because house types do not necessarily have their own geography ... Critical difficulties exist in identifying house-type based shortages. People have strong preferences in housing, and many prefer houses with gardens, for example."—[ Official Report , Social Justice Committee , 9 May 2001; c 2261.] However, our argument is not about preferences; it is about need. The minister is wrong to talk of critical difficulties. A council can identify supply and demand for given house types at the touch of a button. As the minister is aware, I outlined the situation in some detail at stage 2. She will be pleased that I am not about to go into the same detail now. Glasgow has such a chronic shortage of five-apartment housing and larger that at present rates of turnover, it will take 87 years and five months to house all the people who are on waiting lists in medium or high-demand areas. Even taking low-demand housing into account—houses that no one wants—it would still take 12 years and nine months, which is four times the average waiting time. I remember when I was a city councillor that I was able to assist a family who were moving from Nitshill to Mosspark and were surrendering a five-apartment house. The council was so desperate to get a five-apartment house in Nitshill that it offered the family a four-apartment house in Mosspark, even though the family had only 20 points, when usually 300 were needed. That shows how desperate the council was to get its hands on five-apartment properties. Surely there must be flexibility if that situation is not to be exacerbated. We must be able to fine-tune to ensure that pressured status can be applied to certain types of housing. At present, the bill is too crude in that respect and too inclusive. For example, in areas of Glasgow, there is a huge surplus of four-apartment housing—indeed, 2,000  or 3,000 council houses are demolished every year—but almost everywhere there is a chronic shortage of five-apartment housing. If we are to preserve five-apartment housing and other high-demand stock, local authorities must be able to give them pressured status, rather than use a geographical definition of pressure. That view is supported by Glasgow City Council, which is of the same political persuasion as the minister, so I hope that she will consider the matter not from a party political viewpoint, but based on the needs of people in Glasgow.

I will try to keep within the time limits.  Members will recall that we had a full debate on the Scottish Local Authorities (Tendering) Bill on 17 May. I do not intend to go over the same ground, particularly as colleagues' thoughts may be focused somewhere else. At that time, the SNP made its position clear. We support the abolition of CCT. The bill has our full support in continuing the moratorium. We therefore back the Executive in this instance and call for the bill to receive the whole-hearted support of all MSPs. We look forward to legislation on best value being introduced this autumn.

The Conservative amendment says that "the Executive should give priority to the drafting of a Bill on Best Value so that it can be placed before the Parliament before the end of this year". Does Mr Tosh agree that the proposal for the Executive simply to place such a bill before the Parliament before the end of the year does not mean that the bill would be passed this year? CCT would therefore come back on 1 January next year. Unless the Conservatives' aim is to bring back CCT, is not their amendment incompetent?

Does not Bill Aitken think that we should learn lessons from the English legislation before battering on with ours?

I thank Keith Harding for that entertaining presentation. The Scottish National Party is broadly supportive of the bill. We oppose the process of compulsory competitive tendering in local authorities. A key policy of the Conservative Government that was elected in 1979 was the promotion of the concept of local government as an enabling authority, with a reduced role in the direct provision of services. The objective was to achieve better value for money and enhanced service performance by subjecting local authority service provision to market competition through inviting tenders from  private companies to provide such services. However, as I am sure most people will agree, the end result was often that the cheapest possible tenders won out and quality, efficiency and effectiveness suffered.

I thank Pauline McNeill for that intervention. I fully agree with what she said and, in fact, her timing was excellent, as I was just about to move on to that topic. Workers in the private sector would often see their companies win tenders through the erosion of employee pay and conditions, including sick pay and holiday and pension entitlements, particularly for those in low-paid manual jobs. With non-discriminatory employment practices, the single status and the social inclusion agenda, CCT is now clearly out of tune with the wider social agenda. CCT inhibits innovation and leads to a poor response to changing needs. It imposes an excessive level of central Government control, which diminishes local accountability and denies a proper focus to the needs of service users and local citizens. The SNP believes that all parts of the CCT legislation should be repealed at the earliest opportunity. Although we accept the Executive's view that it would be complex to reform sections of part 1 of the Local Government Act 1988 to remove the requirement on local authorities to seek tenders, we do not want that to result in a lengthy wait before best-value legislation is introduced. Concerns have been raised by COSLA, by the Association for Public Service Excellence and by others that legislation should appear "sooner rather than later". However, I am pleased to accept ministerial assurances on that matter this afternoon. The minister will be aware of the comments made to the Local Government Committee in evidence, which suggested that we take a close look at the difficulties experienced by councils in fully embracing best value. That evidence also suggested that, at the same time, the provisions of the Local Government, Planning and Land Act 1980 and the Local Government Act 1988 should be maintained and incorporated in the moratorium regulations. As Keith Harding pointed out, direct labour organisations and direct service organisations have to run with the requirements of CCT and  establish new best-value structures that are incompatible. Flexibility is required. In England and Wales, best value has presented a number of difficulties, and Keith Harding pointed them out. For example, there is a restriction on the potential to innovate and limited use of cross-public sector working. I trust that the Executive will look closely at the experience gained south of the border. I find it bizarre that, having mentioned a number of failings of best value south of the border, the Conservatives seem to think that, without considering those failings carefully, we should rush into legislation now. On a superficial level, the Tory amendment attempts to address concerns about the delay in introducing best value. However, I would have thought that the last thing that we want to do is attempt to rush the introduction of this complex legislation and end up with a less than satisfactory outcome. Of course, that is not the real aim of the Tories. Their real aim is to turn back the clock to reprise CCT in all its glory. Their amendment is a smokescreen for their true aims, and I would have thought it more honest if the Conservatives had simply opposed the bill. A continued moratorium is essential. CCT is a crude method of attempting to lever the private sector into providing public services and of introducing competition in a number of key areas such as refuse collection, cleaning, catering, and repair and maintenance of buildings. The logic was that subsidised services could be provided better, and unsubsidised, by the private sector. As we know, that process is bureaucratic and cumbersome. It forced local authorities to alter their mindset on service provision, but the promised savings did not materialise, and 90 per cent of contracts under the Local Government, Planning and Land Act 1980 have been won in-house. In Glasgow City Council, the legislation introduced by the Conservatives was particularly disastrous when it came to repairs. It was ludicrous even to suggest that any private company could have competed with the city council, simply because we could not have woken up one day and seen a private company take over the amount of work that the council did. It would have had to appear magically with a vast number of depots and workmen to carry out that work. The legislation forced openness and accountability underground and militated against the interests of local people.

I will not give way, because I have only one more sentence to say and then my time will be up.  The bill was welcomed by all the organisations that gave evidence to the Local Government Committee, and I urge all members to agree to its principles.

I welcome today's Executive debate. For obvious reasons, rural issues have dominated the Parliament of late—which proves how wrong opponents of devolution were to say that the Parliament would be dominated by central belt concerns. However, it is pleasing to be able to discuss an issue of such importance as urban regeneration. I am only sorry that the Executive has allocated so little time for today's debate. Scotland's towns and cities are where most of our people live. Thirty per cent live in the five cities of Aberdeen, Dundee, Glasgow, Edinburgh and—our newest—Inverness. Cities can and should be seen as a source of dynamism and creativity that stems from the density and diversity of population and the proximity of firms, homes and institutions. Unfortunately, if cities are neglected, they can become reservoirs of social inequality and economic decline. The Parliament has a crucial role to play in revitalising urban Scotland by establishing a strategic perspective within which social needs, economic opportunities and environmental problems can be considered together and addressed effectively. That requires that the Executive's stated commitment on social inclusion, economic development and urban regeneration be  turned into concrete action. What issues do we face? In Glasgow, Scotland's largest city, the population has declined from 1,061,000 to 608,000 since 1961. In 1962, the Toothill report recommended a policy of relocating industry and people from our cities to new towns. That policy was slavishly followed by Labour and Conservative Governments. Investment in infrastructure and the ability to build on greenfield sites were incentives for companies to move out of old industrial sites. People were encouraged to move to improved housing. That left Glasgow and Dundee in particular at a competitive disadvantage. Vast numbers left Scotland altogether, with the result that we are the only west European nation to suffer a recent decline in population. Scotland's population sustained a fall of 250,000 over the last generation, which included a disproportionate number of the young, skilled and well educated. The result of such policies, coupled with decline in heavy industry and massive structural economic change, is that Glasgow and Dundee—and, indeed, Greenock and Coatbridge—have been left bereft of much of their industrial base, with high levels of unemployment and, in Glasgow's case, almost 60 per cent of Scotland's most socially excluded communities. Regrettably, the process of decline still continues. Last Sunday, I took my eight-year-old son and four-year-old daughter on a powerboat cruise along the Clyde. It leaves from Stobcross quay and costs £5 for adults, £2.50 for the kids. On a sunny day, I assure members that they will love it. It was a beautiful sunny day and the children enjoyed the sights, but I found them disheartening. All the way from Glasgow down to where the QE2 was launched, we saw scenes of unmitigated dereliction on both sides of the Clyde. Indeed, the guide told us that today the Clyde's biggest export is scrap metal to Russia and Sweden. The Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning said in a recent parliamentary answer that only 65.2 per cent of Glaswegian males of working age are in employment. That compares with an average of 77.3 per cent across Scotland. As the minister herself stated, that means that Glasgow will have to find 24,000 additional jobs just to equal the Scottish average. For women, 14,000 additional jobs are required. That is the equivalent of 12 Motorola factories, yet the Glasgow Alliance strategy, which was set out in 1999, set a target of only 15,000 additional jobs by 2003. As the creation of full-time, well-paid jobs is the key to prosperity, health and community, it is little wonder that Glasgow is struggling. Half of new jobs in Glasgow are likely to go to non-residents, so there is a real mountain to climb to  turn Glasgow round. It is regrettable that little progress has been made with school leavers. A report last week from Glasgow careers service shows that in each of the past five years, the proportion entering work, training and higher and further education has remained in the 70 to 72 per cent bracket—far lower than the Scottish average. The Executive has mentioned the better neighbourhood services programme and its plan to allocate £90 million over three years to local authorities. That is welcome, but relative to needs and Executive action in the opposite direction, that sum pales into insignificance. Members do not need to take my word for it. On 13 March, the Local Government Committee took evidence from George Black, director of finance at Glasgow City Council. In response to a question from me, he said: "I can confirm that from 1996-97 the council's share of aggregate external finance reduced. Our research showed that, in real terms, the level of aggregate external finance for Glasgow at the end of 2003-04 will be about £50 million less than in 1996-97. The impact of that reduction is well documented. We have had council tax increases of 19 per cent, 22 per cent and 9.4 per cent in the three years since 1996-97. We have had about 4,500 council job losses."

I will finish the quotation, but I will let the member in. He knows, because we discussed it earlier, that I will quote him in a minute or two. Mr Black continued: "We had what is commonly termed a double whammy; we had to reduce services, while dramatically increasing council tax. That is hard for the public to understand. The evidence can be seen."—[ Official Report , Local Government Committee, 13 March 2001; c 1665.] That puts the real situation in perspective. Dundee presented a similar picture to the committee only last Tuesday. Such is the level of decline in that city that the population is expected to fall by 15.3 per cent over the next 15 years. Areas of greatest need continue to sustain relative decline in their resource base—a situation that must be reversed. What should be done? There is little purpose in reinventing the wheel. That is why the SNP amendment emphasises learning from achievements and mistakes here and elsewhere, to ensure optimum use of the public pound. In November 1998, the policy and resources committee at Glasgow City Council, which Mr McAveety and I attended, was advised that a report had been produced that showed that, in the previous 10 years, £500 million spent in Glasgow on regeneration had produced no discernible  improvement. At my suggestion, the committee—and subsequently the council—agreed unanimously to investigate how that money had been spent. If we could learn from the successes, and indeed the failures, we could ensure a better bang for our buck in future. Two and a half years later we still await that report. Other cities, from Sunderland to Lille to Baltimore, have successfully turned around a steep economic and social decline using broadly similar methods. We must consider those successful strategies and adapt them to Scottish circumstances. Glasgow has 74,000 fewer manufacturing jobs than it did in 1974, yet Sunderland has 8,000 more. We must analyse how that and comparable successes have been achieved.

The minister should take the issue up with Wendy Alexander, because Ms Alexander gave me the answer to the parliamentary question I referred to. City tax rises in Glasgow have been curtailed, allowing nearby authorities less of a competitive edge. In 1998, at the count for a local government by-election at Garrowhill, Frank McAveety asked, "Why did we lose this by-election, Kenny? It was the Lally situation, wasn't it? It was sleaze and so on." I said, "No, Frank. It was the council tax." To Frank's great credit, he went to the Labour group and persuaded his colleagues that Glasgow City Council's tax was ridiculously high. They agreed to reduce it to a more reasonable level. Significant investment in new infrastructure, industrial and commercial property, skills, training and education are crucial. The Executive's failure to provide adequate resources for derelict land reclamation is cause for concern. In Glasgow, discussions on setting up a land renewal programme have been going on for more than five years and no progress has been made. Sending the M74 extension back to the drawing board and initially ignoring the road's potential as an industrial corridor—a key strategy in the economic renaissance of Chicago—is worrying, given the new lead time on the road.  The doughnut effect, wherein a prosperous core is surrounded by poor estates, which are surrounded by wealthy suburbs, should be avoided by investing in quality of life initiatives such as improving community policing, de-littering, removing graffiti, addressing loitering, establishing children's play areas and allotments, and—although it is not popular these days in Glasgow City Council—establishing community facilities. A housing-based regeneration strategy without comparable quality-of-life improvements or job creation is not sustainable. Stimulating demand for local jobs evokes a sense of community pride in towns and cities, especially when people from one neighbourhood work together in a nearby firm. Public transport systems must allow people cheap and easy access to work. We must focus not just on the sexy high-tech sector, but on positive measures to attract industry and retain it as a way of protecting and creating blue-collar jobs. Scotland cannot survive on screwdriver jobs alone, as Motorola has shown. Tourism is vital, but a chambermaid economy based on low-skilled, low-wage, seasonal work, coupled with very high-tech jobs is not enough. Economic diversity is essential and stimulation of indigenous business is crucial.

I am just about to finish, Presiding Officer. Unfortunately, joined-up government remains a myth in most of Scotland's towns and cities. Local people should be put in charge of the highly paid, highly trained professionals who believe that they know best but whose priorities are in conflict with those of local people. Initiatives that have been successfully employed in Phoenix, Baltimore and Indianapolis include low-interest loans, a business infrastructure assistance programme, provision of façade rebates, tax increment financing and the creation of a support network between industrial and non-industrial sectors. The SNP amendment is positive, not self-congratulatory or condemnatory, and I urge all members to support it. I move amendment S1M-1922.3, to leave out from "endorses" to end and insert: "notes the activities being undertaken by the Executive with regard to urban regeneration; congratulates the key agencies, organisations and citizens involved in regenerating urban Scotland; recognises that despite these efforts, levels of poverty, sickness and unemployment remain stubbornly high across much of urban Scotland, and undertakes to carry out a comprehensive review of regeneration policy in our towns and cities with specific regard to infrastructure and employment, examining the successes and failures of the past and including an analysis of thriving models of urban renewal across the  United Kingdom and beyond."

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has had any discussions with Her Majesty's Government about the continued devolved status of any currently devolved matters. (S1O-3369)

I am pleased to hear the minister's positive reply. However, if new Labour wins the election, will he and his Executive colleagues take action to counter proposals made by John Prescott's Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions to remove Scotland from policy making on key environmental issues by taking powers from the Scottish Executive and handing them to an new all-Britain quango, the UK nature advisory council? Will he stand for Scotland or bend the knee to Whitehall?

To ask the Scottish Executive when Glasgow Housing Association will publish its business plan on the proposed Glasgow housing stock transfer. (S1O-3325)

Can the minister confirm or otherwise that, in the business plan following stock transfer, the cost of modernising transferred stock will be 17.5 per cent more than under the council, through the imposition of VAT, which is effectively zero rated on council housing? Can she also confirm that that will mean that, of the £1.8 billion that is currently touted as the cost of modernisation, £268 million will go into the bloated coffers of the Chancellor of the Exchequer and thus be lost to Glasgow? If so, how will she ensure that that money is returned to the city?

The minister will be aware that, over the past year, more than half of Scotland's councils have reduced the percentage of housing benefit applications that are processed within the target time of 14 days. At his meeting with COSLA, what steps will the minister suggest to ensure a reversal of that trend?

Does the minister accept that much of what we said was focused on direct quotations from the Scottish Police Federation? Is not the federation angry with the Executive?

Mr Rumbles will forgive me if the SNP does not accept his judgment on that matter. I recall that, during a debate on local government, Mr Rumbles crowed about how great the settlement was for Aberdeenshire Council, which is the local authority in his constituency. However, Aberdeenshire Council then raised its council tax higher than any other local authority in Scotland. Does Mr Rumbles believe that 1,000 extra police officers would improve the fight against crime? Would the 14 extra officers that would go to his constituency allow his constituents to sleep more easily in their beds at night?

First, I commend the Minister for Justice on his conversion to acceptance of the need for more police officers. If he recalls, in the debate on 25 November 1999, he said that "in the 18 years of Conservative Government, crime rose in Scotland." He said that I had "also heard that—and no one is disputing the fact—at the same time, police numbers rose substantially. How does he square that with his view on the correlation between police numbers and crime?"— [ Official Report , 25 November 1999; Vol 3, c 939.]  At that time, the minister did not appear to believe that police numbers have an impact on crime, and I am glad that the Executive now believes that that is the case. The SNP stands against crime and for 1,000 extra police officers. I suppose that the issue is all about priorities. For the Executive, policing regrettably falls well down its list of priorities. For example, according to the Sunday Herald a few weeks ago, the number of spin doctors who are employed by the Executive to tell us how wonderful everything is has increased in two years from 59 to 81. That does not include the swollen ranks of the First Minister's own team of special advisers. For the Executive, the priority appears to be public relations, not policing. In The Scotsman , the Executive was denounced  for its "mean-spirited parochialism, profligate spending and naked incompetence"— a statement that was subsequently echoed by the Executive's own house magazine, the Daily Record . However, at a time when the Scottish Police Federation is denouncing the Scottish Executive for "misleading" the public about police funding and numbers, the Executive says that Scotland apparently cannot afford the £25 million—less than one seven hundredth of the Scottish block—for the extra 1,000 police officers that would ensure that our streets are safe and that people are able to live without fear. What did the SPF say last week at its annual conference in Peebles? Although many members have already touched on the issue, I would like to read out a few more quotes. According to the Evening Times , John Finnie "claimed that Justice minister, Jim Wallace, had announced £165 million of extra funding"— which was repeated this afternoon— "when the true figure was just £80m. He said: 'The public are entitled to demand that politicians present accurate information on the criminal justice system.' McKenzie Reid of Strathclyde Police, said: 'The first qualification for being an MP is being economical with the truth. 'We must start telling the public the truth, which is how many officers are actually carrying out frontline duties.' Police Federation general secretary Doug Keil added: 'The police force is not awash with new money or new police officers.' Delegates highlighted a string of Executive announcements of 'new' money and 'additional' officers. One release in March stated Strathclyde Police now had 7200 officers ... two weeks later the figure had risen to 7318 apparently with no extra officers recruited. Another announcement trumpeted '400 new feet on the beat' when referring to 200 new recruits." The police are justifiably angry at how the Executive apparently deceives the public, and I am sure that more people believe the police than the Executive on the issue. What is the reality? Gordon Jackson mentioned G division. Figures from G division show that, in areas such as Pollok, the crime rate is 50 per cent higher than the Scottish average. Indeed, as Paul Martin pointed out, it is important that areas of social exclusion are given the extra resources that they require. A couple of weeks ago, I spoke to a chief superintendent in Pollok police station who said that, during the week, the division often has only four officers available to police its entire area.  Last week, a housebreaker was caught after carrying out 36 break-ins in a new housing development in the Dalmellington Road area of Crookston. People who move into a new area, with new hopes for themselves and their families, have their homes broken into and wonder whether they should have moved there. Keith Raffan eloquently highlighted drug crime as a major issue that must be dealt with. However, many burdens are now falling on our police force. For example, L division has reported that it needs 22 additional officers to police the sex offenders register. That is a very important task, for which extra officers and resources are required. I and members of all parties have been out with police officers on Friday and Saturday nights, when the clubs close at 3 am. We have found out that the police are overstretched, and that antisocial acts such as urinating in the street or falling down drunk and virtually unconscious are ignored by the police, because they do not have the resources to deal with those people. If a fracas were suddenly to erupt, they would not have the officers to cope with it. The Executive should be more ambitious in trying to reduce crime and it should be reducing crime to historic levels, rather than allowing the levels at which it has peaked in recent years. We believe that recruiting 1,000 extra officers will be a step in the right direction. That is where the SNP stands on crime.

Is that before or after inflation is taken into account?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met members of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and what issues were discussed. (S1O-3299)

You must have been distracted by the minister's scalping, Presiding Officer. The minister will be aware of a letter that COSLA sent to him some days ago expressing "very great concern" about the guidance for local authorities in Scotland on non-domestic rating and hardship relief for businesses affected by foot-and- mouth disease. Does he agree with COSLA that the more restrictive—relative to England and Wales—guidance issued by the Executive means that the "Scottish scheme would be inferior to that south of the border and would fail to support many hard pressed businesses which are affected by the foot and mouth crisis"? If so, will he amend the guidance immediately?

To ask the Scottish Executive, further to the answer to question S1W-12446 by Susan Deacon on 6 March 2001, why expenditure in real terms per head of population by the Greater Glasgow Health Board at 31 March 2000 was less than at 31 March 1992. (S1O-3231)

I thank the minister for that information, even if she did try to duck and dive a wee bit in her reply. However, the reality on the ground is somewhat different to the one that is touted by the minister. What does the minister have to say to nursing staff in Glasgow southern general hospital's medicine for the elderly directorate? They recently received a letter from their senior nursing manager that said: "I am writing to inform you that prior to our entry to the new build at the end of March 2001 the Trust is required to make savings equivalent to the staffing of a 15 bedded ward. I have to date been able to make most of the savings, however I am unable to find vacancies within DME for the equivalent of 3 WTE"—

That is three whole-time equivalent nurse posts. The letter continues by saying that "it has been agreed that in the first instance we should ask staff whether they wish to volunteer to take up a post"—

To take up a post elsewhere. Given that the minister continues to talk about additional resources for the national health  service, why are cuts in nursing staff being implemented?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will Mr Peacock accept some responsibility for the loss of objective 1 status in the Highlands and Islands, given that he was the leader of Highland Council at the time?

Why was that accepted for Ireland and for Wales?

Mr Davidson's colleague, Ben Wallace, said that Scotland was lucky to receive structural funds.

However, both Mr Davidson and Lord James indicated that Scotland received more structural funds under the Conservatives. Who is right? Should we receive nothing, as Ben Wallace seemed to suggest, or should we receive more, as Mr Davidson and Lord James seem to think?

What evidence does George Lyon have that I did not read that report?

Would Ben Wallace rather that objective 1 money comes to Scotland or that it goes to other parts of the European Union?

What does Ben Wallace understand by the term additionality?

Will the member give way?

I am sorry that I was not as passionate as usual, but I try not to be too predictable. Can Tavish Scott advise the chamber whether  the Liberal Democrats still believe in a united states of Europe?

Will Mr Davidson name the members of the SNP group who no longer believe in independence?

Mr Davidson referred to "members opposite". Unless he has a very severe squint, he will have noticed that the SNP group sits directly opposite him.

Perhaps, in response to CAFE, Mr Davidson could form TEA—Tories encouraging assimilation. The SNP is pleased to state that we support the Scottish Executive's broad objectives on Europe: promoting new technology; the concept of working in partnership; mainstreaming equal opportunities and sustainable development; making social inclusion a critical element of economic development; promoting inclusiveness and sustainability. Throughout the countries and regions of the European Union, there are disparities in the levels of wealth, economic development and social cohesion. To address those anomalies, the EU implements a major set of initiatives—commonly referred to as European structural funds—that support national policies in the least prosperous regions and in national and regional labour markets. Structural funds are the second-largest item of EU expenditure and consist of four main financial instruments: the European regional development fund, the European social fund, the European agricultural guidance and guarantee fund, and the financial instrument for fisheries guidance—which Mr Davidson touched on. Funds are allocated on the basis of three objectives. Under agenda 2000, the number of objectives was reduced from six to three. Objective 1 includes NUTS level 2 regions—NUTS is the nomenclature of statistical territorial units—that have a per capita gross domestic product of less than 75 per cent of the Community average. Objective 1 also includes areas with high  population sparsity as well as the most remote regions, which are included because of their peripherality. Objective 1 accounts for some 70 per cent of structural funding. The criteria for objective 1 remain unchanged except that the former objective 6 areas have now been included under objective 1. However, the proportion of the UK's population that is covered by objective 1 funding has fallen from a quarter to a fifth since 1999, because of the removal from eligibility of the Highlands and Islands. Objective 2 includes regions that have major economic and social restructuring needs, rural decline, areas that are experiencing the decline of industrial fisheries, and urban areas in difficulty. Objective 2 funding accounts for approximately 11.5 per cent of structural fund allocations. Objective 3 funding is for the development of human resources, the modernisation of educational training and employment systems, and combating social exclusion. Objective 3 funding accounts for about 12.5 per cent of structural funds. The Highlands and Islands lost its objective 1 status in the final round of allocations. That could have been avoided if regional maps had been redrawn to exclude Inverness. Labour members may believe that to be fanciful, but Manfred Beschel, who is head of the unit for structural funds, explained to Mike Watson and me—when we met him a couple of weeks ago in Brussels—how the Republic of Ireland redrew its regional maps. At the time of negotiation, the Republic of Ireland's gross domestic product stood at 97 per cent of the EU average. To secure objective 1 status, Ireland created a new, artificial region to the west of Dublin and its environs. That region had neither budget nor powers. The so-called border, midland and western region was drawn up to exclude areas of prosperity that could jeopardise access to objective 1 funding. As a result, Ireland will receive £360 million for that region in objective 1 funding and £67 million in transitional relief for the more prosperous southern and eastern region up to 2006. In contrast, Scotland—a more populous, less prosperous country—will receive only £194 million in objective 1 moneys for transitional relief in the Highlands and Islands. Although that money is welcome, the opportunity to retain objective 1 in the Highlands and Islands and to create a region that would have centred on Glasgow and the Clyde valley was missed. I will develop that point, but the minister is desperate to intervene, so I will let him do so.

I felt as if I was dying of old age listening to that intervention. I make the point that half a loaf is better than no bread. Why did the Highlands and Islands lose objective 1 status? It lost it because a complacent Scottish Office took its eyes off the ball. Millions that could have gone towards meeting the Executive's laudable new structural fund programme objectives have been lost. Did the Irish just pull a flanker? Hardly. Sweden and Finland, both more prosperous than Scotland, used the same tactic to obtain objective 1 status, creating new regions that could secure funding by way of sparsity. My nationalist colleagues and perhaps even one or two members of the north British parties will conclude that that is because those independent nations of small population were able to use their seat at the top table to achieve success. Even in our unitary state of the United Kingdom, the tactic was used successfully. The Welsh Office realised early in the restructuring process that Wales, if divided on a north-south basis, would not qualify for objective 1 funding under the new criteria. Such a division did not distinguish between the poor west and the prosperous east of the country. The Welsh Office worked to redraw the EU regional map of Wales and redivided the country on an east-west basis. The new western region, which had a GDP of 72 per cent of the EU average, qualified for objective 1. If only the new Labour colleagues in the Scottish Office had been as switched on. Overall, Scotland will benefit to the tune of £1.094 billion in structural funds across all three objectives up to 2006. What is the beef? In the corresponding period up to 1999, we received £2.17 billion. The ineptitude of new Labour on structural funds has cost Scotland more than £1 billion.

Perhaps the Conservatives did not do as good a job as they could have done, but they certainly did a better job than new Labour. New Labour has cost the country £1 billion. On 13 November, Mr MacKay told the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities that structural funds programmes would bring 65,000 new jobs to Scotland. That is fantastic. However, the number of jobs could have been double that if we had received that extra £1 billion. Even our percentage share of UK structural funds has fallen by a third. At the meeting that I had with Mr Beschel, we discussed EU enlargement. The accession of mainly former Soviet bloc countries will provide many opportunities for Scottish industry and commerce—I am glad that Mr MacKay addressed that in his opening speech—but the low standard of living in those countries will inevitably shift almost all structural funds resources from the west to the east of the EU unless the structural funds criteria are altered. The Scottish Executive must ensure that its voice, which has been something of a whisper to date, is heard in the discussions if Scotland is not to lose out completely. It would also help if an eye was kept on what other nations, including nations of the United Kingdom, are doing. How are EU structural funds delivered? That question seemed to perplex Mr MacKay's predecessor as finance minister, and the rival for the succession, last year. According to Mr McConnell, the mechanism for EU structural fund allocation has changed since the devolution settlement. Pre-devolution, ESF moneys were transferred via the Treasury and other departments to the Scottish Office and then to local programmes. In his evidence to the Finance Committee on 13 June 2000, Mr McConnell said that ESF money now comes from the European Commission directly to the Scottish Administration. He also said that ESF is part of the assigned Scottish budget that was agreed during the devolution settlement and can be identified as a separate budget heading in the Scottish budget. He then stated unequivocally that the Barnett formula plays no direct or indirect part in the allocation of ESF. At the same time, he said that allocations to Scotland are part of the comparable expenditure included in the calculation of the Barnett formula. Mr McConnell further stated that the amount of ESF in the Scottish assigned budget over the next seven years will be greater than the amount that we are allowed to spend. Thus, not only have structural funds halved, but we may be prevented  from spending even those moneys that have been allocated. It is hard to imagine how more money can be allocated to the ESF budget line if the money comes direct from the EU to the Scottish Executive. Mr McConnell acknowledged that the process is "complex", but aside from negotiations with the Commission, the transfer of funds would seem to be straightforward if there is, as the former finance minister said, a direct transfer from Brussels to Scotland. On 13 June 2000, Mr McConnell said: "The only thing in that which I want to correct is that when the European Commission pays the cheque"— that is, the structural funds— "it does so directly to us, as the managing authority. It does not get paid to the Treasury to be passed on to us." The illustrious David Davidson asked: "So the Treasury has no place in this?" Mr McConnell replied: "The money from the European Commission goes directly to the Scottish Executive, and we pass it on to local projects." He went on to say that "the funds go directly to the devolved administration in the UK. We get the funds directly from the EC."—[ Official Report, Finance Committee , 13 June 2000; c 654-63.] Previously, on 30 May 2000, Mr McConnell had told the European Committee: "The money is transferred via the UK Treasury to Scotland for spending on the structural funds. That money is allowed for in our budget clearly and identifiably and has been for many years, despite the initial difficulties with additionality." He repeated that later in the meeting, when he said: "The money is passed from the European Commission to the UK Treasury and then to the Scottish Executive".—[ Official Report, European Committee , 30 May 2000; c 700-05.] We need clarification on the process of transfer between Brussels and the Scottish Parliament and what role, if any, the Treasury plays.

I would like to, but I am only two thirds of the way through my speech and I am down to my last four minutes. I am sorry, but Mr MacKay's rambling intervention cost me about one minute. The then Secretary of State for Scotland, John Reid MP, was less than helpful when questioned on the matter by the Westminster Scottish Affairs Committee on 7 September. He refused an invitation to attend the European Committee of the Scottish Parliament, saying:  "I have no intention of speaking to committees or otherwise in the Scottish Parliament because I am accountable to this Parliament." How humble of him. He recommended that there should be "greater transparency in the publication of information on how the Barnett formula works in practice with respect to Structural Fund expenditure planning." I hope that Mr Peacock can clarify the situation in his summing-up. On 13 June last year, Professor David Bell told the European Committee: "Additionality is the notion that European funds should be additional to whatever level of spending would have occurred in the relevant country. I am sure that the committee is aware that additionality is currently determined at UK level, which means, for example, that if all of Europe's funds were spent in Lesmahagow, the additionality criteria could still be satisfied for the whole of the UK."—[ Official Report, European Committee , 13 June 2000; c 727.] The European Committee was unable to establish additionality at regional level, thanks to the lack of co-operation from UK departments. Angus MacKay himself said: "The requirements and procedures for demonstrating additionality at the European level for the Member State are not compatible, and would not produce consistent outcomes, with programmes at a Scottish level. I therefore do not intend to publish this information in such a way as to 'verify' additionality at a Scottish level." Yet surely the allocation of structural funds that Scotland receives must be able to be demonstrated as additional. We should be told whether, for example, UK structural funds have been traded off against the UK-EU rebate, as Mr Beschel suspects. Why would the Treasury do that? Because money rebated can be spent as the Treasury wishes. Structural funds cannot. Funding must also be allocated to match structural fund receipts. For programmes undertaken by the Scottish Office, matching funds must also be found from within the departmental expenditure limit. For programmes undertaken by other bodies, matching funds must be provided from their own budgets. However, those may be largely provided by grants or grants in aid from the Scottish budget. The European Committee seemed largely satisfied that match funding was being provided, but recommended that "the Scottish Executive should: (a) investigate the likely availability of match-funding over the coming programming period; (b) monitor the flow of projects and co-funding from the various types of partners involved in the programmes; and (c) provide regular, transparent reports on programme performance with respect to match-funding." However, it does not appear that any additional allocation within the Scottish departmental  expenditure limit has been made for match funding. On 6 June last year, the Scottish Parliament's Finance Committee and European Committee asked Gordon Brown to give evidence as part of their inquiry into European funds. In a letter to the Finance Committee, the chancellor declined the invitation and stated that he would not even be sending a civil servant. The European Committee received a similar refusal. In the letter, Gordon Brown said that John Reid would be giving evidence at Westminster. He stated: "I understand he"— John Reid— "has been asked to cover structural funds, among other issues. While I appreciate your wish to hear from Treasury ministers or officials, I feel that on this occasion this is the best way forward." Mike Watson, convener of the Finance Committee, was not happy with the Chancellor of the Exchequer's response. In the Finance Committee, he said: "I find the response from the Chancellor of the Exchequer disappointing, but not entirely surprising, particularly given his reluctance to give evidence to the European Committee on the same subject. However, I do not regard being referred to a meeting that will take place between John Reid and the Scottish Affairs Select Committee at the House of Commons on 21 June as an adequate substitute for hearing the chancellor's evidence. I am open to members' views about how we should proceed. Given that a senior civil servant from the Treasury has already given evidence to the committee, I believe that we are entitled to at least that level of evidence for the inquiry. Otherwise, I fear that suggestions will be made that it is never appropriate for officials or ministers from the House of Commons to give evidence to Scottish Parliament committees. That should not be accepted. That is my personal view of the matter. Before we decide how to proceed, I invite the views of members of the committee." Needless to say, other members, such as Mr Davidson, Mr Raffan and Andrew Wilson agreed. Mike Watson added: "We have asked for the benefit of the Chancellor of the Exchequer's knowledge of the system and our request has been declined." Richard Simpson said: "We cannot let the matter rest here because of the precedent that that will set—the Executive should take it up. We should ask the relevant joint ministerial committee to review the process and to ensure that appropriate officials or ministers will make every effort to assist Scottish Parliament committee inquiries. Gordon Brown's letter is unacceptable."—[ Official Report, Finance Committee , 6 June 2000; c 628-30.] I hope that the minister will pursue that matter, as the issues surrounding structural funds are too  important for it not to be pursued. I move amendment S1M-1825.1, to leave out from "the steps" to end and insert: "steps being taken by the Scottish Executive to develop a broader strategy in relation to European funding issues in preparation for enlargement of the European Union, but notes the failure of the Scottish Office to secure the retention of Objective One status for any area of Scotland by re-drawing the regional map as was successfully done for their own regions by the Welsh Office, Ireland, Sweden and Finland, thus depriving the Executive of vital resources needed to develop its Structural Funds Programmes and reducing the scope, impact and likely success of the outcomes sought by both it and the Parliament."

What impact does the minister think the measure will have? Richard Lochhead emphasised the fact that some charities may lose up to £80,000 a year, which could result in the loss of jobs and the closing of premises.

I thought that you were going to follow the principle of ladies first, Presiding Officer. I add my congratulations to Richard Lochhead on securing the debate. I am sorry that Murray Tosh added a sour note on an issue that has great cross-party support. The decision to remove all relief from charitable bodies is the outcome of a process involving the water authorities, the water industry commissioner and the former Minister for Environment, Sport and Culture, Sam Galbraith. I mention the former minister because I think that the debate gives the current minister an opportunity to start with a clean slate. The decision is in clear breach of the compact that provides a framework for relations between the Executive, its agencies and the voluntary sector. A survey, of some sorts, of charitable customers was carried out by way of a questionnaire, but the results were never published. On 20 November, the water commissioner stated: "The questionnaires were not as objective as they should have been". We have heard of the horrendous financial implications for charities. There can be no doubt that the decision will impinge on the Executive's social inclusion strategy. It will impact on jobs and on service delivery. One can only imagine that, in social inclusion partnership areas, many voluntary services that are on the borderline could cease. More money raised by the voluntary sector will, proportionately, have to go to water companies, so less will be available for good causes. Cathy Jamieson mentioned that no cognisance has been taken of the affordability of the charges for individual voluntary organisations or of the relative water usage of different organisations. Price rises that are well above inflation make the impact even more severe and inflict a double whammy on the sector. The suddenness of implementation has meant that it is too late for voluntary organisations to plan or budget effectively to account for the change. It is self-defeating in terms of public policy.  The policy is penny-wise and pound-foolish. The Executive must reflect on its impact and reverse the decision.

Presiding Officer, is my name showing up on your screen?

I will change position.

Presiding Officer, I—

I was just asking— [Laughter.]

I am sorry, Presiding Officer, it has been a long day. I wanted to say that I had pressed my button to indicate that I wanted to speak, but nothing happened to show that my request had been recorded. That is why I have switched seats.

Jim Wallace made a statement to the Parliament on 27 September last year, in which he described justice expenditure as "the best ever spending package for Scottish justice."— [ Official Report , 27 September 2000; Vol 8, c 641.]  However, senior police officers in Scotland do not agree. Sir John Orr, who has been quoted at length this afternoon, commented on Strathclyde police's lower-than-average award for equipment: "This allocation could have a potentially serious impact on this force's intention to further improve our policing capability in operational terms. It is wrong to assume that less than appropriate capital funding has no impact on our operational policing. This decision to fail to accommodate funding for the new police station at Irvine could mean we will be less able to put more officers on the streets." In response to a parliamentary question, last week I received an answer which stated that the capital allocation to Strathclyde police fell from £9.732 million to £9.076 million during the current financial year. William Rae, the president of the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland, said:  "The root of this problem is that there is insufficient capital consent to meet the needs of Scotland's police forces. No matter what formula is used, it will always leave forces with insufficient moneys to meet requirements."

I am an MSP in Strathclyde. In his summing-up perhaps the minister can explain how Strathclyde police's operational ability will be enhanced by having £700,000 less in capital funding this year than it had last year. As many members will be aware, I ask a number of written questions, and in asking them, I sometimes get to the nub of some of the flim-flam and spin that often is put forward by the Executive. I will take members back to a couple of questions that Mr Jim Wallace answered last year. I discovered, for example, that from 1 April 2000 the Executive intended to charge the police non-domestic rates for the first time. I asked what the breakdown would be. I found out that the total cost to the police would be £9.332 million. How would that break down by force? Central Scotland police would have to pay £388,000, Dumfries and Galloway constabulary £247,000, Lothian and Borders police £1.58 million and Strathclyde police £3.94 million. A month or so after receiving that question, there was a major press release, followed by the usual television and radio presentations by the Minister for Justice and his deputy at the time, Angus MacKay. What was it about? The £8.9 million that they were putting into the police force to provide 315 officers. Once again, I asked what the breakdown would be. I found out, incredibly enough, that Central Scotland police, which was paying £388,000 in rates for the first time, was going to receive £369,000 for extra officers; Dumfries and Galloway constabulary, which was paying £247,000 in rates, was to receive £233,000; Lothian and Borders police, which was paying £1.58 million, was to receive £1.442 million; and Strathclyde police, which was to pay £3.94 million, was to receive £3.710 million. Those are remarkably coincidental figures, which show that an Executive that made a big stushie and a furore about putting money into the police force to create another 315 officers had in fact taken the money and £400,000 more out of the police force only a couple of months earlier. That is the kind of spin that we have to tolerate in this Parliament. The reality is that there are fewer  officers in Strathclyde than there were when the Labour party came to power. The Executive has not redressed the balance, which is why crime has reached its current level.

Will the minister take an intervention?

Give way.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to regenerate urban Scotland. (S1O-3148)

Can the minister advise on the discussions that her department has recently been involved in regarding the establishment of a land renewal programme for Glasgow, which has been under consideration for five years, and whether we are any nearer to a positive decision? In November, I asked the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning a question on this issue; it prompted the announcement of an additional £2 million to develop an industrial site in Glasgow. Will this question elicit a similar response?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

No, you do not.

What am I going to say?

On a point of order.

We have heard references to Tory-SNP coalitions. Is it not the case that the only coalition in Scotland is between—

With my colleagues, I welcome this stage 1 debate, although I regret the lack of time for members to raise their concerns in detail. In view of the shortage of time, I will restrict my comments to the new executive agency, the strategic role of local authorities and grants for improvements and repairs—which the minister did not touch on in her opening speech.  In exercising its strategic role, a local authority must not be constrained by the NEA. Funding and adequate powers are essential. As drafted, the bill does not provide for the cost of planning or for the development funding role. That is crucial, for in evidence to the Local Government Committee, Glasgow City Council estimated that Scottish Homes' development funding amounts to £8 million a year in Glasgow alone. As things stand, that cost will fall directly on the council. As the minister will be aware following her meeting with Charlie Gordon on 26 February, Glasgow City Council will agree to stock transfer only if it can take on the strategic and development funding role immediately on transfer, if it ever goes ahead. The costs associated with that, according to the explanatory notes on the Housing (Scotland) Bill, "will be taken into account in future decisions on Executive support for local government expenditure." No such provision has been made in the 2001 to 2004 local government financial settlement. The Executive states that "local authorities currently meet the costs of producing housing plans out of their own budgets" but fails to acknowledge the contribution that is made by the housing revenue account, which will be lost to councils that transfer stock. In her summing up, perhaps the minister can tell the chamber how the bill, as it currently stands, will address that issue, or will she concede that that will have to be rethought? The NEA will have powers to intervene in local authority housing services while loading management inspection costs on to councils in full. Across Scotland, those costs could run into several million pounds. To add insult to injury, a local authority that produces strategic plans that the NEA rejects is at the mercy of the NEA vis-à-vis development funding. Thus, local authorities will be forced to kowtow to the NEA. That will greatly reduce local flexibility. Furthermore, the bill contains no statutory right for councils to receive information from the NEA about RSLs in their areas, which will make it more difficult for councils to play a meaningful strategic role. As it stands, the NEA will have extensive powers to intervene in housing strategy independently of the minister. Councils are much better placed to address issues such as housing, the environment, transport, job creation and infrastructure than a housing-focused quango, and that could cut across multi-agency activity and divide area regeneration from mainstream economic activity. The Executive must show its faith in local government. There is no need to construct a mega-quango in the shape of the new executive agency. Local authorities should be responsible  for the strategic housing budget and development role, with staff and budgets being transferred from Scottish Homes. The NEA should be restricted to a regulatory role. With regard to part 6, we are concerned about means-testing for grants and whether the Executive has given any thought to the actual cost, relative to the benefits. More bureaucracy ultimately means that less is available to spend on grants. To reduce complexity, the grants system should be unified and simplified by the introduction of a single refurbishment grant. The £20,000 maximum stated in the bill should be index linked to prevent erosion over time by inflation. A major issue is the massive reduction in the moneys available for grants. According to a written answer Wendy Alexander gave me last year, they have been reduced from £102 million to £38 million since local government reorganisation. The Executive has done nothing to redress that. Section 91, on tolerable standards, should include serious disrepair, energy efficiency, electrical wiring, fire protection and the provision of smoke detectors. The Executive should make clear to Westminster colleagues its support for the harmonisation at 5 per cent, VAT on new build and repair building work. That would help to reverse urban decline and reduce suburbanisation.

To ask the Scottish Executive what response it will give to the information from the recent British Medical Association Scotland's survey regarding the proportion of general practitioners who believe that the quality of hospital services has declined in the past five years. (S1O-3084)

Eighty per cent of GPs believe that the service that they provide has declined in the past five years, and only one in 1,000 believes that primary care has improved since new Labour came to power. Does the minister agree with the BMA that the service is in crisis, that the level of care that is offered to patients by GPs is steadily eroding, and that collapsing GP morale, an increase in bureaucracy and a lack of resources are having a detrimental effect on patients? If so, what of substance will she do about it?

As a vice-convener of the cross-party group on survivors of childhood sexual abuse, I am pleased to be able to contribute to this debate and to be the first to congratulate Marilyn Livingstone on securing it. I add my thanks to Anne MacDonald of the Kingdom Abuse Survivors Project and to Sandra Brown of the Moira Anderson Foundation, which has done phenomenal work in this area over a number of years. We are talking about the theft of someone's childhood. That someone is not allowed to grow as other children have grown up; perhaps because of the loss of innocence, perhaps because of the personal violation that they have suffered, perhaps because of the breach of trust that many of them have endured at the hands of people whom they may know only too well. Such children, when growing up, have no voice and, as adults, often have no voice still. They are people who might grow up feeling unable to talk to people about what they have suffered over many years. Different people react in different ways and suffer different types of abuse. Some suffer long-term abuse, others suffer short-term abuse. They suffer differing degrees of violence. Perhaps it is severe; perhaps there is no overt violence other than the actual violation. There may be the overhanging threat of blackmail. Someone in their own family might go to prison if they come forward. Obviously, many who suffer sexual abuse suffer  ruined lives. As Marilyn Livingstone mentioned, suicide is often a side-effect of childhood sexual abuse. Self-harm is common and people can suffer a loss of self-esteem. Children and young people might run away from home to get away from sexual abuse. Mental health and relationship problems may follow. Promiscuity and prostitution are other possible side-effects. We should understand that many people who have suffered childhood sexual abuse will go on to have happy and productive lives, but undoubtedly not as happy as they would have been if they had not suffered the abuse. The group that has been established will be a forum for debate. It will work positively and collaboratively across party and geographical divides. The issue affects people from all social and geographical backgrounds. The individual human costs are monumental, the social and economic impact colossal. The agencies that help people who have suffered trauma lead a fragile, hand-to-mouth existence and may have to apply or reapply for grants on a tri-annual or annual basis, never knowing whether they will be able to provide a service from one year to the next. The cross-party group believes that that must not continue. We must secure the establishment of a comprehensive, fully funded, all-Scotland strategy to tackle the issue. From the north of Scotland to the south; from the east to the west; in urban Scotland and in rural Scotland—people who have suffered appalling abuse in childhood must have someone to whom they can turn, when they are children, but also once they are adults. We have been told of people coming forward 20 or 30 years after first suffering abuse. People should be able to do that, but they can do so only if there are agencies nearby to which they can turn. This is an area in which the Executive must truly ensure joined-up government, with the involvement of councils, health boards, educational services, the justice system and so on. Training for those who work with survivors is vital. We must fight against taboo and explode myths such as that of the perpetrators usually being strangers, that of victims almost always being girls or that of victims themselves going on to become predators. This is a vital issue on which Scotland can and should lead the rest of the United Kingdom. There is much more to be said, but given that I am now over my time, I leave it to colleagues to make the salient points. I look forward to the response of the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care.

I will confine my speech to a few key sections of this welcome bill. It is interesting to note the large element of consensus that there appears to be in the debate. As Trish Godman—and, indeed, Keith Harding—pointed out, the Local Government Committee took evidence from a number of witnesses on the issue of inspections. I think that we all came to the conclusion that we were rather perplexed as to how the bill could possibly improve public confidence with regard to some of the less salubrious care homes if the number of inspections was reduced from two to one. Indeed,  NAIRO, COSLA, the Association of Directors of Social Work, the Scottish Trades Union Congress and Unison all made clear their very strongly held concerns on the issue. As has already been stated, the committee unanimously agreed that there must be a minimum of two unannounced inspections per year. Section 21(3) of the bill indicates that the commission will not generally inspect a service in a year that Her Majesty's inspectors carry out an inspection and that the inspection could be planned in advance with the provider. I wish to emphasise that the committee believes that all inspections should be unannounced and also that they should be carried out by a minimum of two inspectors for reasons of corroboration. Why is that important? It is important because, as was alluded to by my colleague Shona Robison, the Walker report indicated that there are a number of people in care homes who have been sadly neglected. Indeed, there are many thousands who apparently suffer from malnutrition. The committee believes, therefore, that the bill must be robust in order to deal with concerns on those specific issues. Self-funding through fees has been alluded to by many people, as this is a cause for concern. The financial memorandum to the bill made clear that a mix of fee and central funding will be replaced entirely by fees from 2004-05. That will have enormous implications, in particular for the voluntary sector. In a few short years, as the minister has stated, fees may triple. At the same time, according to proposals that have been put forward to date, inspections could halve. The Local Government Committee believes that that is likely to impact significantly on service delivery. I am pleased, however, that the minister has advised that GAE will be altered to minimise additional costs to local government, providing that  that is not subsumed in overall aggregated external finance, and given additional costs to local government of approximately £6 million per year by 2002-03. However, paragraph 186 of the explanatory notes to the bill appears to indicate that additional costs will be considered only beyond 2003-04. I believe that that needs clarification. As previously mentioned, the costs of registration for a care provider could impact on the provision of care by those on low incomes, for example, those who care for the elderly or childminders. The committee asks that the Executive introduce safeguards to ensure that small organisations and people on low incomes are not disadvantaged. The unions gave evidence on the transfer of staff and highlighted issues such as: the location of offices; the appropriateness of home working; grading and conditions of service; pension rights; and employment alternatives. It is clear that the Transfer of Undertakings (Protection Of Employment) Regulations are insufficient to meet staff needs and that transfer practice should be comparable to the section 9 provisions of the Local Government etc (Scotland) Act 1994, which underpinned staff transfer during the 1996 reorganisation of local government. More detailed information is urgently required on the arrangements relating to transfer of staff. Working from home could lead to difficulties with family care responsibilities. Homes, as the unions pointed out, might not satisfy legislation on health and safety at work. The same standards of health and safety should apply to home workers as apply to other employees. Concerns about the resource implications for training of the social services work force have been voiced. Appropriate interim arrangements will be necessary to provide training for social care staff during the period before new arrangements have been put in place. There is also a need for designated training for registration and inspection staff and for consideration to be given to offering education and training to staff to allow career progression from a vocational to professional status. A competent, motivated, multidisciplinary, professionally qualified work force is essential. Action is needed now on a training and work force planning strategy. It is clear that misgivings about the reduction in regional options must be addressed. At present, each council has its own inspection and registration unit, and 13 of the 15 health boards also have registration and inspection functions. If the bill as introduced is passed, it will reduce access to inspection and registration services from the current 44 centres to a proposed five. That is too drastic. It will not provide an optimum service. A happy medium is perhaps the best way forward.

Does the minister agree with the view of our local authorities—expressed this week at the Local Government Committee—that the case for abolition of housing capital set-aside arrangements is overwhelming and that failure to abolish set-aside betrays a lack of trust in local government's ability to decide whether housing investment or debt repayment is a priority on a council-by-council basis? Is the minister willing to put her faith in Labour councils on this issue?

Why then, on 21 July 2000, did the Scottish Executive write to Ballet West saying that "there is no widespread evidence of demand for post-16 Dance and Drama training in Scotland"? That is why the anomalies that have been discussed in the debate have arisen.

I am pleased to be able to introduce this debate today; I thank all members who signed the motion. A number of members have asked why the motion is so long—it is the longest motion ever debated in the Parliament. I was concerned that it would not be selected for debate so, in effect, I wrote much of the speech in the motion. However, matters have moved on since then, so forgive me if I elaborate somewhat. The matter was first brought to my attention by  Mr Robert Eadie, who is a resident of the ward that I used to represent on Glasgow City Council. His daughter, Gillian Barton, is artistic director of Ballet West, a company that was founded in 1991 and, in 1995, began to teach full-time classical ballet courses. Ballet West is situated near Taynuilt, in the shadow of Ben Cruachan. Its reputation as a centre of excellence soon spread far and wide throughout the ballet world; its dancers have won numerous awards. For example, in 1997, Sara-Maria Barton became the first female dancer from Scotland to win an Adeline Genee award in the 63-year history of the competition and the first female from the UK since 1991. Furthermore, in 1999, Kelly McCole was the only British dancer to reach the final of that competition. Time prevents me from detailing further the numerous other awards that have been won by dancers from Ballet West or the outstanding teaching that it has brought to the school. Suffice it to say, it has now attracted students and teachers not only from across the UK and Europe but from as far afield as Guatemala, Malaysia and Japan. Indeed, that well-known nationalist Billy Connolly was so impressed by Ballet West after its participation in the film "Mrs Brown" that he agreed to be its patron. Unfortunately, Ballet West believes that its very existence is threatened by an anomaly that differentiates between dance companies north and south of the border. Historically, local councils across the UK were responsible for funding for dance students. With cuts in local authority funding throughout the 1990s, it soon became apparent that receipt of a grant was determined by postcode instead of individual talent. On 27 November 1998, dance and drama awards—or DADAs—were established by the Department for Education and Employment. A student who wins a place at an institution offering courses in dance, drama and stage management is required to provide £1,050 for their fees, with the remainder being met by the DADA. Students who receive a DADA can also apply to a fees and maintenance fund to pay the student's proportion of the fees. Furthermore, students from England and Wales may receive up to £3,000 towards living expenses, which is means-tested against parental income. With the change to central Government funding, the system of accreditation has moved from the independent Council for Dance Education and Training to a scheme involving the Further Education Funding Council inspectorate, industry representatives, the DFEE, the Department for Culture, Media and Sport and the Arts Council of England. Dance schools on the scheme are required to teach new further education  qualifications written and assessed by Trinity College, London. No Scottish dance school can join the scheme, as education is now a devolved issue. However, the qualifications of Trinity College can be offered and funding for Ballet West provided if ministers give the Scottish Further Education Funding Council guidance to do so. That is the conundrum. On 31 January, the Executive wrote to Ballet West advising that "responsibility for ensuring the provision, including the funding, of further education training lies with the Scottish Further Education Funding Council". However, on 19 February, Ballet West responded: "The Council cannot provide funding for provision of organisations outwith this list without seeking the agreement of the Scottish Executive". As that list comprises the organisations that are prioritised by the Executive, I ask the minister to address that issue in his response. Why is this important? Although dance students from across the UK and European Union are accepted into institutions south of the border on ability, students from Scotland cannot access the fees and maintenance fund. Because of non-accreditation, students at institutions in Scotland, such as Ballet West, receive no funding to pay their fees. Dance students in Scotland can obtain maintenance grants from their local authority if it is supportive; however, although councils such as Angus, Argyll and Bute and Glasgow are supportive, others are not. As a result, maintenance costs fall on students and their families in a fairly random way, depending on where they live—which is, ironically, why the system south of the border was changed some years ago. As accreditation does not exist in Scotland, no DADA is available to students at Ballet West. That is an anomaly that the company is keen to have addressed. All fees are currently paid by the families of those who study, which places great strain on such families and limits those who can access ballet training in Scotland by family income, not by talent. For example, the income of 17-year-old Jill Hamilton's family is only £24,000, almost half of which will have to go towards her training and living costs, placing real hardship on a family that simply wish the best for their daughter. Jill's brother and sister must also be considered by the family. Ironically, although Jill Hamilton is from Appin, which is near Ballet West, she suffers from the double whammy that is imposed by the lack of access to funding for fees and living costs. If she  moved to London to study, all but £1,050 of her fees would be paid; however, her family believe that she would receive poorer tuition. Others do not wish their children to move from Scotland at such a young age. As a result, the potential for a Scottish Billy Elliot is very limited. As the motion indicates, 34 potential students have had to reject offers to study at Ballet West due to lack of funding, compared with only two who have rejected offers at institutions south of the border. So much for social inclusion. In launching last year's cultural strategy, the Executive talked about "widening opportunities, promoting education, developing and promoting excellence". That is not happening for classical ballet dancing in Scotland. Unless the situation changes, Ballet West may have to move to England, depriving the fragile economy of Taynuilt of income from the dance school and its students, inflicting job losses on teaching and administrative staff and depriving local schoolchildren of supplementary activities in schools, such as dance classes and public performances. That may also lead to an unnecessary drain of creative artistic talent from Scotland. The Executive has stated in correspondence to Ballet West that "there is no widespread evidence of demand for post-16 Dance and Drama training in Scotland." In fact, demand is strong. It would be stronger if access to funding was comparable to that south of the border and if discrimination was ended.

To ask the First Minister what response the Scottish Executive plans to make to the findings of the report "The National Nutritional Audit of Elderly Individuals in Care" on the nutrition of pensioners in professional care. (S1F-857)

I thank the First Minister for his reply, but will he explain why, after four years of  new Labour government, 21 per cent of pensioners in hospitals and care homes are starving and, in many cases, suffering from appalling neglect? Will he detail how Executive policies, such as the proposal in the Regulation of Care Bill to reduce the number of inspections of care homes from two per year to one per year will improve the situation?

What a load of waffling mince we have just heard from the Liberal Democrats, who are so concerned about this issue that only a third of their group have bothered to show up. Moreover, what can we say of the massed ranks of the Labour back benchers who have been dragooned into showing up today but who were not present in any numbers three weeks ago when the minister was getting a pounding from all parts of the chamber? One or two members seem to be getting their knickers in a twist about the SNP even bringing this issue to the chamber today. We do so not out of spite or vindictiveness towards the minister, whom many of us like a great deal, or out of a desire to score, in the words of the immortal Iain Smith, "cheap political" points. We bring the issue to the chamber today because the minister has gone against the will of Parliament on the trunk roads issue to the detriment of the public sector and the public purse. Indeed, Donald Gorrie—who, I understand, is a colleague of Iain Smith—said in the previous debate: "Although we do not want crises, votes of no confidence and so on, it is not acceptable for a minister to ignore the majority opinion of the Parliament."— [ Official Report , 25 January 2001; Vol 10, c 593.]  Touché. However, it is clear that when a minister cocks a snook at Parliament, we have little option but to move a motion of no confidence, otherwise ministers could be forgiven for doing whatever they liked and thinking that they could get away with it.

Sit down. Our party has nothing to gain from this issue. Parliament will gain. If the motion is successful, new Labour will select a replacement from its own ranks who not only might be more effective but, as important, will not be able to ignore the will of the chamber on issues that deeply affect the lives of many thousands of people across Scotland. The fact is that, on the issue of trunk road  contracts, the minister chose to accept the advice of a small group of civil servants rather than that of local authorities, unions and fellow parliamentarians of all colours. Pleas calling for a delay so that the issue could be reviewed fell on deaf ears. Details have emerged showing not only that the process was flawed, but that the costs in terms of job losses, damage to local authority direct labour organisations and the waste of public money will be, as Bruce Crawford suggested, colossal. On 25 January, ministers stayed away from the chamber in an act of outright political cowardice. Of the 22 members of the Executive, the only one who bothered to show up during the 90-minute debate to give Sarah Boyack an element of support was Rhona Brankin. Today, however, the ministers are in the chamber to ride shotgun over those Labour members who dared to criticise the minister and who now, suitably chastised, jump to her defence.

No. I am going to quote again the words of Mr Kerr for the benefit of those who did not hear them the first time. He said: "I have absolutely no confidence in Sarah Boyack's judgment on the matter."— [ Official Report , 25 January 2001; Vol 10, c 579.]  Today, Mr Kerr said that he had no confidence in Bruce Crawford. Who will Mr Kerr have no confidence in next month? The man who criticised the SNP for not being supportive of the Scottish Parliament is a man who does not even believe in devolution to the Scottish Parliament and who said to me and four of my colleagues that he was in the Scottish Parliament only to stop a devolutionist getting elected and that he had more in common with the Tories than he would ever have with Scotland's party. Andy has had his bum skelped over his comments of January 25—I hope only metaphorically—and we know that he has been told exactly what to say today. The minister is under fire on other issues as well. This Monday, the headline of the Evening Times read: "Boyack Gets Bridge Message Wrong". The story said that "drivers were misled over the lifting of restrictions on the Kingston Bridge." There has also been criticism from Glasgow City Council and others over delays in the construction of the vital M74 northern extension and of the minister's continued tinkering with the plans. Before the accession of the new First Minister, the minister also had responsibility for the environment. Her brief was halved, which indicates that the First Minister must have had concerns about her abilities.  Regrettably, the minister listens not to Parliament, colleagues, councils or unions. It is time to replace her with someone who will.

Will the minister give way?

I thank the Presiding Officer and minister, given that I could not participate in the debate. Does the Executive intend to ensure that there is a sound financial framework for Citizens Advice Scotland and similar agencies to enable them to continue with their work in future?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met representatives of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and what issues were discussed. (S1O-2946)

I thank the minister for his brief answer. What discussions does the minister plan to have with COSLA on today's decision by Glasgow City Council to withdraw from COSLA? Does he accept that the straw that broke the camel's back was a miserly local government settlement for an authority with half of Scotland's deprived communities, which has been forced, since Labour came to power, to put up council tax by 36 per cent, to cut 2,347 full-time-equivalent posts and to  slash services? Given that Labour-run COSLA—

Will the Green party make a submission to the Local Government Committee's inquiry into local government finance?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the minister give way?

What proportion of the additional resource that is being given to councils over the next three years is being prioritised by the Executive? How much will local authorities be allowed to prioritise?

Will the minister give way?

If the minister is genuine about moving forward, will he tell us what percentage of the new money will be unhypothecated and what percentage will be hypothecated?

What room do the Conservatives believe remains in local authority budgets for further efficiency savings? Will the member explain how they would work for each council—or even just for South Ayrshire?

rose—

Will the member give way?

Say that with a straight face.

Given that the time that is available to me in this year's debate on the local government settlement order is seven minutes shorter than I had last year, I will not respond to every point that was raised by the minister, but will focus instead on a few key areas of concern for COSLA and the wider local government community. My colleagues will pick up other issues as the debate progresses. On 22 November, the Minister for Finance and Local Government announced his intention to introduce three-year budgets for local authorities, which we welcomed. Although the details of each local authority settlement were not released until 7 December, the minister spoke of real-terms increases in spending over three years and of flexibility in spending those additional resources. The aggregate external finance figures will front load additional resources into the first year of the settlement—coincidentally in a Westminster election year—and the most deprived local authorities will receive below average settlements, apparently in favour of local authorities that equate to marginal constituencies. We have heard condemnation of the settlement from, among others, the minister's Labour party colleagues in Glasgow. Indeed, the leader of Glasgow City Council has stated that by 2003-04 Glasgow will be £72 a head worse off in terms of grant—£45 million in that year—than when the Tories left office, despite new burdens and responsibilities having been imposed on the council since 1997. However, I will leave others—notably members on the Labour benches—to detail those specific concerns. I am happy to answer the question that the Minister for Finance and Local Government was unable to answer. By 2003-04, the capital that will be available to local government will be approximately £188 million less than when the Conservative party left office.

When the next local elections come, we will provide a fully costed manifesto that will detail all the information that the minister requires. I know that many of his Labour colleagues feel that Glasgow got a raw deal—they have spoken to me privately about the matter. However, for once I shall not quote Charlie Gordon in my speech. Instead, I shall address hypothecation and the spending pressures within the overall local government settlement. Resources are always an issue and always will be, not only because of the amount of resources that are available, but because of the way in which they are spent in particular council areas. I was pleased that the minister touched on hypothecation. It is now clear that the extent of ring fencing and the Scottish Government's direction of the use of resources are causing significant difficulties for councils in maintaining core service provision. Those factors are also undermining efforts to introduce a more appropriate balance between central direction and local flexibility. In announcing individual councils' figures, the minister stated: "The three-year grant allocations that I am announcing today for both revenue and capital will assist all local authorities to plan their budgets better and to provide their local electors with certainty about their tax commitments."— [ Official Report , 7 December 2000; Vol 9, c 690.]  He reiterated much of that today. However, commenting on the three-year settlement, the president of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, Norman Murray "warned that councils would continue to face difficult decisions in setting their budgets for the next three years." Why should that be, given the apparent generosity to which the minister has referred repeatedly today? Analyses of specific grants for the next three years show that, for next year in particular, although overall AEF—aggregate external finance—is to increase by 6.2 per cent, ring fencing within that total is to increase by 10.7 per cent. That restricts the resources that are available for general grants to local government. The increase in ring fencing through specific grants is at odds with the minister's statement to Parliament on 7 December. He said that there is "an increased focus on service outcomes".— [ Official Report , 7 December 2000; Vol 9, c 690.]  That is a message that he repeated today. Ministers have indicated their willingness to examine the possibility of more flexible arrangements for specific grants for years 2 and 3 and to consider putting in place arrangements that will allow greater flexibility between capital and revenue. However, such consideration needs to be undertaken as a matter of urgency, especially in relation to the use of available excellence fund resources, which the minister touched on. There are several facets to the problem of ring fencing. First, ring fencing is set within the context of resources that are demonstrably insufficient to meet the needs of Scotland's communities. Secondly, the process is rigid and bureaucratic. Thirdly, it is fragmentary and militates against a strategic joined-up approach. It is disingenuous to place so much focus on initiatives that raise public expectations, when the reality is that funding is being displaced from other high-priority areas. An urgent review of hypothecation in the system must therefore be undertaken. On 7 December, when the Minister for Finance and Local Government announced individual councils' settlement figures for the next three years, significant background detail was outstanding in relation to the Executive's assumptions in its calculations. Prior to receipt of that analysis, the focus on settlement figures had been largely on the bottom-line settlement. Ministers said that the settlement took account of the existing pressures in local government and that there would be less focus on inputs. The detail that has since been made available places in some doubt the substance of those statements. It is clear that the Executive has placed considerable direction on the use of available resources. The devil is, of course, in the detail—the detail shows that every penny of the new money has been directed by ministers. That significantly distorts the efforts that have been made in reviewing local government finance systems to introduce a more appropriate balance between central direction and local flexibility. There must be more local discretion and flexibility in the use of such resources. Fundamentally, the lack of local flexibility that has been brought about by the Scottish Government's detailed breakdown of available settlement resources demonstrates little partnership or trust, yet that was what the minister spoke of today. There needs to be more honesty in settlement announcements; it is disingenuous of ministers to suggest that previous cutbacks and the funding of core service provision have been recognised in this settlement. Resources have been targeted largely to specific areas in education, social work, the police and the fire service. Direction of funds to those areas will  mean disproportionate cuts in core service provision and in other service areas. On top of that, different messages are coming from the centre and from service departments in the Scottish Government with unacceptable levels of hypothecation. An example of that is the recent issuing of circulars that direct and specify in a detailed manner the most appropriate use of available social work resources—an area that is already substantially under-resourced. A further example of an area of concern that relates to the Executive's announcements is road maintenance. On 28 September 2000, the Minister for Transport stated in a press release: "Years of neglect have left our local roads and bridges in an appalling state. To tackle the backlog of repairs I am allocating an extra £70 million to local authorities up to March 2004." That is fine, but she continued: "I expect councils, at the very least, to maintain this year's level of current and capital spending on roads, street lighting and bridge maintenance." In short, she said that the new spending must be used as additional funding, not as a way to make up the existing budget. No provision has been made in the settlement calculations to assist councils in addressing and restoring much-needed on-going revenue maintenance to roads.

I thank Mr Tosh for his point of order. He is correct in saying that much of the information that I am using was received in a COSLA briefing. That is because COSLA is the organisation that speaks for local government in Scotland. I can assure members, however, that some of what I say is my own words. Because local government has less discretion over its funding than it has over its services, it is hard to apportion responsibility for locally delivered services. As a result, there is confusion about responsibility and accountability; central Government and local government blame each other when things go wrong. To make accountability clear, local government's discretion over its funding must be closely aligned with discretion over its services. For its part, local government must play its part in helping the Government of the day to meet its objectives. Those objectives, however, are best achieved not by central direction or hypothecation, but by joint policy and the development of such policy by local government and the Executive. By definition,  priorities should be limited in number and the focus should be on jointly agreed outcomes, which will allow local government to use discretion in achieving those outcomes. Last summer, councils faced a number of new burdens and spending pressures that have still not been addressed. They include: increased employer superannuation contributions; the impact of green taxes; the demographic pressures that are caused by the increasing number of single-status elderly households; and a major funding problem in relation to police and fire service pensions. That amounts to a minimum cost of £146 million next year alone, in addition to the necessary restoration of previous cutbacks which, it would appear, have not been adequately reflected within the settlement calculations. As a result, there will be significant pressure on councils' capacity to fund existing core service provision while recognising levels of urban and rural poverty. Other pressures that are appearing on the horizon include the impact of the award of the new trunk road contracts, the outcome of Lord Hardie's judgment in the MacGregor case and the cost of the new executive agency's regulation of housing management, which Glasgow City Council believes will cost it £8 million a year. Other hidden burdens have not been accounted for. Last Monday, for example, I was advised that the cost of service provision for autistic children has risen 700 per cent in Glasgow in six years, but there has been no recognition of that at the centre. The minister will be aware that that service to autistic children will soon receive Glasgow's COSLA affiliation fee, following Glasgow City Council's withdrawal from that organisation. The Scottish Executive defined a new burden that will be taken into account in settlement calculations as a situation in which "as a result of the Executive's policies a new initiative, duty or responsibility was placed specifically on local government in such a way that imposed additional costs on authorities" or "where there was a transfer of functions or responsibility from the Executive or other government departments to local authorities in such a way that imposes additional costs on authorities."

Indeed. I am on my last section. In assessing the overall spending needs of local government, a more realistic account needs to be taken of all the spending pressures and inescapable costs that are faced by local government. A realistic assessment must be made of the capacity to introduce further efficiency savings for local government. The Scottish  Government's narrow definition of new burdens must be expanded to recognise all spending pressures within settlement calculations. A grant distribution system cannot solve the problems of inadequate resource levels and an inadequate tax base. The overall inadequacy of resources is at the root of the problem in attempting to consider the allocation of available settlement resources.

I am just finishing. I hope that ministers will give a strong commitment to the Local Government Committee's inquiry and that they will act promptly to effect any changes that might be proposed for the financial arrangements. The current system confuses accountability, creates dependency and includes too many central controls. Partnership between ministers and local government is essential if we are to make progress with optimum service delivery.

To ask the Scottish Government what criteria are considered when establishing people's juries. (S1O-2890)

I thank the minister for her answer. Does she accept the findings of her central research unit, which has condemned people's juries as "expensive and time-consuming" and unreliable. Does she further agree with the unit that the findings of people's juries are often worthless and cannot guarantee a representative sample of views? Will she take the opportunity to acknowledge that this initiative of her predecessor  has been a costly failure?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The leader of the Conservative group asked the First Minister a question on the transfer of money that is allegedly being used to convert to the euro. Should David McLetchie be allowed to misrepresent the fact that, according to a written answer from the former Minister for Finance, the money to which he referred is additional to the Scottish block? Indeed—

Alleged cuts? The member should read the document.

Is Scotland's share of UK expenditure increasing or decreasing?

Not any more.

Never is a long time in politics, so I will try not to take an eternity with my speech. I am relieved that Angus MacKay was able to make his statement today. Over the next few days, I hope that he will give me the answers to the questions that I asked previously, but which he could not answer. On today's consideration of Scotland's budget documents, it is not all peaches and cream, as the minister professed it to be. Like other members, I did not have time to absorb the whole tome, but I noted some interesting parts of it. In summing up, perhaps Mr Peacock can inform us why local authority grants for transport will fall by £7.344 million next year and why housing support grants will fall from £12.414 million to a new low of £9.565 million. He might even explain the decline in moneys that will be allocated to community ownership, which will nosedive from £76.483 million to £47.824 million next year, with further decreases in 2002-04.  Andrew Wilson touched on indirect expenditure on schools—I must say that I pointed that out to him over lunch. It is an issue that has been raised in the chamber in recent months by Gil Paterson, Tricia Marwick, Andrew Wilson and others, and it is of great concern to pupils, parents and staff throughout Scotland. We see that there will be a cut from £41.195 million to £34.929 million next year, with further cuts in subsequent years. Throughout the document there are more cuts, for example, in funding for careers guidance, for further education colleges and for business support. As Gordon Brown continues to display largesse south of the border, Scotland receives a declining share of United Kingdom expenditure. In a normal Parliament, the budget debate would be a wide-ranging assessment of how money is raised, as well as how it is allocated; of what is a fair and efficient way to tax people and what are the optimum choices for expenditure—but not here. This budget takes the funding that is allocated from the Westminster budget and divides it roughly by 11. There is little to which we can take an independent approach. Indeed, as we saw this morning in respect of the Sutherland report, quite the reverse is true. While devolution has created a divergence in policy demand, we have in the Barnett formula a financial system that is designed to produce convergence. In the main, our criticisms are not levelled at the Government's budget choices, but at the lack of ambition about the tools that are at its disposal. Unfortunately, the Parliament has fewer financial powers than any other legislative Parliament on earth, bar none. I was amazed that David Davidson talked about the constraints on local government, when he knows fine well that we have even less control over the size of our budget than any local authority in Scotland.

I am sorry that I have not memorised the 260-odd pages of the document in two hours—that is beyond even my incredible powers. Members will be aware that, for example, more than £1 billion in local government finance was raised through the council tax. That is a higher proportion of council expenditure than the Parliament could raise if it used the 3 per cent tax-varying power. It is not enough for ministers to boast that most budget areas will spend record levels on public services. Every year tends to be a record year for spending. Even under the Tories, more was spent  each year than in previous years—it is called inflation. In fact, the only year in recent times in which a record amount was not spent was Labour's first year in power when, for the first time since the national health service was established, expenditure on it was cut. The outcome is there for all to see, in crumbling transport infrastructure, poor hospital buildings and gross underinvestment in housing. More than £1 billion requires to be spent on school buildings alone. We should not have to watch as spending rises more quickly in the rest of the UK than it does here. We have great potential for wealth in Scotland, which is one of the world's largest oil producers. We are a rich country, but we do not yet have the powers to turn ourselves into a rich society. On any analysis of the coming financial period, Scotland is sending more in taxes to London than it receives. As for oil—that is like winning the lottery and handing the money to the next-door neighbour. Even on the most conservative of estimates, our surplus will total £7.7 billion this year and next—that is £1,500 for every person in Scotland. Yes, we may have higher expenditure than down south but, despite Scotland's greater need, the margins are closing. Our expenditure is dwarfed by our tax contribution, which amounts to 20 per cent more tax per person from Scotland next year than the average for the rest of the UK. What is the solution to Scotland's economic and social plight? There is only one—independence.

Never.

We have seen a fairly astonishing turn of events. I do not think that I have ever been at a debate in which a minister has spoken twice and, after sitting down, has received applause from not one member on either occasion. That shows the chamber's concern and unanimity on the issue, which has caused great concern for a number of people over a long period. I am pleased that we have been able to bring it before the chamber. I will address the comments made by each speaker. First, the minister has not answered the central question. I am willing to sit down and allow her to intervene if she will say whether she will delay the contracts until such time as the Transport and the Environment Committee has carried out its investigations. [MEMBERS: "Go on, Minister."]  Given that the minister has not intervened, I shall proceed. The tendering process was flawed at 26 different points. In the main, those have been touched upon, but they deserve further comment. How could the assessment process, for example, have been carried out effectively if the current providers—with decades of experience, who have delivered a high-quality service—are replaced by two companies, one of which has little or no experience in Scotland? The tendering process has lacked any transparency. The Government reserved the right to apply unspecified weightings to items within the bid, but the actual weightings applied have never been disclosed. On quality, tenderers did not know what the quality threshold was. They were advised only if they reached it. On pricing, tenderers will be paid a lump sum for winter maintenance, irrespective of the type of winter. There is great concern over the flexibility of such pricing. On price assessment, some of the quantities used in the assessment are three or four times greater than have been or will be used by the Government. In one instance, a differential of over 4,000 per cent has been indicated. That has greatly distorted tender prices. It was made clear at pre-tender and quality meetings that large lump sums and low rates would not be tolerated, yet it appears that they have been accepted. That makes it easier to manipulate outcomes. In addition, the many areas of ambiguity in the tender documents mean that there is considerable scope for claims for additional costs, possibly leading to an expensive claims approach by tenderers using that methodology.  Bruce Crawford talked about the serious damage to our ability to manage and maintain our roads and about the fact that no attempt was made to assess the impact on existing services. Like other members, he talked about duplication, and increased costs for local depots and quarries. The minister spoke after Bruce Crawford and talked about the use of inaccurate information, but it seems to me that the minister is the only person who holds to that view. COSLA and the individual local authorities have all submitted information that contradicts the minister. It appears that the minister believes that she is right and that everyone else is wrong. How can that possibly be? She has approached the debate like an ostrich with its head stuck firmly in the sand. Murray Tosh talked about savings being made centrally by burdening local authorities. He was not satisfied that the process had been carried out effectively. Iain Smith talked about the lack of transparency and clarity in the process. He touched on the errors in base quantities and talked about economies of scale, about depots closing and about materials. He also called for a full, independent assessment. Everyone in the chamber would agree that today's keynote speech was given with great passion by Andy Kerr. He expressed no faith in the minister's judgment—what can we add to that? He talked about a shambles of a process and reminded the minister that local authorities are already in partnership with the private sector and that we were hoping to achieve a level playing field. Andy Kerr doubted that local authorities had been listened to and talked of this being a sad day for the Scottish Parliament. He said that quality was not in the contracts and pointed out the fact that the Scottish Government's proposals were 10 years out of date and were simply compulsory competitive tendering mark I. He told us that there was not even a basic level of best value in the contracts. Shona Robison talked about the conflict of interest with Halcrow and I have been advised by some of the many lawyers on the SNP benches that that could leave the Scottish Government open to independent legal challenge if the contracts were introduced. Shona Robison appealed to members to support the SNP motion. Tommy Sheridan talked about the honesty of Andy Kerr's presentation and called for a full exploration of the matter. He emphasised the fact that the minister was proposing to cut costs by cutting jobs and mentioned the possible risks to safety.  David Davidson talked about the minister's blinkered view and, although he did not use these exact words, said that the minister was taking us over the abyss on the issue. Fiona McLeod again pointed out that the minister had disputed the information given by local councils. She quoted COSLA on its adamant opposition to the proposals that the minister has outlined today. I would like to quote David Stewart, the Labour MP for Inverness East, Nairn and Lochaber. He says: "I have very grave doubts about the Executive's handling of the tendering process. It has been deeply flawed from the outset, and I have no hesitation in supporting the Highland Council's stance. In politics, you have to stand up for what you believe is right." Kate MacLean also talked about flaws in the assessment process and said that the Executive had let the side down. Alex Neil talked about the amateurish and pathetic argument that the minister had put forward and I am sure that most MSPs will agree with the point that he made about shabby deals. Donald Gorrie raised an important point about the minister undermining trust between the Scottish Parliament and the ministers and talked about the need for the ministerial team to listen to the majority. There was discussion of the fact that the minister is entirely alone in the process and the minister refused to reply to individual concerns that were raised by members. It appears that, in her view, her civil servants are right but that MSPs, COSLA, local authorities, Uncle Tom Cobbleigh and all are wrong. She even had the temerity to misquote the SNP's motion.

Nasty. Best value has been totally ignored and TUPE regulations will be ignored. It is clear that substantial numbers of people will not meet the criteria for TUPE regulations and that local authorities will be faced with redundancy costs. TUPE regulations will apply only in cases in which half of the work of a member of staff is clearly identified with the transferred undertaking. That is unlikely to apply to many due to the way in which direct labour organisations use staff across differing contracts. The minister may have called for an urgent independent review of one aspect of the tendering process, but one can hardly feel confident of the outcome, given the fact that, in yesterday's Evening Times , the minister was quoted as saying that she is certain that the findings will not alter her decision.  The issue is about jobs, services, people and livelihoods. It is not about a minister behaving like King Canute and holding back the waves of indignation and concern. She should re-examine all aspects of a flawed process to arrive at the best possible solution and to find the most economically advantageous method of delivering trunk road management and maintenance. I urge members to support the motion.

Will the minister give way?

I add my congratulations to those of colleagues across the party divide to Pauline McNeill on securing this debate. I first raised this issue with Allan Wilson's predecessor some 18 months ago when the Parliament and most of us were a lot younger. When the Parliament met in Glasgow, I raised the matter directly with the then acting First Minister, Jim Wallace. I did that because it is an important issue. Glasgow is extremely lucky in that, over the past couple of hundred years, not only the city council but members of Glasgow's population have contributed significantly to enhancing the city's collection of arts. That is why we have such a wonderful variety of museums and such rich and varied collections in our galleries. Glasgow is also lucky in that its city council has, in Bridget McConnell, a director who is extremely energetic and enthusiastic about enhancing the collection and, where possible, presenting and retaining the best of the works that Glasgow has. A lot of work has been undertaken by elected representatives in Glasgow City Council, such as Liz Cameron, who has led very much from the front and is another great enthusiast for the city—I see Bill Aitken smiling; we all know why. Liz is a wonderful person and a great character who has done a tremendous job in her role as convener. Other individuals, such as Chris Mason of the Liberal Democrats, have also contributed, as has my mother, who has played a significant part in Glasgow City Council's best value review. Just over a decade ago, Glasgow was European city of culture. That was partly because of the superb collections that we have in our museums. Without those wonderful collections and the way the city council has presented them over many years, we may not have been able to win city of culture status. However, much more money is needed. If we are to attract exhibitions such as the recent Dead sea scrolls exhibition, which broke all  records, it is important that we get funding from the Scottish Executive. Other colleagues have spoken about the money that Edinburgh museums get. There is concern in the west of Scotland that Edinburgh appears to be favoured over the west coast. I do not want to go down that line, as it has already been touched on. If Glasgow is to make the most of its museums—if it is to display some of the treasures that are at present in its basements, if it is to have the money in coming months and years to restore some of the works that have fallen into a state of dilapidation and if it is to attract more tourists and enrich the lives of Glaswegians young and old—it needs more money from the Scottish Executive. I urge the minister to consider the matter sympathetically.

It is regrettable that the shameful actions of the Scottish Government have led to this decision today. For the record, I received the statement only 40 minutes ago.

I do not know about you, Presiding Officer, but I have a feeling of déjà vu this morning. On 9 February last year, Jack McConnell launched a consultation document on appointments to quangos. Since the consultation process was completed—

Since the consultation process was completed, it has lain gathering dust on the shelves. Labour's much-vaunted bonfire is not even a smouldering ember.

Indeed, quangos continue to proliferate, with three quango births last December alone and more in the pipeline. Perhaps the minister could tell us how many quangos have  come into existence in Scotland since new Labour came to power and how many have been merged or abolished over the same period. Rather than simply consult, the Government must commit itself to democratise, scrutinise and—where possible—merge or abolish quangos altogether.

After four years of new Labour, we need action on this important issue. Given that, on 7 December, the Minister for Finance and Local Government stated in the chamber that he would make an announcement before the end of the year on a small business rates scheme—an event that has not yet happened—we should be forgiven if we do not hold our breath concerning the proposed time scale for action on this issue. I ask the minister to explain what action the Scottish Government now plans to take, specifically in respect of the responses to Mr McConnell's previous consultation. Alternatively, is the minister, as his statement implies, lumping those responses in with the review that was announced today? For the record, will the minister outline exactly which categories of non-departmental public bodies will be covered by the review? Does he agree that his statement on the commitment and dedication of those serving on public bodies is somewhat at odds with the First Minister's comment that Scotland is smothered by unelected, unwanted and increasingly corrupt quangos? Can he advise us whether the Scottish Government has a view on which quangos—other than the symbolic Scottish Homes—to consider for abolition?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I had to endure a number of points of order while I was questioning the minister. I gave a television interview at 10.55 this morning, based on Mr MacKay's statement, despite the fact that I did not receive it until 11.35.

Will the minister give way?

Does Fiona McLeod agree that the consultation process appears to be more about selling the ideas that had already been decided on by trusts and by the health board than about a genuine attempt to consult and to address the issues that the public raised?

I wish to be the first to congratulate Janis Hughes whole-heartedly on securing this welcome debate. About 20 months ago, Janis Hughes, Ken Macintosh, Mike Watson, John Young, Robert  Brown and I met a delegation from the Victoria infirmary and we agreed to form an informal cross-party group to consider the issues that are addressed in the motion. Since then, we have had 35 to 40 meetings with a variety of organisations, ranging from trade unions and the ambulance service to clinicians and—on two separate occasions—the Minister for Health and Community Care. I am pleased that the motion is, in many ways, a result of the work that has been done by that group. Time is short and a number of areas of concern that Janis Hughes touched on will be dealt with in greater detail by Ken Macintosh, John Young, Mike Watson and Robert Brown, so I wish to comment specifically on some of the issues that were discussed with Greater Glasgow Health Board and South Glasgow University Hospitals NHS Trust. When colleagues and I met the board and trust in September 1999, we were presented with what was virtually a fait accompli in their proposals for south Glasgow hospital provision—I see that John Young is nodding vigorously. We were presented with an open-and-shut case for why acute services for all south Glasgow should be concentrated on one site—the Southern general hospital—which is at the outer edge of the catchment area. The main reason for that was cost. We were advised that a new hospital on another site, such as Cowglen or Pollok, would cost £90 million more in capital cost and £7.3 million more in revenue than it would cost to refurbish the Southern general hospital. In the 18 months since then, despite repeated questions about how such figures were arrived at, we are still no further forward. We have had merely to take the health board's and the trust's word for it. That would be fair enough if there were a wee bit of consistency from the trust and the board. However, as colleagues across the party divide will attest, we might be presented with one set of figures at a board meeting on Monday, and we could meet the trust on Friday of the same week, only to be presented with a completely different set of figures. From the outset, we have met shifting sand. From £267 million, excluding an ambulatory care and diagnostic centre, the cost of a new hospital apparently ballooned first to £350 million, then to £440 million and now—this might give the minister a heart attack if it is true—to some £550 million. That increase has happened with no apparent significant change to the proposed hospital's size, specialty profile or patient services. Indeed, we were presented with completely different figures on different days and in successive weeks. We ended up in a very confusing situation in which nobody seemed to know where they were. Only the revenue costs—for some bizarre reason— appear to have stayed the same throughout the negotiations. That has caused concern to those of us who have been involved in discussions during recent months. The sand also appears to have shifted when it comes to the time scale for construction. We were told that a new hospital would take five years to build and that refurbishment of a hospital would take 10 years. That seems to me to be an argument for a brand-new, all-singing, all-dancing hospital on a new site. However, miraculously—after a couple of further meetings with the board and trust—we were told that it might take seven or eight years to build a new hospital but only five or six to refurbish one. Perhaps we are being cynical, but we are concerned that the wool is being pulled over our eyes by Greater Glasgow Health Board and by the trust. I say that with great regret. What is the trust offering us? First, we were offered a refurbished hospital, but people did not really like the sound of that, so the proposal has somehow been developed into a plan for a brand-new hospital. However, at a public meeting in Cambuslang last year—which was also attended by Robert Brown and Janis Hughes—I asked Bob Calderwood what his choice would be if a new hospital would cost exactly the same as a refurbishment on the Southern general site. What did he say? He said his choice would be a brand-new hospital. The issue is cost, but we do not think that cost should be the overriding factor. That hospital might have to last 50, 60 or 70 years. We want a high standard of care for patients and the best possible working conditions for staff. The public demand a new hospital. We need an independent option appraisal to ensure that people in south Glasgow get the best.

As convener of the cross-party group on tobacco control, I am pleased to be able to speak in this debate. The cross-border nature of tobacco marketing means that a ban on tobacco advertising would be much more effective if it were carried out simultaneously across the UK. The tobacco barons argue that they use advertising to encourage brand switching. However, in reality, cynical and often subtle marketing has been used to encourage people to start and continue smoking, with all the corresponding damage to health and all the heartbreak that is endured by the loved ones of the 14,000 Scots who die each year as a result. Young people, the socially excluded and the emotionally vulnerable are deliberately targeted by market segmentation strategies that are aimed at attracting new customers to replace those who quit or die, while strengthening individual brand identity and awareness. The tobacco industry is highly profitable and can afford to hire the most creative and inventive people. Restrictions to date on advertising have helped to reduce consumption significantly, particularly in the more prosperous socioeconomic groups. However, progress has slowed due to the strength of the industry's more subtle campaigns, which currently outspend Government health campaigns on smoking by a factor of 10. A complete ban on advertising works. In countries from Norway to New Zealand where advertising has been banned, consumption has fallen by 14 to 37 per cent. I realise that the odd member might believe that newspapers should be exempt from a ban, as they judge tobacco advertising in that genre to be ineffective. Although I am sure that advertising executives in our newspapers would be apoplectic at the very suggestion that our newspapers are a poor advertising medium, it is at best naive to  suggest that tobacco companies advertise in newspapers for charitable reasons. They know that it works; in any case, it is not our job to boost the profits of the Rupert Murdochs of this world at the expense of Scotland's public health. For a ban to work, it must be comprehensive and include all media, brand names and logos. The bill must clamp down on direct marketing, including the practice of sending "money-off" vouchers to people's homes unless they are directly solicited. Brand sharing—the promotion of tobacco through non-tobacco products such as clothing and coffee—must be banned and tight restrictions must be introduced at point of sale, including packaging and shop displays. Sports sponsorship and internet sales require regulation, and initiatives such as handing out free cigarettes to young people at the industry-sponsored Edinburgh fringe comedy festival should no longer be permitted. I am pleased that the bill covers most of that, but the sponsorship and point-of-sale loopholes must be eliminated. We must put a nail in the coffin of the tobacco industry—after all, it has been putting nails in the coffins of millions of us for many, many years.

As the minister is aware, Greater Glasgow Health Board and South Glasgow University Hospitals NHS Trust are promoting only one site—that of the Southern general hospital—on which to build the much-needed south Glasgow hospital, despite public pressure to consider other locations, to which Ken Macintosh alluded. Does the minister agree that it is important to ensure that a full multi-option appraisal is carried out, covering the other potential sites at Cowglen and the Victoria infirmary? Will she use her powers of persuasion to ensure that some of the funding that is allocated to the acute services review is allocated for that purpose?

Will the First Minister give way?

Has the Executive endorsed the European alcohol action plan 2000-2005, as the World Health Organisation has done? If so, will the Executive make representations to Westminster on lower blood alcohol limits, on monitoring alcohol consumption and on alcohol tax levels, all of which are unfortunately reserved to Westminster?

So there will be at least five minutes to spare then. [Laughter.]

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will recommend to Her Majesty's Government that there should be a referendum on independence for Scotland and suggest an appropriate date. (S1O-2656)

I find that answer surprising. [Laughter.] The Scottish people have never been asked directly whether they acquiesced in the surrender of the nation's independence 293 years ago, following the bribery that was inherent in the old Scottish Parliament. Given the fact that the Scots were denied a multi-option referendum in 1997, and the fact that people who support independence vote from across the political spectrum, is it not about time that the choice was put to the people of Scotland, or is the minister simply afraid that his side would lose?

I thank the minister for providing me with a copy of his statement an hour ago. I have guarded it with my life. I came here this morning hoping to hear from  Santa Claus in pre-election mode. However, although Angus MacKay may not quite be the Grinch that stole Christmas, he is not quite the man in red either. Notable omissions from his statement were extra statutory responsibilities and new burdens that may be imposed on local government that would also have to be paid for through the additional resources that were announced earlier today. Despite the above-inflation increases that Mr MacKay gleefully announced, will he concede that there is still a long way to go before local government again enjoys the resources that it had before reorganisation and prior to the massive hikes in council tax that were endured following that Tory-inspired debacle? Will the minister explain what the settlement will mean, in relative terms, for local authorities such as Glasgow, Inverclyde and Dundee? Does he agree with Charlie Gordon, leader of Glasgow City Council, that the rejection of the block and formula system, which is advocated by local authorities that are in the greatest need, will mean that Glasgow loses £10 million of much-needed resource and will place an additional burden on the hard-pressed council tax payers of that city and similar authorities? Does the minister agree with Councillor Gordon's view that the Executive decision on the funding formula over the next three years means that "ministers would be seen as walking away from their own social justice agenda" and that "the Executive is failing to recognise the impact of poverty on the delivery of services like social work and education" having been browbeaten by more prosperous local authorities? Does the minister accept that a simplistic reallocation of additional resources, primarily on a population basis, will inflict a disproportionate burden on poorer councils? Those areas often lose employed skilled residents and are left with a higher percentage of the socially excluded population which is desperately in need of higher- quality services. When will capital allocations again reach the levels, in real terms, that they were a decade ago? Will we be able to question the minister on his pre-Christmas announcement on a small business relief scheme, or will it be leaked to the media through another planted question?

You were.

Is the member that old?

And I thought that he was a sweet young thing.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it will address the expected loss of between 3,000 and 10,000—

That was exactly what is in the business bulletin.

We get told to be more spontaneous and look what happens. [Laughter.]  To ask the Scottish Executive how it will address the possible loss of between 3,000 and 10,000 manufacturing jobs in Glasgow by 2005, highlighted in "Glasgow's Renewed Prosperity" by Glasgow City Council and Scottish Enterprise Glasgow. (S1O-2599)

I welcome the minister's reply, but she will be aware that, although manufacturing employment is expected to fall by 13 per cent throughout Scotland in the next five years, it is expected to fall by 27 per cent in Glasgow. Given that Glasgow has the highest level of resident unemployment of any city in Britain, what additional steps will the Executive take on infrastructure development to secure increased investment and employment in Glasgow's hard-pressed manufacturing sector and to reverse the continued haemorrhage of full-time manual jobs? I am sure that the minister will agree that an additional £2 million is not enough.

Will Mr Stone take an intervention?

On a point of order. I seek your guidance, Presiding Officer. Is it in order for the Executive to make an announcement on an issue as important as the delay in the next local government elections through the medium of a reply to a written parliamentary question—which had not even been published—after decision time on the day of a by-election? If that is in order, can we all look forward to our written questions being answered prior to their publication? If it is not in order, do you agree that the parliamentary process has been made a mockery of by an Executive that is determined to undermine scrutiny and democratic accountability by failing to make a statement or hold a debate in the chamber on this important matter?

I, too, lodged an amendment to John Scott's motion, but at the time the motion had not been selected for members' business and my amendment was not accepted. I was happy to sign Robin Harper's amendment; it is regrettable that he is unable to be here to put the environmental side of the argument. We must consider first principles and the kind of world we want to live in. What is the purpose of sites of special scientific interest? To save the hen harrier or a certain species of toad or butterfly. Why do we want to do that? Because mankind has systematically exterminated the wolf, the bear, the wild boar and other creatures that used to inhabit Scotland. Conservation is carried out here on a much smaller scale than in other countries. Daily, we hear that one hectare per second of rainforest is being destroyed and that hundreds of species are being exterminated. The world is either becoming a concrete jungle or increasingly being put under the plough. Scotland must accept that it has a role to play in conservation. That role does not need to have an adverse effect on rural communities. The conservation movement is not only trying to save rare species in areas of natural beauty; it is trying to bring jobs into those areas and to develop them in a sustainable way. Alex Fergusson said that he would not be bothered if the amount of land that was available for conservation was doubled, as long as conservation of that land was not compulsory. However, a certain area of bog land, for example, may be the last remaining refuge on the planet for a specific species. If that is the case, for the sake of future generations and the preservation of the species, such sites must be taken under the wing of the conservation bodies as SSSIs. The only types of development that are permitted in SSSIs are those that are appropriate and that do not undermine health or natural values. Damaging developments may be allowed in such areas only for reasons of overriding national importance. That is absolutely right. Furthermore, SSSIs provide opportunities for rural communities. Some €30 billion is being made available for such sites from European Union structural funds, and programmes that encompass environmental protection and sustainable development are achieving a much higher priority. That means that issues such as those that John Scott touched on, such as rural unemployment, can be addressed in conjunction with conservation. We should examine SSSIs from a positive perspective and consider that conservation can  work in tandem with farming, forestry and fishing. For God's sake, let us not think about ploughing under all the land in Scotland, as has happened in East Anglia, where prairies have been created and 100,000 miles of hedgerows have been destroyed. Let us think about future generations and the world that we want to bequeath to our descendants.

I am pleased that the minister accepts that the review is worth while and should continue. Does he accept that the conclusions of the inquiry may strengthen the Executive's position, as I suggested to Jack McConnell in the Local Government Committee on 21 September 1999?

In mysterious ways.

When Mr McAllion was speaking, Mr Rumbles was crowing that some parties had been more successful than others in obtaining resources. Is not the Liberal Democrat group's failure in the first year of the partnership shown by the fact that Mr Rumbles's council was shafted more than any other by last year's settlement? If 10 of his colleagues had not voted with the Executive on the Local Government Finance (Scotland) Order 2000, Aberdeenshire would not have suffered the cuts that it had to sustain.

Will the member take a brief intervention?

Will Des McNulty concede that, since new Labour came to power, Glasgow's share of aggregate external finance has reduced to the extent that Glasgow is £44 million a year worse off than it would have been if its share of aggregate external finance had remained the same as when the Conservatives were last in power?

I welcome this debate and the many positive comments that the minister has made, for example on the community planning initiative and the power of community initiative. We have long supported a power of community initiative, and we welcomed it when it was mentioned in the McIntosh report and when some months ago Wendy Alexander brought it before Parliament. As members will see from my amendment, this afternoon the Scottish National Party is not opposing the coalition. Like all parties represented in the chamber, we see the benefits for planning and accountability of what the minister has outlined. Later in my speech I will seek a number of assurances from the minister on the specifics of his proposals, but for the moment I would like to concentrate on the amendment. Although it is supportive of the coalition's position, our amendment raises the issue that Mr MacKay and his predecessor have been anxious to avoid—a comprehensive and independent review of local government finance.

I thank the minister for indicating that he is giving positive consideration to the sort of review that we are suggesting. He will be aware that not only the four Opposition members of the Local Government Committee, but the seven members from the coalition parties, along with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, the Society of Local Authority Chief Executives and General Managers, Unison and others, all support such a review. I hope that he will progress that as soon as possible. Our amendment is designed to gee up the process somewhat. Our amendment welcomes the inquiry that the Local Government Committee has started. I hope that the Parliament, by supporting our  amendment, will give credit to the Local Government Committee where it is due—for making progress on this issue while acknowledging the sensible and progressive measures that the Executive has introduced, such as three-year budgeting, which the SNP has long supported. It is important to acknowledge that the central issue in Scottish local government remains outstanding. The minister's predecessor set his face against the tide of local government opinion in this matter. I am glad that Mr MacKay has shown himself to be his own man on the issue. I hope that he will emphasise that by accepting our amendment. That would send the clearest possible signal that the Scottish Government is prepared to be flexible in this regard. At the least, we would be telling the Local Government Committee that its work will be listened to and acted upon when and where appropriate. I hope that we will achieve some consensus today. We believe that our amendment is sympathetic and offers an opportunity to the coalition parties to correct the errors of the previous regime. I will now discuss the substance of the matter that is before us today. The announcement made at COSLA and confirmed by the minister covered four key matters: introduction of three-year revenue budgeting, three-year council tax figures, a simplified distribution formula and the relaxation of expenditure guidelines. On the three-year revenue settlements, I understand from what the minister has said that in December he will announce a grant allocation for each local authority for each of the next three years. That is welcome. I will ask several questions, which I hope he can answer in summing up. Will the minister clarify what contingency planning there will be in the settlement? I am thinking of eventualities that cannot reasonably be foreseen by the Government, COSLA, or the authorities concerned. They include not only natural disasters, such as floods, for which there is a mechanism, but events such as rapid rises in interest rates or inflation. It might be reasonable to expect everyone to stick to a three-year deal on funding in a stable economic climate but, in the event of economic instability, what provision is there to react to changing circumstances? Will the minister clarify what plans there are to pay for new burdens that are announced within the three-year period? What happens to an authority's settlement when Her Majesty's Government, or the Executive, place on councils additional burdens that were not taken into account when the budget was set? There will always be a dispute about what has and has not been provided for  when the settlement is struck. I am specifically talking about measures that are introduced after the settlement: new burdens that were not accounted for previously. What guidance will the minister issue on that matter? What measures will he put in place to control ministerial colleagues who may wish to impose new responsibilities and burdens on our councils? Will the minister clarify what flexibility there is in the settlement? I will give an example. I understand that there will be provisions in the new housing bill for local authorities to increase the level and quality of support and housing advice that they give to homeless people, which is in line with the recommendations of the homelessness task force. The SNP supports that welcome move. In its response to the housing bill consultation document, COSLA estimated that considerable costs are associated with those new duties. I understand that there is a commitment that the Government will meet those new costs. Given that those are new statutory responsibilities that local government will be required to carry out, what happens if the cost of providing those services is far greater than the resources that are provided to do so? If both the Executive and the councils acknowledge that the new burden will outstrip allocated resources, what provisions are there to amend the moneys given to local authorities to take that into account? What flexibility will be incorporated into the new system where a case can be made for it? Will the minister detail what discussions have taken place with COSLA to ensure that the new-found stability that is offered to local authorities through three-year funding is passed on to the organisations that local authorities fund? I am sure that the chamber will agree that if three-year funding gives planning stability to local authorities it only makes sense for that stability to be passed on to the thousands of voluntary organisations across Scotland that are dependent on local authorities for their funding. The minister has again produced a sensible solution in respect of settling council tax over three years. It is a reasonable quid pro quo to say that stability that is given to authorities should be passed on to their council tax payers. People will appreciate knowing what their council tax will be over three years. My one concern is that outgoing administrations will try to tie the hands of incoming administrations with regard to council tax levels. It is important to emphasise that the levels of council tax are indicative. The exercise that starts next year will cover the period to the end of the financial year 2003-04. There will be local authority elections at the end of the first year of the new arrangement. We must emphasise that the  decision to stick to the council tax level indicated for year three is a political one on which parties fighting local authority elections have a right to seek a mandate from the people. It would be unfortunate if the message that went out was that the level of council tax was a fait accompli, as council tax levels and spending had already been fixed. It is important for the electorate to understand that politicians who are seeking their votes at election time have it within their power to raise the level of council tax to pay for additional services or to lower it to relieve the burden of taxation if they so wish. I understand that the current method of calculating distribution will be used for the next financial year and that the new distribution formula will be introduced for the following two years, but that to set a three-year budget and to iron out any differences that are thrown up by the change in formula, the grant that local authorities are to receive will be guaranteed. Any changes in the formula will also be self-financing. The minister may correct me if I am wrong, but I take that to mean that increases in funding as a result of changes in the distribution formula will be balanced by decreases in other council departments. If a local authority's grant is guaranteed, any increases in funding will come from within that local authority's budget. For example, an increase in Glasgow City Council's schools allocation might come from a relative decrease in its roads budget. It is not clear how the minister intends to square the circle of guaranteeing a local authority's grant while changing the distribution formula on which that grant is based. Clarification of that would be appreciated. Equally, clarification is required of the precise way in which the Executive intends to operate capping according to the criteria under which capping will be imposed. From his response to Alasdair Morgan, I understand that the minister takes the view that local authorities should decide that themselves. I do not know whether he meant that it would be up to a local authority to decide whether it should be capped. I hope that the minister will return to that in his summing up. I welcome the relaxation in spending limits, but the minister seems to be saying that the Executive will not cap unless it is forced to do so by a local authority. The Parliament must be told, in greater detail than it has been given so far, what the definition of unreasonableness is. In what scenario does the minister envisage the Government stepping in? That is of interest to councils throughout Scotland, from Aberdeenshire and Angus to East Dunbartonshire. Will the minister allow council tax levels in those authorities to rise to the levels in their urban neighbour authorities in Glasgow, Dundee and Aberdeen?  Will the minister allow councils that were punished for their prudence under the last settlement to set budgets that reflect the wishes and aspirations of their electorates, as he hinted in his opening speech? It is not clear whether councils will be judged on their merits. I suspect that, faced with the political need to keep council tax levels down in the Labour-controlled authorities in Glasgow, Aberdeen and Dundee, he will end up restoring a crude national council tax ceiling that will punish councils that have been prudent in their past budgeting and which can sustain future rises in council tax if that is what their electorates support. Will councils enjoy flexibility on that issue, or will subsidiarity remain a chimera? I seek an assurance from the minister that national capping has definitely gone from the political agenda. The need for the Labour Government to protect the public from Labour local government still exists, but capping is not the way to do that: reform of the electoral system is. Proportional representation would guarantee fair electoral outcomes and would end the need for central Government to play Big Brother by imposing capping. The other reason for capping is council tax benefit. As the minister is aware, under the Scotland Act 1998, rises in council tax that are above the UK average will result in a reduction in the amount of council tax benefit that is paid by the Department of Social Security, leaving any gaps in funding to be filled by money from the Scottish block. The minister may want to explain that to the chamber today, although I suspect that it will not be part of his summing up. He may want to tell us what the consequences of such an eventuality would be for the Scottish block and what discussions have taken place with his counterparts at Westminster. I await his response with interest. Much of what the minister has said today relates to revenue. Capital allocation is also important, and I note that the minister is actively considering abolishing section 94 control arrangements, possibly to replace them with a self-regulating, prudential safeguards regime. That would be welcomed. Under the principle of subsidiarity, we must trust our local authorities to determine their own capital spending needs and allow them to borrow to support those needs according to a standard set of indicators that are subject to audit and public scrutiny. Both COSLA and the Scottish Executive development department's local government group are keen for progress to be made on that this year, so I trust that the Executive will bring the issue to the Parliament at the earliest possible opportunity. This debate has been positive and I welcome  much of what the minister has said. I hope that he will welcome the SNP amendment that is in my name. I move amendment S1M-1373.1, to leave out from "and will contribute" to end and insert: "and believes that an independent and comprehensive review is essential to the renewal of local government finance and further welcomes the inquiry currently being conducted by the Local Government Committee."

To ask the Scottish Executive how the Republic of Ireland's economic performance will influence its policies for the Scottish economy. (S1O-2537) To ask the Scottish Executive what economic lessons it can learn from the Republic of Ireland.

I thank the minister for her positive response, but is she aware that industrial production in the Republic of Ireland grew by 15 per cent over the past year, compared with 0.8 per cent in the United Kingdom, which is less than an eighth of the European Union average? Is she aware that growth in per capita income, employment and inward investment in the Republic continues to far outstrip the UK and Scotland? Does she agree with me—and with the First Minister's hero, Mario Cuomo—that until Scotland has the control over its economy that the Republic of Ireland and other independent nations enjoy, it will never achieve its full economic and social potential?

Will the minister give way?

I will try to respect that limit. Wholesale stock transfer first reared its ugly  head back in 1998. I recall debating stock transfer with Frank McAveety and others on 22 September of that year at a meeting of Glasgow City Council's housing committee. The years pass but the quagmire deepens. In the October issue of "Glasgow City Housing Tenant News"—an expensive council propaganda sheet aimed at convincing sceptical tenants of the merits of wholesale stock transfer—Glasgow City Council leader Charlie Gordon said that the council would agree to transfer if "Write-off of the city's £1bn housing debt and completion of all the major work within six years is achieved." Is that on the agenda? At a seminar on the housing stock transfer at Hampden on 12 April, the then Minister for Communities informed those in attendance that the debt would remain with Glasgow but that "£50 million would be contributed by the Scottish Executive towards servicing that debt". We were also told that the refurbishment of stock would take 10 years, not six. Has the Executive's position changed? If not, how will the demands of Charlie Gordon and company be satisfied? In November last year, in response to written question S1W-2601, Wendy Alexander stated that the Glasgow ballot would be in November 2000. Unless time is suddenly to stand still, the ballot will not now take place for six months, or a year, or ever. Meanwhile, time is standing still for the tenants whose homes have been starved of investment since new Labour came to power and who have no prospect of house modernisation or refurbishment while the stock transfer shambles rumbles on and on. Even if the difficulties that are currently facing the Glasgow housing association are resolved and a ballot is held with the tenants overwhelmingly voting for transfer, when will the first house be modernised and the first home refurbished? Will it be four or five years after the idea was first mooted? How much will have been lost in public sector investment in Glasgow during that time and how much will have been spent on consultancy fees? Charlie Gordon said: "We . . . are on the verge of beginning the most ambitious council house modernisation partnership ever launched." On the verge? And the band played, "Believe it if you like." The pyramids were built more quickly. Only last Friday, at a meeting of the south-west area housing partnership, community representatives were told that the GHA still had not set criteria for the establishment of local housing organisations, which will be expected to assume immediate responsibility for managing the  housing repair and maintenance service post transfer. Confusion reigns. One of the arguments that we hear for the transfer is that it will create 3,000 much-needed jobs. Given that over the past four years, according to the First Minister in his previous incarnation, only 543 apprentices were trained in Glasgow in construction-related trades across private and public sectors, I thought that that would be a tall order. That was until I received a letter from the Scottish House Builders Association, indicating that the Glasgow and Clyde valley joint structure plan 2000, if approved, will lead to 3,000 job losses in the private house-building sector. Under this Executive, we are to see not only a transfer of stock, but a transfer of jobs. Finally, what would the SNP—Scotland's party, the party of the Scottish people, independence and national renewal—do? We would abandon the policy of wholesale stock transfer. However, if the Executive presses on, Glasgow City Council's housing debt should be transferred to central Government now; the debt should not be linked exclusively to the tenure of the stock as a lever on the tenants to persuade them which way to vote in a future ballot, should one ever come to pass. Funding for public sector housing should not be dependent on wholesale stock transfer. Resources that are tied into lubricating the wheels of the stock transfer should be allocated now to public sector housing in the city. The Executive should pull its finger out and secure a relaxation of the public sector borrowing requirement, so that the Government is in line with other European nations in terms of how public investment is secured. We are told that "This is the only game in town", but that is an insult to the tenants of Glasgow who continue to live by the thousand in substandard housing. The Executive, which boasts daily of additional resources, should direct some of those resources to Glasgow, a city that it has starved of investment. I urge members to support the motion.

rose—

I am exhausted after listening to that. I loved reading the social justice annual report. It has lots of lovely graphs, statistics, warm words and hope. Who could fail to be impressed by the Executive's commitment to change lives for the better? That commitment is undoubtedly genuine and heartfelt. The minister talked about the closing of data gaps, but in the mass of figures it is clear that the areas with the highest deprivation in 1984 still have the highest deprivation now. Compared with  the Scottish average, the ratio of unemployed in the most deprived areas has—according to the Executive itself—increased since new Labour came to power. The minister is shaking her head, but if she examines milestone 24 on page 65 of the social justice annual report, she will know where I am getting that information from. However, does the information tell the whole story? Government figures do not recognise the geography of unemployment in, for example, Glasgow. The claimant count in Pollok is three times the Scottish average. That is horrific in itself, but Government measurements do not break figures down sufficiently at a local level to show how labour markets function by community. As a result, Glasgow City Council, for example, ignores the Government's figures because they fail to gauge accurately the extent and distribution of real poverty in the city. Further, the claimant count is an artificially depressed rate that the council considers meaningless. Glasgow City Council has gone so far as to tell the Office for National Statistics not to publish figures for Glasgow using the Government's measures—but it has been ignored. The council's measurement focuses down to ward level and is a truer indicator of unemployment and deprivation. Calculations are based on the number of people who are economically active and the claimant count. That system is recognised and used by the House of Commons library, academics and authors. Such measures have shown substantial disparity in real levels of unemployment on a ward-by-ward basis. In Hutchesontown ward, for example, the unemployment rate is seven times higher than it is in Maxwell Park, although a comparison of the respective parliamentary constituencies of Shettleston and Govan shows a variance of only one third in Govan's favour. Why are such statistical measures important? If we are really to address poverty and deprivation at the micro level and deliver social justice for all, the nature and extent of poverty and deprivation must be identified accurately. The extent to which a community thrives is obviously dependent on employment. Scarce resources must be targeted effectively if we are to improve the lives of the maximum number of people. Parts of the indicators of progress document outline the difficulties with assessing the geographic spread of social exclusion. For example, page 5 of the report makes it clear that it is not possible to provide "sub-Scottish figures on either a regional basis or disaggregated by age, gender, disability or ethnicity"  of the number of children who are living in workless households, thus making it difficult for agencies to tackle this issue in a more focused way. Milestones 2, 5, 7, 8, 9 and so on similarly fail to analyse the figures at a local level. Once we know who to focus on, what should we do? I shall finish by focusing on the new deal. Investing in Scotland's infrastructure at a local community level is vital. We must ensure that those who are on the new deal receive real chances to gain the skills and qualifications that are necessary in today's labour market. Each new deal delivery unit must be decentralised and allowed to react to the labour market it deals with—something the voluntary sector, local authorities and other agencies stress continually. The new deal options should be overhauled or reappraised, as Donald Gorrie said, to give local partnerships the power to develop and implement options that suit a specific area, its people and employers. The gateway must be extended for more than four months, to allow the investment in time and effort that is needed to motivate and train the unemployed. Through the new deal, Westminster has re-established its central control of the employment services by linking training, which is supposed to be a devolved matter, to welfare, which is a reserved matter. The obvious solution is to hand over responsibility for the new deal to this Parliament along with the remainder of its budget. We could then re-engineer the scheme into a responsive and flexible programme. Although new Labour suggests that it will listen to ideas about reform, its centralised nature means that it could take a long time for vital changes to be made. We cannot wait that long; it is essential for this Parliament to be given responsibility for such changes as soon as possible.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will make representations to Her Majesty's Government to obtain a level of autonomy for the Scottish Parliament equivalent to or greater than that applying in the Manx Parliament or the States of Jersey. (S1O-2490) Does the Scottish Executive believe that the Scottish Parliament should have as much autonomy as the Manx Parliament or the States of Jersey?

I thank the minister for his response, but not for his poverty of ambition. Jersey and the Isle of Man have complete fiscal autonomy and control over customs and excise, postal services, telecommunications and social security. Are not the minister and the Executive embarrassed that this Parliament has none of that control? Why are the 84,000 inhabitants of Jersey and 70,000 residents of the Isle of Man trusted with wide-ranging social and economic powers with which the 5.2 million people of Scotland are not trusted?

Accountability and public consultation are important issues. I am sure that all of us in the chamber agree that the structures of NHS decision making are outdated, outmoded and in need of urgent review. Eighteen months ago, some parliamentary colleagues and I formed an unofficial cross-party group to look into the future of hospital services in south Glasgow. We did so  because we had been presented with plans by the South Glasgow University Hospitals NHS Trust and Greater Glasgow Health Board to restructure hospital services in south Glasgow. Those plans were virtually cut and dried, and were comprehensively rejected by community groups, NHS staff and service users. My parliamentary colleagues and I persuaded the board and the trust to reconsider the plan prior to the launch of their statutory consultation. During that period, and into the consultation, we met umpteen groups—ranging from hospital staff associations to the ambulance service to the Minister for Health and Community Care herself. All my MSP colleagues attended numerous public meetings across south Glasgow, taking soundings directly from constituents. The board extended the consultation period by 10 weeks, and the number of public meetings that it organised increased manyfold. Once the consultation period was exhausted and the submissions had been delivered, it became clear that no cognisance whatever had been taken of the cross-party submission or of many others. The staff were ignored; the patients were ignored; and the community groups were ignored. To many, the consultation was a sham and an insult to those who took part. To the board and the trust, the consultation was a costly irritation, but one that did not deflect them one iota from the path that they had pursued prior to the exercise. To add insult to injury, the health board is now selling its plans via press advertisements costing tens of thousands of pounds that would otherwise be spent directly on services. We need a response from boards and trusts that genuinely acknowledges the concerns of the public and professionals. The minister gave us hope when she spoke of her clear appetite for change. Is she aware that many decisions that have been made before any effective consultation had taken place are ultimately down to her department? For example, at Glasgow royal infirmary, despite total opposition from medical and nursing staff who believe that the merger will prove disastrous for patients, staff have been told that to access £50,000 to £60,000 to address winter pressures, a specialist head injury unit must merge with two medical wards. No one was consulted; staff were presented with a fait accompli. Why? The board said that without the merger, the Executive would not release money for winter pressures. The board said that "following announcement of additional monies made available by the Scottish Health Department to address winter pressures, the Trust prepared a bid to secure almost £1 million additional funding . . . A key element of this bid outlines a proposal to integrate the head injury service, currently provided at Ward 29 with the Acute Medical Receiving service in Wards 4 and 5".  Staff believe that that blackmail will result in a loss of staff specialisms, a mismatch between patient needs and services and, ultimately, a loss of experienced staff who believe that their new working conditions will be intolerable. Fundamental change to the way in which NHS staff work at the coalface must be preceded by real consultation if morale is to be maintained and service delivery improved. We must democratise the NHS.

I also welcome the minister's statement. I particularly welcome her determination to tackle the fundamental structural problems that stand in the path of long-term success. Does the minister accept that one of the major structural problems is the high level of unemployment in Glasgow? Although the claimant count might be only 9 per cent, some 21 per cent of Glaswegians are on incapacity benefit or other benefits. The percentage of Glaswegians in employment is the lowest of any conurbation in the United Kingdom. Does the minister accept that, unless there is a comprehensive regeneration strategy for Glasgow and a reversal of the disinvestment in housing in the city, she will be left simply to manage the problem rather than being able to solve it?

Will the minister give way?

rose—

Will Mr Harding give way?

Go on.

rose—

Will Mr Harding take an intervention on that point?

I understand what Michael McMahon says, but why did the Executive say that it would come back to Parliament within 12 months, if it has no intention of doing so? Is not it about time that the Executive came back to Parliament with a proper scheme?

Des McNulty is wandering all over the place. He clearly did not listen to what the minister or I said. We made it fairly clear: that all the schemes we are considering would be self-financing.

Spot on.

The views of the CBI were not accepted by the Local Government Committee and I am sure that Des McNulty's colleagues on that committee will support my comments on that subject. Does Des not accept what was even admitted by the CBI: that small businesses pay up to 10 times more than larger businesses as a proportion of their turnover? By relieving some of that burden on smaller businesses we will not only help them grow—and possibly recruit more staff—but, in some instances, help them survive.

Is Mr Lyon aware that the FSB has revamped that scheme and now has tapering bands instead of bands that create the falling-off-a-cliff difficulties that the committee identified?

Great minds think alike.

Will Miss Goldie give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Given that the deadline for appeals was 30 September and that there was a certain restriction on winners and losers, what kind of impact will the transitional relief for this year have on businesses from 1 April? Does the minister not think that a lot of businesses that do not realise that the deadline for appeals was 30 September will suddenly find themselves caught out?

I open by welcoming the new local government and finance team to the chamber—and Angus MacKay's mum to the gallery. I reassure the new ministers that we recognise that they might not be completely au fait with their respective briefs and promise to be gentle with them. Well, I promise to be gentle—I cannot give any guarantees about Fergus Ewing. This issue is close to our party's heart. At the previous elections for this Parliament and Westminster, the SNP suggested costed proposals for a relief scheme for small business; in fact, we were the only party to do so in either election. We did so because we acknowledge that the rating system is inherently discriminatory to smaller businesses, and we recognise that small businesses pay a disproportionately larger part of their turnover and profit in non-domestic rates. Indeed, a year ago today, the Local Government Committee was informed in evidence received from the Federation of Small Businesses, the Forum of Private Business, the Scottish Retail Consortium and the Confederation of British Industry that, as a percentage of turnover and operating profits, small businesses pay a significantly higher proportion than large concerns, sometimes by a factor of 10. For owner-occupier small businesses, rates form the single biggest overhead. That can act only as a brake to growth, jobs and investment to the detriment of the economy, particularly in rural and remote Scotland. For some small businesses, the level of rates can mean the difference between staying in business and going bust. Such is the concern among small businesses at the level of rates paid that 87 per cent of the members of the Forum of Private Business stated that it was the issue they most wanted Parliament to address. Introducing small business rates relief not only will help the businesses involved to survive, expand, recruit more staff and pay taxes, but will encourage new start-ups, which will help the  Scottish Executive to reach its target of creating 100,000 new businesses over the next 10 years. Although the introduction of a 1p reduction in the poundage this year is welcome, it will make no appreciable difference to the bottom line of any small business. The smallest 70 per cent of all Scottish businesses contribute only 12 per cent of the business rates collected by the Scottish Government. For that 12 per cent, the profitability and viability of many Scottish businesses are fundamentally affected. It is clear that the pain caused is not warranted by the gain made. Instead of abolishing the uniform business rate, as the Liberal Democrats proposed in 1997, or doing nothing like the Tories and new Labour, we think that a compromise is possible that will allow us to protect the income stream that local authorities receive through non-domestic rates while alleviating the burden on the businesses that are least able to pay. It is important to emphasise that non-domestic business rates are an effective revenue gatherer for local government and a vital support for Scotland's public services. This year, more than £1.5 billion will be collected from Scottish business and redistributed to support public services across the country. That represents the second biggest contributor to local services after government grant, dwarfing the amount of money collected through council tax. Unlike the electorate, on which council tax is levied, the business community has no say when unfair or punitive levels of taxation are imposed on it. That is why we support the principle of uniformity, a principle that is a necessary protection against the worst excesses of Mr MacKay's colleagues in Labour's rotten boroughs. I excuse Mr Peacock from that. As a recent Labour party recruit, it would be unfair to tar him with the same brush. The principle of uniformity must extend beyond our borders, as it is vital that Scottish businesses are not put at a competitive disadvantage. Put simply, Scottish business should not pay more than business in England. That is a clear principle of the SNP. We thought that it was shared by all parties represented in this chamber—until the coalition introduced Jack's tax, as my illustrious colleague Fergus Ewing famously termed it.

Certainly not. However, an independent Scotland would not want its businesses to be at a competitive disadvantage with those of our next-door neighbour. For those members who are unfamiliar with it, I  should explain that under Jack's tax Scotland's businesses pay more in business rates than their counterparts in England, through a poundage that is 8.8 per cent higher than that south of the border. That is a direct breach of Labour's 1997 manifesto and a new tax that it failed to mention in its 1999 manifesto. For the first time since the UBR was introduced, the poundage rate in Scotland will be higher than it is in England. Simply put, a building in Glasgow will now cost more in rates than a building of comparable asset value in Gloucester. I do not want to dwell for too long on Jack's tax. From their woeful amendment, it seems that the Tories believe that today's debate is about that. I am sorry to disappoint them, but if they had read the motion, they would know that this debate is about small business rates relief. Sadly, their amendment shows their utter contempt for the small business sector. I want to concentrate on the motion that is before us. I think that there will be consensus on the motion. In fact, I know that there is consensus on it. I am lucky enough to serve on this Parliament's Local Government Committee, which reached a consensus on this very issue. Even Keith Harding, who is now smiling, agreed, so it will be interesting to see whether he, the Liberal Democrats and Labour members maintain their position or turn turtle on this issue, the whips having won again. For the benefit of the chamber, I will outline conclusion 1 of the Local Government Committee's report on non-domestic rates, published on 23 June this year. It states: "The Committee is satisfied that small businesses face a disproportionate rates burden and considers that a permanent small business rates relief scheme, which is more generous than the present 1p poundage reduction, should be introduced with effect from 1 April 2001 at the latest." It continues: "this points to the need for a multi-banded or tapered scheme with the level of relief reducing to a small level close to the upper limit of eligibility." The report goes on to say: "The Committee considers that the relief scheme should be self-financed through an increase in the Scottish poundage." To me, that says it all. As tasked by the Minister for Finance, and in co-operation with the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, we conducted a lengthy inquiry into this issue and arrived at the central conclusions to which I have referred. After listening to a variety of views and considering the evidence, we came to believe that a more generous, permanent scheme was required. More eagle-eyed members will have noticed that the SNP motion this morning calls for  precisely that. Today we seek simply to build on the cross-party consensus that the Local Government Committee has already established. That is why I am somewhat disappointed by the tone of the Government amendment. Our motion seeks to reinforce the decision of the Local Government Committee. It seeks to give the chamber the opportunity to endorse that decision and to give a clear signal that we want to see progress on this matter, sooner rather than later. Two schemes have been proposed, by the FSB and the FPB. I understand that the minister has been given the details of those. If so, he will note that both schemes are self-financing and involve a shift in the rates burden from small to larger businesses. Under the FSB scheme, for example, small businesses are effectively designated as those having a rateable value of less than £10,000—a threshold figure that the Executive accepted last year when deciding which businesses qualified for penny poundage reduction. The FSB scheme would be tapered and would mean relief of at least 50 per cent for businesses with a rateable value of less than £5,000, at a cost to larger businesses of an additional poundage of 1.9p, a figure not dissimilar to that which the Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions is considering down south under its proposed scheme. Eleven months ago, the former Minister for Finance stood before this chamber and promised that he would deliberate on the case that had been made by the small business organisations. He said: "Over the next 12 months, Henry McLeish"— whatever happened to him?— "and his team will examine the case for small business rate relief and consider the best way forward." He also said: "In the next 12 months, we must examine in an open and transparent way how we can afford that, rather than rushing into a decision this afternoon. I hope that that decision is welcomed by small businesses—it certainly should be."—[ Official Report , 8 December 1999; Vol 3, c 1262, 1273.] I can tell Angus MacKay that the 12 months is nearly up. The Executive has had 11 months to cogitate, analyse and examine the schemes put forward by small business organisations and five months to examine the Local Government Committee's report. The SNP thinks that the Executive has had long enough to produce a scheme. Our motion today is designed to bring that to a head. Vote for our motion today and the Executive will still have time to produce a scheme in its review. If the Executive votes for this motion,  it will identify itself with its own back benchers, who supported this form of words as a committee recommendation. Vote for this motion and signal to small business that it will be able to plan for a relief scheme in the next financial year, not at some distant point in the future. It is incumbent on the Government to tell us whether it favours either of the schemes put forward by the small business organisations, whether it has a scheme of its own or whether it is simply saying to small businesses that they have had their whack when it comes to help from this Government. We deserve an answer; I look forward to the minister's response. Today, the Executive has already taken on board one SNP policy in relation to drugs courts. This is an excellent opportunity to adopt another. I move, That the Parliament resolves that a permanent small business rates relief scheme, which is more generous than the present 1p poundage reduction, should be introduced with effect from 1 April 2001.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to increase the proportion located in Glasgow of manufacturing jobs and investment being attracted to Scotland. (S1O-2374)

I thank the minister for his reply. Can he explain why Glasgow has attracted only 2.9 per cent of the manufacturing jobs created in Scotland through inward investment since his party came to power? What will he do to attract further manufacturing investment to Glasgow?

That is right; we should trust the Executive—and the band played, "Believe it if you like." We had Dr Jekyll from me earlier; I am afraid  that I may have to give members a wee bit of Mr Hyde, but let us hope not. First, let us consider that declining voice of yesteryear that is slowly fading away and which is banished to a few leafy enclaves. Of course, I am talking about the Tories. The contributions from Tories were shambolic. I was shocked that John Young seemed to indicate that Helen Eadie was the only honest person who had spoken, which implicated his colleague Keith Harding. John was inaccurate, as he has been often over the years, in much of what he said. If we had PR in Glasgow, we would not have two councillors; we would have 25. As for the Tories saying that STV would benefit them—well, I am sorry, but it wouldnae. In the 1995 local council elections, I gained more votes in my ward than John Young—who was elected by a ba hair of 38 votes—Bill Aitken and Catherine Lyon combined. The Tories got three seats on 6 per cent of the vote, whereas we got one seat on 23 per cent. Clearly, the current electoral system favours the Tories—it is no wonder that they support it. If we consider new Labour, Helen Eadie, who would not take any interventions, does not seem to realise that even under the current system, 13 of Scotland's 32 local authorities are hung. There is a rainbow coalition of independent, Tory, Labour and Liberal Democrat in Perth and Kinross. Trish Godman talked about the SNP struggling to make a breakthrough in local government. I am surprised that she said that. With 207 councillors, not only do we have our greatest number of councillors ever, but we have five in her constituency, which is the same as her party has. We have made a breakthrough, at least in her constituency. That will go a long way to unseating her at the next election. STV requires political will—a will that is sadly lacking, as the Labour party buckles to the voice of Cro-Magnon Labour, calling for no change from Westminster to council chambers to the back benches of the Parliament. It is the voice of the vested interests of people who have no real concern for local democracy but who wish to save their political skins, of councillors who lack the confidence to put themselves up against political opponents, without the odds being heavily stacked in their favour, and of MSPs who rely on the nomenklatura of councillors, their relatives and acolytes for selection to the chamber. We must have a system that does not lead to one party receiving such an overwhelming number of seats that its administration implodes into factionalism, as happened in Glasgow in 1997, leading to the suspension of the lord provost, deputy lord provost and the leader and deputy leader of the council. That may have been good  for the career of the Deputy Minister for Local Government, but it did nothing to enhance local government. The deputy minister talks about a ministerial working group. Four months on, we are still unaware of how often it has met and what conclusions it has come to. We still do not have a timetable for action. The Executive talks about making progress in all areas of Kerley, but it is a bit like chicken and egg: how can we have democratic and accountable scrutiny and so on if we do not have opposition councillors? It is important that not all councillors act, as Labour does, in naked self-interest. I am pleased that there are no such vested interests in the SNP. In Alex Salmond's constituency, the SNP holds 22 of 24 seats. In Angus, Perth and Kinross, Clackmannanshire and elsewhere, we have many councillors. They know that Kerley and the introduction of STV could bring about their demise, but not a single one opposed the introduction of STV at local government elections. As far as the Liberals are concerned, they have done it again. I should congratulate the minister on his maiden speech. [Laughter.]

I think I said that in my opening speech. The member will be aware that the number of councillors in Dumfries and Galloway declined from 70 to 47. I do not hear any of the councillors complaining about a 50 per cent increase in their ward size. Even if we had wards with two or three members in rural Dumfries and Galloway, they would still be a tenth of the area the member has to represent. She seems to get round it, so I am sure that the councillors will be able to manage just fine. Back to those Buddhas of suburbia, the Liberal Democrats; not content with selling out on tuition fees and Sutherland, as has been so eloquently put by colleagues, the final ignominy for the Liberal Democrats is to support—

We have had that debate, and the public will make up their mind about it. Mr Rumbles should consider where the Liberal Democrats are in the opinion polls in relation to tuition fees. [Interruption.]

Everyone knows that students who work in a burger bar after they have graduated will have to repay fees.

No—the Presiding Officer cut my time by two minutes because of Iain Smith's incoherent ramblings. [Laughter.] Let me continue. By not supporting the motion, the Lib Dems are refusing to implement one of their cornerstone policies.

It is the only Lib Dem policy that the public are aware of. Bought and sold for Labour gold—what a parcel of rogues in a Parliament. Donald Gorrie contradicted the comments that he made in The Scotsman three weeks ago. It is clear that only the SNP stands up against municipal Stalinism, stands for democracy in local government and opposed not only 18 years of official Thatcherism, which we got through the first-past-the-post system, but three years of unofficial Thatcherism. The SNP opposes inertia and supports McIntosh's recommendation on the introduction of PR for the elections in 2002. I commend my motion to the chamber.

Not the Administration, but the Liberal Democrats.

If it wisnae for the voters, you widnae be here.

He must know something we do not.

I thank the member for letting me intervene. One thing that I mentioned in my speech, but which no one seems to have picked up, is that 59 councillors were elected unopposed. In the Western Isles, 12 councillors out of 31 were elected unopposed. Of the 19 who had contests, 17 were new councillors—which shows how unhappy people were with their existing councillors. Surely if wards are merged—even if it is only two or three together—that will still give better choice. For example, it is better to pick three councillors from a selection of four than to have only two wards, in one of which a councillor is elected unopposed, and in the other of which the electorate has a choice between only two people.

rose—

If the Tories are so opposed to STV in local government, why did they bring it in for local government in Northern Ireland?

If multi-member wards are so bad, why did the Tories not abolish the system in England and Wales?

Will the member give way?

The Liberal Democrats and Labour combined in the convention to force a decision whereby all parties who were represented on that convention would have to support one policy regarding the future Scottish constitution. How could Scotland's party of independence possibly have participated in a convention that was rigged against a campaign for independence?

Will Mr Harding give way?

Keith Harding was a member of Stirling Council for a number of years. Would he accept what Stirling Council's chief executive said in a report on community councils, which are now being elected by STV? It says that the introduction of STV has brought in "an unprecedented degree of representative legitimacy".

Will Mr Harding give way?

I hope that my speech will be less controversial than my tie has been this morning. In July 1999, we debated the report of the McIntosh commission on local government and the Scottish Parliament. The report recommended that: "Proportional representation (PR) should be introduced for local government elections. A review should be set up immediately, to identify the most appropriate voting system for Scottish local government, with a view to legislation which should take effect in time to govern the next council elections in 2002 . . . The criteria to be used in determining the system or systems of PR to be adopted for Scottish local government should be   proportionality   the councillor-ward link   fair provision for independents   allowance for geographical diversity and   a close fit between council wards and natural communities.    . . . Of the possible electoral systems, AMS, STV and AV Top-up should be given particular consideration." The Minister for Communities subsequently established the all-party renewing local democracy working group, chaired by Richard Kerley. The remit included "the most appropriate system of election", taking into account the five criteria that were established by McIntosh. Why change? If it ain't broke, don't fix it. Well, the system is broke. I am sure that members are aware of a certain council, not too far from here, where one party with less than half the vote holds such an overwhelming number of seats that the main opposition party can muster only two members. For donkey's years, the administration has been able to ensure complete domination of the council, knowing that it has only a rump opposition, unable to provide an effective political challenge and struggling to ensure democratic accountability and scrutiny. In that council, members of the ruling party standing for election are almost guaranteed  a place on the council, simply because of their political allegiance. It cannot go on. We cannot continue with one party completely dominating on less than half the vote, as happens in SNP-run Angus Council. In Angus, the SNP has one councillor for every 1,063 votes that are cast; Labour has only one councillor, despite the fact that the party gained 8,931 votes. Is it right that an SNP vote in Angus is worth eight times a Labour vote? I think not. If we look elsewhere in Scotland, we will see a similar pattern. New Labour, the party of government in Holyrood and Westminster, is discriminated against by an out-of-date and unfair system that has given Labour only one seat out of 36 in Argyll and Bute, one out of 34 seats in the Borders and none of the 68 seats in Aberdeenshire. What about the voters? As Kerley stated in his report, where a seat never changes hands "and the same party gets its candidate home repeatedly, even by a narrow margin and on a small minority of the vote. . . . those who do not support it never get the effective use of their votes, and this produces two ill effects - fatalism and disillusion on the part of voters and complacency on the part of the winning party. Both are bad for democracy. The essence of the case for proportional representation is that it produces a result which more fairly represents the spectrum of opinion within the electorate." That is where there is a choice. However, in much of Scotland, voters have no opportunity even to cast a vote—let alone a vote for their favoured party—or to see their party of choice elected. In last year's local government elections, 59 wards were uncontested. In Alex Salmond's constituency, the shambolic nature of the local unionist parties allowed five SNP councillors to be elected unopposed, leaving voters with no choice. Across Scotland's 1,222 wards, new Labour failed to field candidates in 262 wards. The Tories did not field candidates in 499 wards, the Liberal Democrats did not field candidates in 499 wards, including, astonishingly, all 92 Ayrshire seats, and the SNP did not field candidates in 165 wards. Tens of thousands of voters were denied any choice, let alone the option to vote for their preferred party. We need a system that will increase voter choice, between candidates and not only between parties. We need a system that will ensure that no vote is wasted and that puts power in the hands of the electorate, rather than the selectorate. We must eliminate the anomaly that means Labour can win overall control of Aberdeen Council and City of Edinburgh Council on 32 per cent of the vote while the SNP in East Ayrshire gained 51 per cent of the vote and remain in opposition. We need a system that does not discriminate against parties that appeal across the social and  geographic spectrum, in favour of those with, traditionally, a much narrower focus and relatively concentrated vote. We need a system that will be a cornerstone of a modern and responsive local government, able to improve service delivery more effectively and efficiently. We need a system that works for urban, rural and mixed authorities and one that meets the five criteria set out by McIntosh, which form the cornerstone of Kerley's work. That system is the single transferable vote. Let us consider choice. Under STV, we would have multi-member wards of three to five members, or two in the most sparsely populated areas, reflecting natural communities. All councillors would be elected in the same way. Under STV, voters would not have to consider tactical voting, supporting a candidate of dubious merit out of party loyalty or the fatalist view that no one else could win in that ward. Voters would not be stuck with a candidate who may have been deselected from another part of the local authority and selected unopposed in a smoke-filled room by three men, or women, and a dug. They could choose between two, three or even four individuals from the same party who are standing in the same multi-member ward, and perhaps give their second or third preference to an individual from another, or no, party. Over time, that would weed out less effective members and improve the calibre of councillors and the quality of representation. Parties that are unable to contest every seat under the current system would be much more able to select and field candidates, leading to fewer uncontested wards or wards where voters have no opportunity to vote for their favoured party. Political parties would gain strength where they currently are under-represented, and also would gain through an improvement in the quality of councillors where they are successful already. The possibility of more hung councils would inject co-operation and more innovative ideas into local government, given that single parties are not the font of all knowledge, and would make committee or executive meetings more meaningful. Indeed, policy making would be likely to be debated and analysed more thoroughly with more councillors involved in the decision-making process, leading ultimately to better service delivery. In councils where a party clearly has lost the confidence of two thirds or more of the electorate, one-party administration would be impossible, just as it would be impossible to gain 31 per cent of the vote, as the SNP did in Midlothian, and have no elected representatives. Such a democratic deficit is no longer acceptable following McIntosh and Kerley. How does STV shape up against the five McIntosh criteria? As everyone in the chamber will  agree, no system is perfect. We need a balance, for example, between the impact of any system on proportionality and the member-ward link. STV maximises the use of each vote to ensure that the representatives who are elected in a ward reflect voting patterns. Voters simply vote for their favoured candidates—1, 2, 3 in order of preference—by party, or whatever other criteria they consider to be important, using a single ballot paper. From the total votes cast a quota is calculated, which is the minimum number of votes that is needed for a candidate to be elected. Elected candidates have their surplus votes transferred in proportion to their next preference. The candidate coming last drops out, and his or her votes are transferred to their voters' next preference. In that way, all votes are fully utilised. The greater the number of councillors per ward, the greater the proportionality. As for the ward-member link, each elector would have an equal link to several councillors, and a choice of whom they wished to advocate for them. Multi-member wards existed in Scotland prior to 1975, albeit the members were elected by the first-past-the-post system. In England and Wales that system still exists, and appears to present little difficulty. The Tories introduced STV in multi-member wards in Northern Ireland, and no one would argue that that has been unsuccessful. Given that parliamentary constituencies are considerably larger than any ward would be under STV, I doubt that anyone in the chamber would argue about the weakness of the constituency-voter link. In any case, members may wish to reflect on whether it is the primary function of elections to elect individual councillors, determine who should form the administration, or both. If it is the first of those, it is clear that under the current system many voters never have a chance to express judgment on how well their councillor performs anyway, given frequent boundary changes, deselections and retirements. Independents would be just as able to win election under STV as anyone else, and in an urban setting perhaps more so. Kerley makes it clear that geographical diversity can be served, even in areas that are represented exclusively by independents, with STV, given the flexibility that is proposed in the number of councillors. That flexibility should end the situation whereby so many councillors are elected unopposed. As far as establishing a close fit between wards and natural communities is concerned, all parties in this chamber have expressed great concern about current boundaries, which often cut through the heart of communities. Larger wards under STV would limit the risk of dividing communities, or combining areas that have no community feeling.  It is for those reasons that Kerley concluded that STV is the most appropriate electoral system for local government. What of the other systems that McIntosh suggested should be looked at? Briefly, the additional member system, or AMS, which is the system that we have here in Parliament and which was cobbled together as a second-best compromise between Labour and the Liberal Democrats, and the additional vote plus system, or AV-plus, fail the McIntosh criteria. While they meet the proportionality test, they both result in two categories of councillor—ward and list—which breaks the ward link for list councillors, who would cover the whole council. That would present considerable difficulties in the Highlands and elsewhere. In addition, voters would have no direct voice in compiling party lists, which would put power in the hands of party apparatchiks, not the public. Independents would be discriminated against when additional lists are allocated. Unless there was a substantial increase in councillor numbers there would have to be considerable redrawing of ward boundaries. The Kerley group was hand-picked by the Executive and it has spoken, so why, months after publication of the Kerley report, is the Executive procrastinating and prevaricating on this issue? One could argue that the next council elections are too close—hardly. STV could easily be introduced for the next elections by merging existing wards. There is plenty time to do that. Local authorities are already implementing other McIntosh recommendations, and looking closely at Kerley. I am saddened by the Executive amendment, which is simply an attempt at delay. I hope that Labour members will remember that it is the chamber that legislates on the matter and not the Jimmy Hoods or Charlie Gordons of this world. We must not yield to pressure from Westminster or council chambers on the matter. What of the Lib Dems? I am confident that they will see the Executive amendment for the holding operation that it is. It is a fudge to delay the day of reckoning, but the issue can be kicked into the long grass no further. We all know that STV is a fundamental Lib Dem manifesto commitment, which that party is determined to implement. That is why I am confident that our Lib Dem colleagues will snub the Executive and come on board today on this issue. I welcome that support. On 9 September, Donald Gorrie said in The Scotsman : "If we don't get it"— electoral reform on the statute book before the next council elections in 2002—  "I believe most of my colleagues and the party in general would decide that the coalition should stop. This is my personal guess." On 24 March, Andy Myles, former Liberal chief executive, said in the same newspaper: "People had better start to accept that PR is going to happen. Labour is not going to get off the hook on this. Donald [Dewar] cannot dither . . . PR is on the way for local Government." Come on in, folks—the water is lovely. Introducing the single transferable vote is best for democracy, best for local government and best for Scotland. I ask members to support the motion. I move, That the Parliament agrees that there is a democratic deficit at the heart of local government and resolves to implement the single transferable vote system of proportional representation for the next local government elections.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it supports Scotland entering a team in the next and subsequent Olympic games. (S1O-2298)

Is not the minister saddened that the 199 nations that are represented in their own right at the Olympics do not include Scotland? Is he aware that the Olympics is one of the few major sports events left at which Britain is favoured over Scotland? Do the minister and his colleagues accept that, as a Scottish Government, they should stand up for Scotland and argue for Scotland to take its place at the top table of world sport—or would a Scottish team expose the neglect of sport under this and previous unionist Governments— [Interruption.]

That neglect places us far behind smaller, newly emerging, independent nations such as Latvia, Lithuania and Slovenia—

Will the member give way?

If the Presiding Officer says that you are over time, you are over time.

The minister keeps talking about the future. Why is investment in public housing in Scotland at its lowest ever?

Why does Glasgow have only £50 million to invest in its council housing now, when it had £178 million in 1987, when the Conservatives were in power? The Executive has deliberately starved Glasgow and other councils of investment in order to force through, for ideological reasons, the stock transfer proposals.

Especially when Frank McAveety was leader of the council.

Will the member answer a point of clarification?

The council voted for a moratorium—

Will the member give way?

Will Mike Watson give way?

As we debate the third report of the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee, it is important to consider why stock transfer is so high on the agenda, particularly in Glasgow. In 1987, the year in which Mrs Thatcher won her third term in office, City of Glasgow District Council received permission to borrow £67 million for council housing. That figure was considered to be totally inadequate by the council's then Labour administration. In 2000, the First Minister, who is a Glasgow MSP, and the Minister for Communities, who is a self-confessed Glaswegian, sanctioned a total spend for Glasgow, inclusive of all revenues,  of an amount that is only three quarters of what the district council received 13 years ago in borrowing consent alone. That amount is in cash terms, but examining what the council had to invest in real terms makes pretty embarrassing reading for Labour members. Glasgow had 350 per cent more to invest in council housing in 1987 than in 2000, which is equivalent to £178 million at today's prices. As recently as 1995-96, total investment in council housing in Glasgow was just under £100 million. Today, the council has half that figure. In an intervention on Margaret Curran during last Thursday's debate on the Scottish Executive's legislative programme, my colleague Fiona Hyslop described the situation as a "starvation diet of investment in Glasgow."— [ Official Report , 14 September 2000; Vol 8, c 417.]  At the time, Margaret Curran said that that was "absolute nonsense". I would have been prepared to give way to Margaret on that point, had she still been in the chamber, so that she could refute those figures or apologise to Fiona Hyslop and admit that, far from Fiona's accusation being nonsense, it was absolutely correct. Given that the Deputy Minister for Local Government presided over the biggest post-war reduction in investment in Glasgow, perhaps he would like to stand up and refute some of those figures, which came from the Minister for Communities in an answer to a written question. As everyone knows, Glasgow's tenants are being softened up so that they can be corralled into a yes vote on wholesale stock transfer. The figures prove that that is the case. However, given the pressure that tenants are under, with repairs not being done and a capital programme that is slipping into the 22 nd century, it is remarkable how resistant they are to the proposals that are being foisted on them by the Executive. Members may have read an article in The Herald last week that indicated that tenants were not exactly blown away by the prospect of wholesale stock transfer.

Before we commit another pound to another public relations consultant, tenants' concerns must be addressed.

Hold on a second. Margaret Curran has already had a chance to intervene, as has the deputy minister, but I will take an intervention on  this particular point from the convener of the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee.

It is clear that the re-emergence of Scotland as an independent, sovereign state is the only way forward for Scottish housing and for the rest of Scottish society. [Interruption.]

However, until we reach that destination, we should have a relaxation of the rules on the public sector borrowing requirement, so that this Government is in line with every other European Government. I will move on. On 4 September, David Comley, the director of housing services, presented a report to Glasgow City Council's housing services sub-committee on housing management and participation. The views of tenants, as expressed through tenants' forums, were made clear in that report. [Interruption.] If members will listen, I will give them the views of tenants. The report says that "most forums would like the debt removed, the stock improved and the Council still to be their landlord. Forums feel the process is moving too quickly for them. They feel that they are being given a lot of detailed information with little time to fully consider it and broadly that they are being driven towards stock transfer. They would like more time to consider issues."

If Johann Lamont had been here earlier, she would have had an opportunity to intervene. The document continues: "Generally they do not understand the speed at which Area Housing Partnerships are being formed and are suspicious of them."

I have already allowed Mr McAveety to intervene.

The document also says: "There is a good deal of confusion over the Area Housing Partnership role. Again many feel that this issue is being railroaded through without proper consultation", and goes on to say: "Many (tenants) see Community Based Housing Associations as predatory". What did tenants say to the committee? John Carracher of the Scottish Tenants Organisation said: "The language that has been used, such as community empowerment, is part of the problem, and we take issue with that way of dealing with the situation." George McKie of the Edinburgh Tenants Federation said: "I heard a number of people mention community ownership. I am a tenant of City of Edinburgh Council. My home is in community ownership. It is owned by all the community. That is the true meaning of community ownership."—[ Official Report, Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee , 24 November 1999; c 352, 363.]

Rankine Kennedy of the Glasgow Citywide Tenants Forum said: "We have been led to believe that the policy is about stakeholders and that tenants will be involved in the process from the beginning. The stakeholder issue has not been addressed in our case as we have had no information or representation whatsoever over the past nine months."—[ Official Report, Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee , 15 March 2000; c 823.] The majority report does not identify a single tenant organisation or group that agrees with the definition of community ownership outlined on page 63 of the report. In fact, the report does not appear in any way to reflect the views of tenants given in evidence to the committee. Only the views of the Minister for Communities have been taken into account in the report. For large-scale stock transfer to work, it must have tenant support. That support does not exist at present and may never be forthcoming. The tenants are not buying; it is time that the minister considered plan B.

Will the member give way on that point?

The member mentioned naked opportunism, but he is a member of the party that, in East Dunbartonshire Council, switched its alliance with the Labour party to one with the Conservatives at the drop of a hat. What do the Liberals have to say about the information from the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, which said that local government will need a minimum of £3,024 million new money over the next three years to meet new burdens such as McCrone, school security, the national road safety strategy, and pay awards? Does not that expose the fact that the extra £1.2 billion, which Jack McConnell promised, is buttons in comparison with the amount that will be required to deliver local government services—

rose—

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will Mike Watson give way?

The Minister for Finance said today that the Executive will increase the capital that is available to councils by 50 per cent. Does Mike Watson accept the details in "Strategic Resourcing for Effective Local Services", which was produced by the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities—a Labour-controlled organisation—showing that the amount that is available to local authorities is half of what it was 10 years ago? A 50 per cent increase in capital will take us only to the point at which capital is three quarters of what it was 10 years ago. Does he accept that what we have heard from the minister is spin and that, regardless of what he said in his statement, local government will be worse off in capital terms than it was under the Conservatives a decade ago?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will review the funding arrangements for students of dance, drama or stage management to facilitate them studying at Scottish institutions. (S1O-2259)

I thank the minister for her rather disappointing response. Is the minister aware that Ballet West, based at Taynuilt, attracts more than 100 applications a year, from all over the United Kingdom and abroad, for its three-year diploma in dancing and teaching studies, and that it injects significant resources into the local community? Is she also aware that Ballet West has outperformed all other ballet companies in competition, including the Royal Ballet, yet cannot gain access to tuition fee grants, as can its more expensive, less talented competitors from south of the border? Does the minister agree that failure to ensure equality for Scottish centres of excellence in the arts not only compromises the viability of innovative, world-class companies such as Ballet West—which may have to move outwith Scotland to survive—but makes a mockery of the much-hyped national cultural strategy that was launched only a few short weeks ago?

Given that the Liberal Democrat worm is finally beginning to turn on this issue, will the minister advise me when local government will be informed whether the next local government elections will be held in May? If they are not held then and they are delayed, possibly by a year or even longer, will they be fought under a system of proportional representation?

To ask the First Minister what steps the Scottish Executive is taking to resolve the local government pay dispute. (S1F-498)

Is the First Minister aware that the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities has stated categorically that the much vaunted extra resources that his Government has allocated to local authorities this year do not even cover new burdens? Is he also aware that Scottish local government employees have had pay rises below the rate of inflation for six of the past seven years and now earn approximately 17 per cent less than their counterparts south of the border? Does he believe that local government employees in Scotland should earn 17 per cent less than their counterparts in England and Wales? If not—as he is not going to put in any extra resources from his own budget—does he believe that council tax payers should meet the costs of additional pay rises for local government workers? I want a direct answer. Are workers in Scotland worth less than those south of the border? Should council tax payers pay more?

The minister has indicated that access to higher education in Scotland will not be compromised, but will those who want to study outside Scotland lose out as a result of the fiasco? If so, how many will lose out and what can the minister do about it?

On a point of order. Some of us are not wearing trousers.

It is a shame that Keith Harding did not read the McIntosh report before he asked that question. Given that the working group on renewing local democracy recommends adopting the single transferable vote for local government elections, and given that that is Scottish Liberal Democrat policy, will the acting First Minister press his Executive colleagues to ensure implementation of STV in time for the next local government elections in 2002? Alternatively, as with tuition fees, will it be left to the SNP to remind him of which party he is a member?

I too welcome the statement. From what the minister said, she clearly agrees with the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations that a radical shift is needed from the top-down culture pervading public service delivery towards a community-led and empowered ownership of the means to address community needs and issues. However,  will she accept that at present there is little evidence that such a policy shift is being implemented or even considered comprehensively? Will she actively champion such change in her exciting new role?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Can the member of the labourist party accurately mention the name of the party that we represent?

I will try to get back to the subject of the debate. I had hoped that by the time I was called to speak, the minister would have taken the chance that was afforded him by this SNP-sponsored debate to give his opinion on the findings of the McCrone committee, as Nicola Sturgeon suggested he should. I had hoped, at the very least, that the Executive would have outlined what resources had been set aside to fund the new settlement. I tell Peter Peacock, Brian Monteith & co that negotiation is not about just money, but includes such things as terms and conditions of service. Nevertheless, the minister will be pleased to have the support of Brian Monteith on this vital issue. I had also hoped that, as an absolute bottom line, the Executive would use today's debate to give a clear and unequivocal commitment that, whatever conclusion was reached, the settlement would be funded by the Executive. I had hoped to hear a clear and unequivocal commitment that hard-pressed local authorities, which—as stated in Jack McConnell's response to parliamentary question S1W-5177—face a cut of £191 million in revenue support grant next year, would not have to pay for the settlement in increased council tax levels or cuts in jobs and services. Unfortunately, I have been left disappointed, as I  am by so much of what the Executive has to say. I am disappointed because—I am sure I speak for the entire chamber when I say this—Scotland's teachers deserve, and have the right to expect, better. The issue is not whether McCrone—or whatever variation of it ends up as the final settlement—should be paid for, but who will pay for it. I am disappointed because the Executive continues to play politics with the issue and to leave the key players in the process in the dark about its intentions. We should be able to expect a clear statement of how much money is available to fund the award, what local authorities will be expected to pay and what the knock-on consequences on council tax increases and/or job losses and service cuts in each local authority will be. I remind the minister of COSLA's view, expressed by its president, Councillor Norman Murray, last week. He said: "We have made it abundantly clear to ministers that local government budgets are already fully stretched and that the Government will have to meet its full share of the bill. So COSLA's message could not be starker. If McCrone's recommendations are not funded centrally, then they cannot be implemented." I understand that the minister has stated that he wants to consult before making a pronouncement, but it seems odd that the third party in a triangular negotiation should be silent, while the other two parties are forthright in their opinions. One is left to surmise that the Executive's silence has more to do with the need to stall for time than the need to listen to public or professional opinion. In the spirit of consensus and the new politics, let me offer the Executive a way out. Why does not the Executive use this opportunity to put on record the resources that are available? It would not have to give a commitment to release those resources; all I ask is that its position be made clear. How much money is on the table and how much will local authorities have to find from their resources? Telling us that would not bind the Executive. The minister could still hold his consultation. He would still be able to deliberate, cogitate and mull things over. He would not have made a commitment; he would have said, on record, only how much was in the kitty and how far the Executive was prepared to go. That would give the unions and local authority employers clear parameters in which to operate and would give the discussions an air of reality.

I have only a couple of minutes left.

As things stand, COSLA states that  unless resources to implement the McCrone recommendations are met in full by the Executive, the recommendations cannot be implemented at all. The unions say that unless there is money on the table, the process is dead. In the middle, we have the Executive saying nothing at all. The minister has his chance to end the speculation and tell us what resources are available. If there is £450 million in the kitty, let him say so. If there is £250 million, as has been reported, let him say so. If there is no money in the kitty and the minister expects local authorities to fund the recommendations, in the same way that they have had to fund every other award that Labour has sanctioned, let the minister say so. The issue is one of resources, but it is also one of honesty. If the Executive cannot afford to fund McCrone, let it say so. If the Executive believes that it has a duty to fund only part, or none, of McCrone, let it say so. If it believes that local authority taxpayers should pay the bill, or that there should be efficiency savings in local authority services, we must be told. The Executive does not need to consult to have an opinion and it does not need three months to express a view. The Executive should clear the matter up today and let Scotland's teachers know where they stand. New Labour and its Liberal Democrat colleagues are fond of saying that politics is about tough choices. Let me put a tough choice to them today: choose between telling the truth—being straight with the teachers and the people of Scotland—and hiding behind spin and delay. I invite the minister to make that tough choice when he closes for the Executive. I support the motion.

The passage of this bill has been particularly pleasing for me. Two years ago, on behalf of the SNP, I submitted our party's contribution to "A New Ethical Framework for Local Government in Scotland". This has been a long haul, but well worth it. To those who say that Parliament does not work, or that its committee system is ineffective, this bill gives the lie. As it now stands, the bill bears little resemblance to its original form. The  Executive is to be commended for taking on many committee recommendations, albeit grudgingly at times. Issues added to the original bill—with our support—include the time taken for investigations, surcharge, interim suspension, the explanation of rules and procedures, the right of appeal, the inclusion of area tourist boards and further education colleges, the loss of special responsibility allowance for suspended councillors, and more. Members of the committee, its clerks and its convener are to be congratulated on their hard work. The committee's approach was open, constructive and enthusiastic and was undertaken in the genuine spirit of trying to arrive at the best bill possible. I thank especially Donald Gorrie, who supported all 47 of the amendments that I submitted at stage 2. A key point in the debate was which non-departmental public bodies should be included in the bill. I am heartened that the minister has again agreed to look at that in the coming months through a review process. The bill as it now stands will show that only the highest standards are expected of those who serve on our councils and devolved public bodies. We now have a clear and transparent public mechanism for dealing with allegations of wrongdoing. That will, I trust, go a long way towards improving perceptions that people may wrongly have of sleaze on our councils and devolved public bodies. At the same time, the bill will provide balance by introducing safeguards against malicious, unfounded allegations. The bill will allow elected members and members of devolved public bodies the freedom to do what they are there to do: serve the Scottish public. The minister talked of parity of esteem between local government and the Parliament. I believe that this bill goes a long way towards strengthening that approach. On behalf of the SNP, I welcome the repeal of section 2A, which was imposed on Scotland by a Westminster Tory Government. I am pleased that it was the SNP that led the way in ensuring that parental concerns were properly addressed. I commend the Ethical Standards in Public Life etc Bill to the chamber.

We agreed previously that amendment 22 would be taken separately. Apart from that, I would be happy for the rest to be taken en bloc.

At stage 2 I lodged amendment 122 to remove the archaic and inappropriate penalty of surcharge, which is not only peculiar to local government, but greatly resented by it. Since 1975 only two surcharge orders have been made by the Secretary of State for Scotland and only seven cases have been recommended by the Accounts Commission. There is an issue about whether an action by the First Minister to make such an order is now compatible with article 6 of the European convention on human rights, which guarantees a person a fair and public hearing. Section 104 of the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973, which allows the First Minister to make that surcharge order, does not provide for such a hearing. The Local Government Committee unanimously supported the repeal of surcharge. Following the concerns of COSLA and others that my amendment was not a "belt and braces" amendment, the minister agreed to come back with alternative wording. That has been done. I realise that the detail of amendment 85 has caused consternation among some members who feel that there has not been enough time to examine it. I disagree—action to repeal surcharge must be taken now, rather than put off until some unknown future date to assuage members who have not acquainted themselves with the issue in the month since it was flagged up by the committee. The bill contains sufficient alternative sanctions, particularly in relation to the Accounts Commission, to allow approval of amendment 85. I therefore urge members to support the removal of  surcharge once and for all.

Only the first two amendments.

Could we take the votes on amendments 26, 34 and 22 separately, Presiding Officer?

I beg your indulgence, Presiding Officer, because I hope to speak at some length on this issue, which is the real meat of the bill, as it covers the bodies that can be incorporated.

I shall try my best. May I point out to Trish Godman that Scottish Homes, with 700 staff and a budget of £363 million, will, under the Executive's proposals, be excluded from the bill's scope? However, the Scottish Conveyancing and Executry Services Board, with one member of staff, will be included, so I do not think that the amount of money available is necessarily a criterion. I should also point out to Keith Harding that amendments that are not competent would not be accepted at stage 2 of a bill. "The Executive and this Parliament expect the highest standards throughout the public service."— [ Official Report , 2 July 1999; Vol 1, c 879.]  So said Wendy Alexander on 2 July 1999, when she announced the extension of the ethics bill to include public bodies. "However, the Committee remains unconvinced that the argument against including the maximum possible number of public bodies in the legislation stands up to scrutiny . . . all devolved public bodies, including Local Enterprise Companies, operating in Scotland and spending public money, should be included within the provisions of the legislation." So says the Local Government Committee's stage 1 report. The central argument about which bodies should and should not be included in the Ethical Standards in Public Life etc (Scotland) Bill is covered by those two quotations. The Local  Government Committee's stage 1 report reaffirmed the essential ambition of the Executive, as set out by the Minister for Communities on 2 July 1999. At the stage 1 debate, I quoted that debate when I stated: "The minister did not say part of the public service but 'throughout the public service'."—[ Official Report , 27 April 2000; Vol 6, c 91.]

I cannot give way. I have been given only four minutes. I am sorry, but I cannot accept interventions. I have written a 15-minute speech, would you believe? [MEMBERS: "We believe it."] My concerns about the bill are shared by my party and by my colleagues on the Local Government Committee. I went on to say: "That issue must be addressed. We cannot have a two-tier system in which some public bodies are included and others are not. This chamber legislates in this area and it should be able to legislate for all who live in this country and hold public office."—[ Official Report, 27 April 2000; Vol 6, c 94.] Our position is that all bodies that were added to the bill at stage 2 should be retained; the position of the Executive is that they should all be removed, with the exception of area tourist boards and the boards of further education colleges. Our view is that a quango is a quango is a quango. It should be noted that all but three of the 49 devolved public bodies that were added by the Local Government Committee at stage 2 were approved unanimously. Donald Gorrie said to the committee on 23 May that "the list seems to be a good attempt to cover what are, in common parlance, quangos. The bodies spend public money or advise on the spending of public money. They have an impact on people's lives in the same way that a councillor does and the argument is that they should be treated in the same way."—[ Official Report, Local Government Committee, 23 May 2000; c 957.] In his stage 1 speech on 27 April, Michael McMahon said: "I join the committee in expressing reservations that a number of advisory bodies, such as local enterprise companies, further education colleges, housing associations and tourist boards, will be excluded from the proposals. As we know, individuals in those organisations are responsible for the management of considerable public funds and, like councillors, make policy decisions. The public must have confidence in the integrity of those officials." Bristow Muldoon added that "we should ensure that the bill covers arm's-length companies, such as leisure companies, and industrial and provident societies established by local authorities either to spend public moneys or to manage public assets."—[ Official Report, 27 April 2000; Vol 6, c 113 and 121.] I hope that I can count on those colleagues to vote  to reject the Executive's amendments in this group. The Executive has shown its faith in the Local Government Committee by accepting much of what we said at stage 2. The Local Government Committee must show that it has faith in itself and in its own decision making at stages 1 and 2. I will miss out a few pages of my speech. In paragraph 10 of page 3 of the policy memorandum that accompanied this bill, the Executive said: "The Executive does not believe that a statutory system would be seen as a deterrent by anyone genuinely committed to public service values." Touché. If a statutory code would not be a deterrent to members of Executive non-departmental public bodies, why should it be a deterrent to those who serve on advisory non-departmental public bodies? The only other pertinent argument is that an extension of the powers of the bill to include advisory committees would be disproportionate to any value that their inclusion would bring. That runs contrary to the spirit of the legislation. If all public life is to come under one scheme, the issue of whether the value of including any particular body is proportionate should not come into it. The ethics bill is about restoring public confidence in public bodies. That means all public bodies, and any argument about proportionate value should be set aside. A number of Executive NDPBs have been excluded. According to the Executive, their regulation is a reserved matter under section C1 on business associations in part II of schedule 5 to the Scotland Act 1998, and is therefore outwith the competence of the bill. Section C1 lists as reserved matters the "creation, operation, regulation and dissolution of types of business association". The Executive argues that that means that the NDPBs are excluded from the bill. However, the chief executive of Scottish Enterprise, Brian Jamieson, in evidence to the Local Government Committee on 9 May, did not seem to agree. In a specific reference to LECs, he said: "That is why I said that the Scottish Enterprise board, which has discussed the matter, is entirely open to the suggestion that—so far as is practicable—we should impose all the provisions of the statutory code on the local enterprise companies. However, we would like to do that in the way in which we have proposed, instead of going down the statutory route." The deputy convener then asked: "Are you saying that this cannot be done, or that it ought not to be done?" Brian Jamieson replied: "I am not aware of anything that would make what you suggest a constitutional impossibility."—[ Official Report, Local Government Committee, 9 May 2000; c 904-05]  Mr Jamieson, while not wanting LECs to be included in the bill, is not hiding behind company law and reserved powers. I spoke to him yesterday and he confirmed that LECs could be included provided that their model code reflected that they were bound by company law. That view is supported in paragraph 24 on page 6 of the Executive's own policy memorandum, which states: "Similar codes of conduct will be introduced for members of relevant public bodies . . . Because these bodies do not form a homogeneous group it will be necessary for each body's code to reflect the type of work that it does, its composition, and the responsibilities and duties of its members. Accordingly the Bill provides for a statutory model code of conduct for members of relevant bodies; and for each of the relevant bodies to adopt a version of that code which is suited to its circumstances." It is clear from the policy memorandum that public bodies that are limited companies would be able to adapt their codes to reflect that reality. There is no question of changing company law, so the issue of company law being a reserved matter is a red herring. The Executive has also objected to the inclusion of a number of bodies such as tribunal NDPBs and university courts. We have yet to hear a clear argument from the Executive as to why those bodies have been excluded. Housing associations are also to be excluded; again, no clear reason has been given. Housing associations argue that, like universities, they are not public bodies. We do not accept that argument. They also argue that they are regulated by statute through Scottish Homes. However, that could be incorporated into their model codes. We are unclear on the Executive line on this, but nationalised industries either operate in the same company law climate as limited companies, or act as public corporations, in the same way as the water companies that are included in the bill. Either way, they should be included, especially given the fiasco over Caledonian MacBrayne. The last line of attack from the Executive is that there has been no time for consultation with the bodies that it is proposed are added to the bill. That argument could be applied to the late inclusions—area tourist boards and college boards—yet there has been the same time for them to be consulted as there has been for everyone else. That was flagged up in the committee some five months ago. The Scottish National Party feels that it should oppose the Executive's attempt to withdraw all the public bodies introduced at stage 2.

As the minister said, this amendment is based on amendment 77, which I submitted at stage 2. It was originally opposed by the Executive, but was unanimously agreed by the Local Government Committee. I am pleased that the Executive has seen the light on this issue, has abandoned its preference for it to be dealt with by guidance notes and has accepted the need to have written notes of procedure and possible sanctions for individuals who are in alleged contravention of the councillors—or, as it may be, members—code, as incorporated in the bill. To that end, I support amendment 14.  Amendment 14 agreed to.

I wish to speak briefly in favour of this amendment. At stage 2, Gil Paterson submitted amendment 140. The Executive originally opposed a councillor's being entitled to receive special responsibility allowance while suspended. The Local Government Committee unanimously agreed to support Gil's amendment, believing in the main that failure to do so would create an anomaly, whereby a suspended housing convener could lose a large proportion of his or her income whereas a back-bench councillor or a housing director would lose no income as a result of suspension. In industry, that would be unacceptable and against natural justice. The Executive has, to its credit, not only taken on board this issue, it has in effect enhanced amendment 140 to ensure that members of devolved public bodies in receipt of an honorarium or other periodic allowance are similarly protected. Thus, I am happy to support amendment 15.  Amendment 15 agreed to.

I rise to move amendment 87.

Amendment 87 is based on amendment 53, which I submitted at stage 2. The Local Government Committee split 5:5 on amendment 53 because some members believed that as it called for all investigations to be completed within 90 days, it could have led to difficulties. As Mr McAveety said: "People might be able to string out investigations of their conduct and so invoke the time limit"—[ Official Report, Local Government Committee , 16 May 2000; c 930.] My view, and that of Donald Gorrie and others, was that the 90-day limit would not be prescriptive but would be an incentive to complete investigations expeditiously. The Executive assured the committee that it would come back with a rewording and, indeed, it has done so—but amendment 9 does not clarify that investigations should normally be completed within three months. It provides merely that the commission should be informed if the investigation is likely to exceed that time scale. Amendment 87 gives more urgency to the completion of investigations by emphasising that investigations "shall be completed within three months" although it does not close the door on their taking longer if necessary. I trust that that emphasis will satisfy the  chamber, given that it is in no one's interest for investigations to drag on longer than is absolutely necessary. I ask the chamber to support amendment 87 and reject to amendment 9.

Just for clarification, I inform Donald Gorrie that "shall" was inserted by the clerks and not, as he said, by me. Amendment 88 is based on amendment 52, which I lodged at stage 2. At stage 1, the Local Government Committee broadly supported the view that complaints should be in writing, to reduce the possibility of malicious and anonymous complaints being made against councillors and members of devolved public bodies. The failure to require complaints to be made in writing was described by my colleague Gil Paterson as "a cowards charter", but the Executive and five of the committee members who were present during the stage 2 debate felt that the wording of amendment 52 was, in the words of Michael McMahon, "too prescriptive". I have therefore altered that amendment to include "so far as is possible", which I hope will be acceptable to all members. Complaints would normally be expected to be submitted in writing, but would not be ruled out if they came from another source. At stage 2, the minister promised to reconsider this issue, but no further Executive amendment has been lodged. I therefore ask the Parliament to support the amendment. I move amendment 88.

I am afraid that I cannot withdraw amendment 86, as it has not been selected for debate by the Presiding Officer. Amendment 6 follows on from amendment 123, which I lodged at stage 2. The Executive assured the Local Government Committee that it would come back with a rewording and has done so. However, amendment 6 is less clear than the original wording, in that it does not mark out boundaries, but talks about consulting the commissioner for local administration in Scotland and the Accounts Commission. I resubmitted amendment 123 as amendment 86; I believe that it would have ensured the delineation of workable boundaries from the outset. As amendment 86 was not selected by the Presiding Officer, I believe that members should support amendment 6 as a step in the right direction.

We can tell Alex has had an invitation.

I thank the minister for her statement, although I am sure that she will agree that allowing us only 40 minutes' advance notice of it is unacceptable if we are to prepare an informed and constructive response. There are many positive aspects to the statement, including the introduction of a power of community initiative and the comments on partnership, parity of esteem and the Kerley report. Will the minister clarify how much of what has been announced today will require primary legislation? If some of the measures do not require that, will she confirm which measures those are and what powers the Executive will use to implement them? She said that issues requiring legislation will be included in the local government bill. Can she confirm reports in today's newspapers that the bill will not be forthcoming until the end of 2000? If that is the case, does she regard today's announcement as perhaps  premature? If she is to meet the statutory requirement of local elections by 2002, does the Executive not think that the local government bill must be introduced in the next parliamentary term and not the one after that? Will the minister clarify the matter and give us a clear commitment that legislation will be introduced sooner rather than later?

Does Mr Quinan agree that rough sleeping and homelessness would not be at record levels if the Scottish Labour party and Conservatives, in successive Administrations, had not conspired to reduce capital investment in Scottish council housing by £723 million cumulatively over the past four years?

Will the member take an intervention?

On 22 September 1998, the HACAS document, which was the first document about the stock transfer, announced that the target for housing under the stock transfer in Glasgow was 74,420 units. Currently, 94,000 houses are occupied by tenants, 4,000 of which will be sold or demolished before stock transfer, leaving 16,000 tenants homeless.

To ask the Scottish Executive why capital investment in Glasgow's council housing fell in real terms from £100 million in 1995-96 to £52 million in 1999-2000. (S1O-1838)

I thank the minister for her rather interesting reply. Does the minister agree that Glasgow council tenants have been forced on to a starvation diet in terms of capital housing investment? Does she accept that that is part of a deliberate strategy, imposed by new Labour, to force those tenants into accepting that there is no alternative to housing stock transfer? Furthermore, does the minister agree that the loss of almost £170 million in capital investment over four years has led to a massive deterioration in Glasgow's housing stock, denying many tenants investment in their homes and substituting immediate action for promises of jam tomorrow?

To ask the First Minister what plans the Scottish Executive has to introduce designated status for Glasgow museums that house collections of national importance. (S1F-358)

I intended to thank the minister for his response, but as it was somewhat disappointing, I will not bother. Does the minister agree with Glasgow City Council's convener of cultural and leisure services that "the importance of Glasgow's collections cannot be underestimated" and that we require urgently a "debate at national and local level on the subject of an equitable funding structure for museums." Does the minister accept, given that Glasgow City Council has absorbed cuts of £81 million, £43 million, £21 million and £24 million over the past four years, that the council has been forced to reduce its museums and galleries budget and staff by almost one third over that period? Will the minister assure me that the Executive will consider seriously giving Glasgow museums and galleries of national importance the resources that are required to reach out and attract socially excluded target audiences—

—while improving and preserving rare collections?

I congratulate Johann Lamont on bringing this, her second members' business debate, to the chamber. It is important that she touched so much on the reality of what is happening in the construction industry and how important it is that we do not always get diverted into talking about e-commerce and the knowledge economy. I appreciate that that is important, but what is also important is that work is developed that people can see and can touch with their own hands in daily life. The Deloitte & Touche "Scottish Chambers Business Survey" for the first quarter of 2000  showed that the construction industry in Scotland is in good health, with some 85.7 per cent of companies in that sector working to full capacity. However, 60 per cent also reported difficulties in recruiting staff, particularly skilled manual workers. An obvious reason is that, as Johann Lamont has just highlighted, the number of apprentices who have completed training in construction-related trades is low. In the public and private sectors combined, no more than 543 people completed training in construction-related trades in Glasgow in the past four years, including only 26 bricklayers, 16 slaters and nine plasterers, the vast majority of whom, one assumes, are already in employment. Given the Executive's hope to create 1,400 jobs for tradespeople from the 3,000 jobs expected to come about following the housing stock transfer, the schools programme that Johann Lamont alluded to and the Clyde village project, my concern is that any investment will be either delayed or carried out by jobbing tradespeople from outwith Glasgow. Indeed, in his winding-up speech in the regeneration debate last week, the Deputy Minister for Local Government stated that "we are in a city whose social development resulted from economic migration—people came here to build much of our infrastructure."—[ Official Report , 17 May 2000; Vol 6, c 752.] That is true. I am a descendant of such people, as are many people here. Given Glasgow's high levels of unemployment, we need these jobs to go to Glaswegians, particularly in constituencies such as Pollok, where the claimant count is three times higher than the Scottish average—the highest in Scotland—where health is the fourth worst out of 641 constituencies in the UK and where half the children live in poverty. Training programmes must be stepped up now if we are to ensure that we have a skilled work force to cope with the increased investment in construction from the public and private sectors. I am pleased that Johann Lamont talked about that in her speech. We must support the partnership approach that Johann talked about. Equally, we must ensure that the safety of the work force is paramount as we undertake a programme of development at breakneck speed. The public sector does a first-class job. I—and a number of other members, I expect—have visited the training programmes in Glasgow and have been impressed by the work that is being done. Glasgow has a tremendous opportunity, but we have to ensure that the construction jobs are made available to Glaswegians. Training must be a priority to ensure that the high levels of unemployment, particularly in our peripheral estates, become a thing of the past in the not-too-distant future.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether all the information contained in "Scottish Health Statistics 1999" is accurate. (S1O-1714)

I thank the minister for her reply, but how can anyone, in considering NHS statistics and expenditure, trust this minister and the Executive? In answer to a supplementary question from Mary Scanlon last week, the minister stated: "In 1998-99, the figure for capital spending on equipment  was £136 million."—[ Official Report , 11 May 2000; Vol 6, c 583.] Only three days earlier, in reply to a written question, the minister advised that expenditure on NHS equipment in 1998-99 was only £25 million, less than half the real-terms expenditure of four years previously, and less than a fifth—a fifth—of the figure quoted last week by the minister. Will the minister admit that she has misled the chamber and apologise to Parliament and to the people of Scotland, as her colleague Wendy Alexander should have done yesterday?

rose—

If the Tories are so evil, why are the Liberal Democrats in coalition with them in East Dunbartonshire Council and Perth and Kinross Council?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I hope to cut out the clichés and to talk a wee bit more directly about the regeneration of this city. In doing so, perhaps I shall bring a bit of Zen into the debate, as is customary in my presentations. I take great pleasure in speaking to the amendment in my name, S1M-858.1, before the chamber today. Here, in the holy city of Glasgow, second city of the empire, and on behalf of the SNP, I would like to thank Glasgow City Council for generously allowing us the use of its facilities. I hope that we do the lord provost justice. I start by thanking the Minister for Communities for her contribution this morning. She combined her by now customary mixture of sincerity and spin. Her sincerity of belief is not in question, but the spin applied would be enough to make a trapeze artist lose his or her bearings. Listening to the minister, I am left wondering whether the coalition parties truly understand the complexity of the problems facing this great city and whether they understand the size and nature of the task confronting us. It is unfortunate to open on a negative note, but it is important that, if this debate is to mean anything to ordinary Glaswegians, we must not hide behind false consensus or manufactured agreement. Glaswegians are tired of being patronised. They may not all understand fully, or care for, terms such as social exclusion, but they understand what it means to be working class and poor, and what it will take for Glasgow's new-found prosperity to be shared by all its people. Glasgow is a city divided: between those who enjoy the premier lifestyle of the city's more prosperous residents and those who are relegated to the peripheral estates; between an affluent west end that enjoys the highest quality of life and a devastated east end, in which quality of life is merely an aspiration, or an ambition for a future generation. What unites Glaswegians is belief—belief in themselves and in the city that they are proud to call home. The people of Glasgow know that, through their own efforts, they have dragged their city back from the brink. They know that Glasgow is still the greatest city in Scotland. They know that despite the complex issues that Glasgow faces, the city is still capable of achieving greatness in the future. Sometimes, when we listen to commentators and pundits talk about Glasgow, it is as if the problems that beset the city are of its own making. It is as if the decisions that were taken by the  Scottish Office in the 1960s and 1970s to focus manufacturing investment outwith Glasgow and in our new towns were Glasgow's fault. It is as if the economic downturn and shift in policy, which has cost the city 75,000 manufacturing jobs since 1974, was somehow an act of God, visited upon a recalcitrant people. There has been little or no debate on why Glasgow was allowed to slide throughout the 1970s and 1980s and on why Glasgow's reinvention as a service sector city was perceived as the only route open to it. Today, I will offer a critical analysis of why past, and indeed much of current, Government policy is failing the citizens of Glasgow. Through that, I hope to offer a positive vision of where Glasgow can be in the years ahead. Before that, I offer a helpful definition of terms. I make a distinction between city and citizens not out of pedantry, but because the difference is vital to understanding the problems and, as important, finding the solution. The strategy for reinventing the city has, clearly, been a success. As mentioned earlier, the city centre, west end and parts of the south side are as prosperous and successful as any part of Scotland. Employment growth in tourism—albeit often in low-wage, low-skill and seasonal employment—and the booming media and creative sectors are all testimony to those who pioneered Glasgow as a city of arts and culture as well as a city of industry. Glasgow has consistently recorded the highest economic output of any unitary authority in Scotland. The most accurate calculation available of gross domestic product estimated that Glasgow's economic output was £8.7 billion, which represents more than one sixth of Scottish GDP. Industries that show strong actual and potential growth in Glasgow include transaction processing, call centres, software and opto-electronics. Employment in transaction processing activities increased by 26 per cent over three years. The number of software companies in Glasgow has increased from 80 in 1993 to 300 now; over that period, aggregate sales turnover of software companies increased by 60 per cent and employment by 250 per cent. The number of bioscience companies has also increased, from 10 to 38. In the growth industries such as call centres, Glasgow has carved out a dominant niche position. Glasgow's 59 call centres represent half of all Scottish call centres and 45 per cent of all call centre employees in Scotland. Scottish Enterprise estimates that Glasgow will capture most of the 21,000 call centre jobs that are expected to be created in Scotland over the next two years.  Glasgow is now the media and culture capital of Scotland. The two big broadcasters, the BBC and Scottish Television, are based in Glasgow, while more than half of all jobs in radio and television are located in the city. Eight of Scotland's daily newspapers are printed here, an increase from three 10 years ago. Over 40 feature films have been produced in Glasgow in the past four years, contributing an estimated £10 million to the city's economy each year. Glasgow has 46,500 students in higher education, including 8,500 postgraduate students. The city boasts 34 per cent of Scotland's higher education student population and 3.3 per cent of the UK's; for postgraduates, those figures are 39.5 per cent and 3.7 per cent respectively. The three Glasgow universities are a vital part of the city economy, with total annual revenue of around £370 million, and employ 10,000 people. However, I sound a note of caution: many service jobs are taken by students who are trying to survive without a grant and that has led to the displacement of those who would otherwise be in employment. The successes are there to be seen and praise is due to the politicians, public servants, entrepreneurs and citizens who have made them happen. Equally, the failures of the strategy must be acknowledged if we are to move forward. The city and its image may have been transformed, but for tens of thousands of ordinary Glaswegians, that might as well have happened on the moon. The story of Glasgow is of a city enjoying its reinvention and celebrating its return from what was once seen as terminal decline, and a citizenry for many of whom life is increasingly unbearable. That is why the debate today must focus on the people who live in this great city. It must focus on what we will do to bring a share of the future to all of Glasgow's citizens. It must reject right-wing socio-economic dogma and the attempt to create a false definition of a deserving and an undeserving poor. It should bury the lie that the people of this city are somehow responsible for the economic and social conditions that are assailing them. We should concentrate today on moving forward, on learning from the mistakes of the past and on ensuring that those lessons are applied to public policy for Glasgow in the future. Today, I will concentrate on employment, infrastructure and housing. There is much more that I would like to say on health, education, transport, enterprise and so on, but I will leave that to my colleagues. On researching today's debate, I came across evidence submitted to the House of Commons Employment Sub-Committee by David Webster, the chief housing officer at Glasgow City Council, on the jobs gap in Glasgow. As part of that substantial body of work, Mr Webster did a  comparative analysis of jobs lost and created in Glasgow from 1981 to 1991. The analysis concluded that not only was the number of jobs lost greater than the number created, but the new jobs were not comparable to those lost. The only sector to experience substantial growth in that period was the senior managerial and professional sector, while the greatest jobs losses occurred in the skilled, semi-skilled and unskilled sector. The net figure of jobs lost and gained in the city masks a greater problem: the people losing jobs are highly unlikely to fill the jobs created. According to Glasgow City Council's figures, 27 per cent of the resident work force in Glasgow have no qualifications and only 16 per cent gained three or more higher grades in 1997 and 1998. According to Glasgow's careers service, 22 per cent of Glasgow's school leavers are still unemployed four months after leaving school, compared with 4 per cent in Edinburgh. That gap between the qualifications and the experience of the citizens, combined with the type of job being created, has led to half of the jobs in Glasgow being filled by non-Glasgow residents. According to the "Glasgow Economic Monitor", that trend is set to continue. In 1981, 63 per cent of the city's work force lived in the city, but that figure had fallen to 51 per cent by 1991. By 2007, it will fall to 45 per cent. An additional 25,000 commuters are expected between now and 2006. Mr Webster goes on in his evidence to demonstrate that, despite the fact that Glasgow has seen a significant upturn in its economic fortunes, real unemployment remains stubbornly high across the city. By measuring economic activity as well as unemployment levels, Webster comes up with a figure that he describes as real unemployment. Economic activity measures the percentage of the population within working age and economically active. The "Quarterly Labour Force Survey" moving average for 1999, which is the most accurate estimate available, gives the average economic activity for Great Britain as 79.6 per cent, 77.8 per cent for Scotland and 64.6 per cent for Glasgow. Glasgow's economic activity rate is 15 per cent below the British average and 13 per cent below the Scottish average. If that 15 per cent is presumed to be hidden unemployment and added to Independent Labour Organisation unemployment of 13 per cent, there is a real unemployment rate for Glasgow of 28 per cent. In 1997, Glasgow's unemployment rate was the eighth worst in Britain. It is now the worst.

I thank Mr Gallie for that useful intervention. Perhaps I should slow down for the hard of thinking. The figure for real unemployment of 28 per cent is down only 2 percentage points on the 1997 figure and only 1 point on the estimated figure for 1991. During the last 10 years, real unemployment in Glasgow has stuck firmly at around 28 per cent. That demonstrates that the jobs gap identified by Webster for 1981 to 1991 is still relevant and that the election of new Labour and the introduction of supply-side measures such as the new deal have not dented Glasgow's real unemployment level. The problem for new Labour and the coalition is that supply-side measures such as the new deal and the working families tax credit can work only where there is employment demand. The reality for large parts of Glasgow is that there is no employment demand for those who live there, given the skills that they possess. If the Government accepts that, it must also accept that training people for non-existent jobs is a con and that announcing tax incentives to go to work when there is no work available is even worse. The only alternative would seem to be to take the advice of Norman Tebbit—and now, presumably, of Gordon Brown—and do what 400,000 Glaswegians have done in the last quarter of a century: get on your bike. That cannot be the solution, however. The devastating effect that outward migration has had on Glasgow has been well documented. Public policy towards Glasgow must recognise that programmes such as the new deal will not eliminate endemic unemployment in Glasgow. We need to channel resources into the infrastructure of Glasgow and change the nature of the argument. As members will be aware, Glasgow has the highest rate of derelict and vacant land of any local authority in Scotland. According to Glasgow City Council, 9.1 per cent of land is vacant and half of that figure has been in that condition for 10 years or more.

Thanks for that speech. If Frank McAveety had listened instead of talking to his colleagues during the first two thirds of my contribution, he would have realised that I am getting to the solutions. Half of the derelict land has lain in that condition for 10 years or more. Bringing such land back into productive use is a key requirement for regenerating the city. Vacant and derelict land often correlates directly with the worst areas of unemployment in the city. Bringing it into productive use would create employment potential in the areas in which it is most required. Tyne and Wear, Sheffield and West Lothian are examples of striking success in doing that. Indeed most cities in England and Wales now place strong emphasis on promoting manufacturing and related service employment through site development. It is not accidental that most comparable English cities—Newcastle, Liverpool, Leeds, Manchester—have benefited more than Glasgow from the economic upswing of 1994 to 1999. Indeed, in Glasgow the Govan initiative has been very successful through land reclamation and the establishment of business parks and purpose-built accommodation. Why cannot the rest of Glasgow follow suit? The experience of the new towns shows that provision of purpose-built units with good infrastructure is a powerful incentive to investment. Resources currently ploughed into the new deal in Glasgow would be better spent on developing the city's infrastructure. The completion of the M74 northern extension is central to that infrastructure. I know that Glasgow City Council supports that, as do Scottish Enterprise Glasgow and the Glasgow chamber of commerce, among others. All have expressed extreme disappointment that the M74 northern extension will not be completed as previously agreed. Planning permission was granted in 1995. At present the M74, the main corridor linking Scotland and England, runs 100 miles from the border and then stops in a field in Cambuslang. Extending the M74 into Glasgow is crucial for the economic development and continuing vitality of the city. Failure to extend the M74 is a lost opportunity to redevelop huge areas of vacant and derelict land in south-east Glasgow and Rutherglen.

That is the same kind of pathetic intervention that we get from Labour backwoodsmen in every debate. Labour controls  Glasgow City Council, Labour controls the Scottish Parliament and Labour controls Westminster. Why does Janis Hughes not discuss with her colleagues down south how Scotland can get money— [Interruption.]

—and the investment needed to turn around this city once and for all?

Who would believe that Janis Hughes and I are actually going out to dinner together next Tuesday? The "Complete to Compete Report on the M74 Northern Extension" claims 6,000 jobs are directly dependent on the M74 extension. There may be concerns about increased urban road investment but, as English urban development corporations have shown, substantial investment in roads and public transport infrastructure is required to open up sites for development. That can be done through an environmentally sustainable refocusing of development within existing built-up areas. A direct link between Glasgow airport and the Scottish rail network would act as a further spur to investment. A concerted effort to bring structural investment into the city and develop its latent potential would reap benefits for all Scotland. By developing derelict land in Glasgow for housing and industry we relieve the pressure on the green belt. By ensuring Glasgow's future as a viable economic entity we enhance and secure the prosperity of the 1.5 million people who live in the hinterland of the city. Employment has to be at the top of the agenda in any vision for Glasgow. For real employment to be created we must tackle the infrastructure of Glasgow. To do both, we need to tackle Glasgow's chronic housing crisis. Much has been said about the stock transfer in Glasgow. Listening to the Minister for Communities it would seem a veritable panacea. The minister should be warned that Glasgow has been a test bed for many social experiments in the past, and that the catastrophic result of them can be seen in every corner of the city.

I am winding up. My colleague Fiona Hyslop will concentrate on our principal objections to what the minister proposes. The Executive should be warned that, if the coalition does not intend to take tenants with it  in its proposal, it is doomed to failure. If the coalition does not attempt to gear up and fill the massive skills gap that exists in Glasgow in the building trades, the much-vaunted 3,000 new jobs will go to cowboy builders the length and breadth of the United Kingdom.

Indeed, I shall. The minister should be aware that, in the past four years, only seven glaziers, five heating engineers and nine plasterers have qualified for apprenticeships in Glasgow. The reality of the Minister for Communities' position is this: if the coalition's eggs in Glasgow have all been put in one basket, and if this ballot fails, the city will be faced with an investment crisis of unparalleled proportions, having suffered a starvation diet up to the ballot stage. Regardless of any arguments that we have over the validity or otherwise of the stock transfer proposal, we know one thing to be true: if there is no real growth in employment throughout the city, there can be no regeneration. Without comprehensive regeneration, Glasgow is destined to remain a city divided. We, as a Parliament, have to make a decision on Glasgow. We must carry out a comprehensive review of regeneration policy, examine the successes and failures of the past and analyse thriving models of urban renewal that exist elsewhere. We must act now to halt Glasgow's remorseless population decline. I hope that, through today's debate, we will send a clear message to the citizens of Glasgow that the Parliament is resolved not to let that happen. Rather, we must "Let Glasgow flourish". I move amendment S1M-858.1, to leave out from "endorses" to end and insert: "notes the activities being undertaken by the Executive with regard to regeneration in Glasgow; congratulates the key agencies, organisations and citizens involved in regenerating the city; recognises that despite these efforts levels of poverty, sickness and unemployment far exceed the Scottish and UK averages, and agrees that the Executive should undertake a comprehensive review of regeneration policy in Glasgow with specific regard to stimulation of employment demand, examination of the successes and failures of the past and analysis of thriving models of urban renewal elsewhere."

I thought that Frank McAveety was really one of us. To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with Glasgow City Council regarding demolition of public housing within the city of Glasgow. (S1O-1684)

Is the minister aware of the genuine concern felt by many communities in Glasgow that their homes will be demolished following the proposed Glasgow housing stock transfer? Will he advise the chamber how many homes will be demolished following stock transfer, when tenants will be notified and where they will be rehoused?

rose—

rose—

If Allan Wilson thinks that independence is so unpopular, will the Executive conduct a referendum on it?

Put it to the test.

I am not a back bencher.

Will Mr Wilson give way?

I thank Gordon Jackson for securing this debate and, in particular, for the positive tone and content of his speech. Gordon was talking about a make-it-happen, can-do mentality. This is not a funeral for the shipbuilding industry; this is a means for us to direct our collective efforts to help to ensure that the MOD order comes to Govan. I lived in Govan for 23 years, from the age of one week. My grandfather worked at Fairfield Construction and I have a cousin who works in that yard to this day. Therefore, from a personal perspective, this matter is very important to me. It is important to the history of the burgh, of Glasgow, of Scotland, and—yes—of the wider British shipbuilding industry that the ferries contract is secured. If the order can be secured, Govan has a secure future. We know that the type 45 destroyer orders are not too far off, and that Govan and Yarrow Shipbuilders will work together to ensure that that work is carried out to the excellent standard that the yard can achieve and has demonstrated in previous years. In case some people think that the Govan yard is on its last legs, I should point out that, as has been said, it is a high-tech yard. In its short tenure, BAe Systems has injected £3 million into the yard. It believes, as does the work force, that the yard has a long-term future. BAe Systems is willing to inject up to £23 million more into the yard. The owners of the yard believe that it has a future; the work force, which has sacrificed a tremendous amount over the years to prove that the yard has a future, also believes in that future. We cannot allow commercial shipbuilding to die in this country. I do not think that that will happen; I think that the Government will wake up and realise that the order must go to Scotland. The Prime Minister said that he would not sleep until the jobs at the Rover plant were saved; let us hope that his insomnia extends to Govan.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to increase expenditure on private sector housing in Scotland. (S1O-1591)

I thank the minister for his answer. Does he agree that the cut in home improvement grants in Scotland from £101.256 million to £38.483 million over the past four years—a cut of more than 62 per cent—represents a failure of successive Governments to address the crisis in Scotland's private sector housing stock? Does he further agree that unless the Executive acts to remedy the situation urgently, it will represent a comprehensive failure to meet the needs of home owners and private renters, and will be proof positive that the Executive's failure on housing policy is not confined exclusively to the public sector?

I would like to thank the minister for her very positive opening to the debate. I open my remarks by paying tribute to my colleagues on the Local Government Committee. Over the past few months, we have put in a great deal of time and effort examining the proposals that are before the chamber today. We have conducted that examination in a spirit of bipartisanship and good will that I hope will be reflected in the debate this morning. I would like to pay special tribute—although I know that she will be embarrassed by my saying this, because she told me so earlier—to Trish Godman, who has chaired our meetings with humour and great patience, two qualities that are in great demand, especially when dealing with the more robust and forthright members of the committee. Of course, I exclude myself from that category, because, as you know, Presiding Officer, I can always be relied on to support the convener, and would never dream of heckling, barracking or, indeed, speaking out of turn.  On a more serious note, the bill before us today is here as a direct consequence of the actions of politicians. It is difficult to pinpoint when it happened, and it is of no real value to say who is to blame, but at some point the public lost trust in all of us. Members may have received a recent survey that was conducted by Nestlé, which showed that, in terms of public trust, out of 12 occupations listed, politicians were 10 th , with only television presenters and journalists ranked as less trustworthy. We may argue that that mistrust applies only to some politicians, and that the public may trust one politician or party more than another. That may be so. However, we share a collective guilt. For some, it may be shared only by association, but it is shared none the less. It is a collective guilt that we must address together. The bill recognises—and I pay tribute to the Executive for changing the original ambit of the bill to include this—that distrust extends to members of non-departmental public bodies. Those placemen and women who act as ciphers of the ruling party's political will, and those public servants who act on the public's behalf for more egalitarian motives, are, whether we like it or not, increasingly viewed with distrust by the public. They require the reforms in this bill as much as do the front-line politicians. Reform is the key backdrop to the bill, as the Minister for Communities said earlier. Standards commissions, registers of interest and codes of conduct are good things but in themselves cannot cure the malaise perceived as at the heart of public life. Real reform is needed. Although it is not appropriate to go into detail today, we must not overlook the work of McIntosh and Kerley or the innovative ideas put forward by my colleague Alex Neil in his proposed public appointments bill. This new Parliament—as the minister said, itself a creation of the need for reform—must act on that need. It cannot turn back, despite the pressure to do so from vested interests. Much of the debate on the bill has centred on the abolition of section 2A, or section 28 as it is more commonly known. That is unfortunate because it has overshadowed much of the good work done on the bill and the measures it will introduce. At stage 2 we will propose an amendment in relation to section 2A, which my colleague Nicola Sturgeon will outline later in the debate. I will confine my remarks to the substantive part of the bill and my party's attitude to the bill overall. The SNP supports the Executive on the main thrust of the bill. In the SNP submission to the consultation paper "A New Ethical Framework for Local Government in Scotland", which I wrote for my party in July 1998, we stated: "The Scottish National Party believes elected members  must build trust in their council and earn the respect of communities and individuals the council serves. Councils must achieve best value in local services and adhere to the highest possible standard of conduct. The SNP will ensure its own elected members and councils provide the best possible standards of service to the people we represent." We stand by that statement and we will be voting in favour of the general principles of the bill. However, we have some areas of concern, many of which are shared by colleagues on the Local Government Committee and one or two of which the minister hinted at this morning. My party colleagues will pick up these points during the course of the debate. I will concentrate on some of the main outstanding concerns. When the Minister for Communities first unveiled the coalition's plans to broaden the ambit of the bill to include public life, that announcement was welcomed. On 2 July, in the debate on McIntosh, she said: "The Executive and this Parliament expect the highest standards throughout the public service."—[ Official Report, 2 July 1999; Vol 1, c 879.] She went on to explain how that meant an extension of the proposed ethics bill to include both local government and public bodies. We were promised extensive consultation and that happened at draft bill stage, with opinion sought across the range of public life in Scotland. The minister did not say part of the public service but "throughout the public service". That phrase must mean what it says and all members of all public bodies in receipt of public money in Scotland should be included. There should be a common code for all, a common level of standards and a common watchdog for all public officials, elected or unelected, reserved and devolved, councillor or MSP. They should all be subject to the same standards; all expect to live as far as possible under the same public ethics code. When the bill was announced, it was clearly the collective view of the Executive to include public bodies. That is the only logical conclusion of that extension. I understand the obstacles to MSPs being included and I have had lengthy conversations with members of the Standards Committee on that. I appreciate their concerns; none the less, I ask for the commitment sought by the Local Government Committee in its report on stage 1 of the bill "to re-examine this issue, and to consider whether legislation or other arrangements are required." There is a bigger principle at stake than simply tying up loose ends—that of equality. People in local government are quite rightly resentful that they are the only section of the political class for whom outside regulation of ethics and standards is deemed necessary. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities  said in its written evidence to the Local Government Committee: "The majority view of local government is that councils should be empowered, within a regulated, accountable and transparent framework, to self regulate themselves with regard to standards, a power available to other elected representatives such as MSPs, MPs and MEPs." That is a view that must be taken on board by the chamber. That is not the only grievance that local government has on the bill as it stands. Other grievances include that the bill does not address the power of surcharge on councillors or the interim suspension and complaints procedure. Colin Campbell will outline our objection to surcharge, an objection that was shared cross-party on the Local Government Committee. The complaints procedure and interim suspension is of equal, if not greater, importance for many councillors. For many years councillors in Scotland were expected to work for a pittance. I remember when the leader of Strathclyde Regional Council received a salary of under £6,000 while the chief executive received £108,000. Both had extremely responsible positions, working under tremendous pressure. One was given a salary commensurate with that pressure and one an amount to live on that, for the hours worked, would have made him one of the most poorly paid workers in the country. I will make the point that the fact that I did not agree with the politics of the incumbents of that post did not mean that I did not recognise their work load or the pressure that they were under. That situation was remedied, to an extent, when special responsibility allowances were introduced in 1995. Under the SRA system, there was some recognition that full-time jobs should have full-time wages. SRAs are far from ideal as they can often be used as a tool of patronage rather than a recognition of merit, but they are a start and are highly valued in local government. Under the current proposals, a power of interim suspension will be vested in the standards commission. If a councillor has a complaint lodged against them, they can, under the powers of the commission, be suspended while the complaint is investigated. If they are suspended, they lose their SRA, which in the majority of cases is their only income. It would be against natural justice if that situation were allowed to stand. Back benchers would lose nothing but conveners could lose the bulk of their income. The situation is further compounded by malicious complaints, to which everybody in public life can be subject, especially councillors, who operate in the front line. It is easy for a person who feels slighted by the actions of a councillor to  fabricate a story against them. If the allegation is made anonymously, as is permitted under the current structure, and the councillor is suspended from their duties pending the investigation, then a person will be able to exact revenge against an elected member and achieve a result without any breach of standards or ethics having been proven. That problem is further compounded by the lack of a defined timetable for complaints. Again, I am pleased that Wendy Alexander touched on that in her speech. As it stands, suspensions could run indefinitely, which would leave a councillor in financial penury without limit of time. Those are serious matters that compound the view in local government—I believe unjustified but real—that within one year this Parliament is beginning to renege on its promise of a new covenant between local government and this Parliament. I understand that the issue of equal treatment between MSPs and councillors is not one to be addressed today, but if the issues that I have mentioned are left in abeyance and not resolved, our 1,222 councillors will be entitled to the view that we are less than serious about the equality in the relationship that we promised and are less than serious about working in partnership with our colleagues in local government. I hope to hear today from the Executive and from members of the Standards Committee that they are sympathetic to equality of treatment, even if we lack the legislative time fully to resolve the issues. I want the Executive to say what measures it will take to resolve the anomalies that I have mentioned with regard to interim suspension and malicious complaints. I want the chamber to send a clear message to local government that we understand its concerns and are prepared to act on them. One further anomaly that we should consider, which is again an issue of equality in the bill, is the selective nature of the public bodies included in the bill. Colleagues will be aware that, in schedule 3, the bill lists the public bodies that come within its ambit. The list is far from exhaustive and whole sections of public life are excluded. I again refer the chamber to the Minister for Communities' remarks on 2 July: "The Executive and this Parliament expect the highest standards throughout the public service."— [ Official Report , 2 July 1999; Vol 1, c 879.]  The minister said "throughout the public service." She did not say part of the public service; she said throughout. My party and colleagues in the Local Government Committee share my concern about this bill. In its report, the Local Government Committee stated that "all devolved public bodies, including Local Enterprise Companies, operating in Scotland and spending public  money, should be included within the provisions of the legislation." That issue must be addressed. We cannot have a two-tier system in which some public bodies are included and others are not. This chamber legislates in this area and it should be able to legislate for all who live in this country and hold public office. I will end on the positive note on which I began. This is a good bill and one that the SNP is happy to support. However, it is not yet a perfect bill; my party and I believe that it can be improved upon. I look forward to the minister's reply and hope that some light will be shone on matters that I have raised and that we can move forward in the spirit of cross-party co-operation that we have enjoyed so far.

I welcome the opportunity to debate this important issue and thank the members from all parties who have made discussion of this distressing subject possible and remained in the chamber to participate in the debate. I acknowledge the important work of organisations such as the Samaritans and of individuals such as Professor Stephen Platt, director of the research unit on health and behaviour change at the University of Edinburgh medical school. Between January 1997 and December 1998, 1,752 Scots took their lives. Every one was an individual: a mother's son or daughter; a brother or sister; a friend or colleague. Suicide is a silent tragedy, both for those who kill themselves and for the families left behind to grieve. More than a quarter of all Scots have known personally someone who has taken their own life. Among males aged under 35, more than a quarter of all deaths were from suicide, compared to one in nine a decade and a half before that period. Among the female population, one in seven of the same age group died by their own hand, compared to one in 20 in the mid-1980s.  Among young males, suicide so far outstrips other causes of mortality, with 550 deaths over the years 1997 and 1998, that the next two most significant causes—motor vehicle accidents and drug dependence—combined resulted in 514 deaths. Although, mercifully, the number of deaths of young females from suicide is lower—147 over the same period—suicide became the most common cause of death for that group for the first time in 1997, and remained so in 1998. In Scotland, the level of mortality from suicide among all age groups is at an historic high and is increasing, whereas, as the text of the motion indicates, it is thankfully decreasing in England. We need to understand why. A concerted and co-ordinated response by practitioners, policy makers and researchers is overdue; I hope that the Deputy Minister for Community Care will directly address that point. Over three decades, the number of suicides among young people and people aged between 35 and 64 has not just increased, but has done so relentlessly. That worrying trend requires urgent action from the Scottish Executive. Although I accept that mental health is recognised as a priority for the national health service in Scotland, the white paper "Towards a Healthier Scotland", published last year, did not mention suicide reduction. By contrast, in the white paper for England and Wales, "Saving Lives: Our Healthier Nation", not only has mental health been given a leading priority, but a target has been set to reduce deaths from suicide by 4,000 over 10 years. Before I suggest how a reduction in the number of suicides may be achieved, I wish to touch briefly on how people commit suicide and on who is most vulnerable. What are the most common methods of suicide? Among men, hanging accounts for almost half the cases, and self-poisoning or self-gassing account together for more than a third. More than half the women who commit suicide die by self-poisoning, and almost a quarter by hanging. Who, in socio-demographic terms, is most at risk from suicide? Factors of gender, marital status, social class, occupation, job insecurity and unemployment all play a part—divorced people, unskilled workers and men employed in farming, medicine and allied occupations are particularly at risk. Female nurses and health, education and welfare professionals also have relatively high levels of mortality. What of the individual psychopathology of those who kill themselves? Sadly, between 10 and 15 per cent of people with either schizophrenia or an affective disorder will go on to commit suicide, as will a similar proportion of individuals with a history of deliberate self-harm. Former psychiatric  patients, alcoholics, heroin addicts, homeless people, remand prisoners and an increasing number of people suffering from clinical depression are particularly vulnerable. We must accept, however, that many people who commit suicide fall into no obvious category. Population measures are thus essential if we are to impact on this serious problem over time. What strategies are required for effective suicide prevention? We must examine high suicide-risk groups, including people recently discharged from psychiatric hospital, those with a history of deliberate self-harm and of attempted suicide and those who have suffered sexual, psychological and physical abuse. We must consider population-based solutions, such as reducing the toxicity of analgesics, car exhaust gases and anti-depressants; improving safety measures and installing freephone helplines at known suicide hot spots; introducing an early warning system for diagnosis and prevention; improving the availability of professional counselling and support mechanisms; more responsible portrayal of factual and fictional suicide in the mass media; suicide prevention work in secondary and tertiary education; and improving overall social well-being. It cannot be doubted that the Executive faces a difficult and complex task. However, Canada, Finland and Sweden have shown that the dual approach of high-risk population solutions can work. To achieve success, the subjects of mental health and suicide need to be taken seriously and need to be seen to be taken seriously. We must work to break down barriers, including the taboo that mental health issues and suicide still have in our society. We should consider prosecuting under common law anyone who encourages or assists another to take their own life. We need integrated solutions, with health boards, local government and the voluntary sector co-ordinating their activities. We need realistic and obtainable targets to be set for suicide reduction. I urge the Executive to carry forward this process.

Is it not time for the Executive to give a clear commitment to introduce proportional representation at the next local government elections? Why is the minister unwilling to condemn the reactionaries in the Labour party who are willing to split the coalition to preserve their local government political power base? Why will the minister not tell the chamber his personal views on the subject?

I shall try to be brief. The minister talked about transformation, but I do not see anything to transform local government. According to the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, £298 million has just been cut from local government for the forthcoming year, resulting in council tax rises and in jobs and services being slashed, so why has he ignored local government in his statement?

From today's speeches, it is clear that there is virtual consensus in this chamber that a review of local government finance is imperative. On the Labour side, that consensus now extends to the Minister for Finance, who last week advised COSLA that, although the Executive would not carry out a review, "The full resources of the Scottish Executive will be made available to the Local Government Committee if they decide to undertake a review of local government finance."  The SNP welcomes that. Much of what has been said today relates to local government finance in general, rather than to the details of the proposals by the Scottish Socialist Party (Convener Tommy Sheridan). That is why we have chosen to amend the motion. We have concentrated on the substance of the concern, rather than supporting a proposal that is not yet fully worked out. We have not yet heard how the Scottish service tax would fit in with other demands from the Scottish Socialist Party (Convenor Tommy Sheridan), such as buying back council housing at market value so that tenants could live rent-free after 15 years' occupancy, the maximum income proposal, or the plan to allow the transfer of public sector discounts to the private sector. Those pledges cannot be sustained or paid for. We are amending Tommy Sheridan's motion to make a serious point about the crisis in local government finance. To do otherwise would be to let the Executive off the hook. To allow the debate simply to be about populist notions that fall apart on scrutiny would be to let the people of Scotland down and to turn our back on local government, which is struggling under the weight of the coalition-created financial crisis. The ideas that have been presented do not move the debate on; they have little weight and no substance. They would undermine democratic financial accountability but barely increase the resources that were available to local government. If one considers the impact of Tommy's proposals relative to the top rate of tax on earned and unearned income under Dennis Healey's chancellorship, Tommy begins to look very new Labour. Mr Sheridan's plans do not hold the Executive to account and they do not aid the cause of local government—they simply allow the Executive to walk away. Let us have a debate on the future of local government and consider the options, but let us not be sidelined into discussing ideas that have been worked out only superficially. Tommy's critique of the regressive and unsustainable council tax set the scene very well, but the proposal—which Johann Lamont seemed to support—that all non-domestic rates should be retained by the local authority that raises them causes me concern about the Scottish service tax. The proposals would inject only another £100 million into local government; Glasgow would indeed gain £64 million, but that would leave only £36 million for the rest of Scotland's councils. Some councils would suffer greatly. I would like to hear how Tommy would square that circle. As the minister pointed out, the SNP supports a local income tax, which would ensure local  accountability and a sustainable yield; the Government should examine that proposal in great depth. Andrew Wilson described a number of cases in which the Scottish service tax would make life more difficult for families on low incomes. I hope that Tommy will address those issues when he sums up. I was curious about the support given by Des McNulty, who is no longer in the chamber, for a property tax. Property taxes are not necessarily progressive, which is one reason why we believe in a local income tax. As John McAllion pointed out, inequality is rising under new Labour. That must be addressed sooner rather than later. In conclusion, we are pleased that Mr Sheridan has tried to be constructive in this debate. As a disciple of Leon Trotsky—a poster of Trotsky was always on display in his council office and even the family cat is named after him—Mr Sheridan may have endorsed the cult of personality, but at least he has not called today for the dictatorship of the proletariat, forced collectivisation of agriculture, liquidation of religion, the deportation and mass murder of political opponents, the surrender of our most productive land to the forces of German imperialism, or even the enslavement of the working class through, as Trotsky demanded, "coercive forms of economic organisation". We should be grateful for small mercies. Members should support Andrew Wilson's amendment.

To ask the Scottish Executive under what circumstances it would seek additional resources for the Scottish consolidated fund from Her Majesty's Government. (S1O-1367)

Given that last week the Labour leader of South Ayrshire Council decried the local government settlement for the next financial year as the worst in history, and that we read daily of financial crisis in the health service, does the minister agree with the Deputy First Minister's call on the Chancellor of the Exchequer to open his war chest and cancel the planned 1p cut in income tax, so that additional resources can be given to Scotland's hard-pressed public services?

Will the minister impress on the police the need to act urgently when the law in this area is broken, given that this is an issue of public and child safety?

On a point of order— [Interruption.]

I hope that the First Minister will take this opportunity to be magnanimous enough to apologise for his gross misrepresentation—

To ask the First Minister what steps the Scottish Executive is taking to improve the criminal justice system. (S1F-162)

Is the First Minister aware of the special survey that was undertaken by Victim  Support Scotland, which reveals that almost half the people who witness a crime do not report that crime? Is he concerned that victims of crime express high levels of frustration with the lengthy criminal justice process? Does he agree that part of the problem is that witnesses and victims of crime are not kept informed? What measures does he propose to resolve that situation?

When the minister says that there has been an increase, does he mean an increase in real terms or in cash terms? Does he disagree with COSLA when it says that the amount of money for next year will be £496 million less in real terms than it was for 1996-97, even excluding new burdens and self-financing pay awards? Does he accept that there have been 13,000 job losses  and a 41 per cent council tax rise since his party came to power? If he does not accept that, why not? One last thing. As Mr McAveety knows, I did not propose any budgets when I was a member of Glasgow City Council because I was the sole representative of my party. As soon as I got a seconder, we proposed a budget.

rose—

That is absolutely untrue. Bill Aitken and people from all political parties will confirm that I supported the school investment project. Does the minister—

If you had been here during today's debate—

On that point, will the member give way?

Is the member aware that, in response to a written question from me, the Executive refused to acknowledge the existence of the term metropolitan status? In what way has Glasgow benefited from three years of new Labour government, when it has had an £88 million cut in its budget, a 14 per cent council tax increase and 1,400 job losses?

Will the member explain his comment about wilful ignorance?

Will the member give way?

I let Des McNulty in.

I gave way to Des McNulty when I was speaking.

Does Des McNulty—

Des McNulty talks about education  cuts. Why does he think that Eddie McAvoy, the leader of South Lanarkshire Council, felt it appropriate to write to Opposition members to complain about a £12.8 million cut—and a £5.2 million cut in education and social work—if cuts did not exist? Is the member happy that in West Dunbartonshire, where he is a member, council tax is to be raised by twice the rate of inflation, there are to be £3 million of cuts and compulsory redundancies are to be made? Has the member spoken to his council? Has it told him that it is happy with that settlement?

I was one of those sinners, Presiding Officer. There must have been a communication  breakdown; this morning, COSLA told us that the information that I mentioned a few minutes ago was accurate. The Minister for Finance's speech contained a diversion. I was surprised that "It Pays to Pay" was referred to today. I asked a parliamentary question about that report before Christmas and only today, when we are discussing the local government settlement, are the implications of that report coming out. That is to obfuscate and divert people's attention from the real meat—the lack of resources for Scottish local government. Having made those remarks, I will start my speech with a fact—I know that it is a fact because the Minister of Finance told me so in answer to one of my many written questions. The fact is that, in 1990-91, authority capital expenditure was £1.7 billion at today's prices. The minister also helpfully pointed out, in a reply to a question lodged by Mike Watson, that the total local authority capital allocations, including moneys that local authorities raised themselves through capital receipts, was just under £396 million for 2000-01. If one adds the housing capital expenditure figure—which, according to the Executive's budget figures, is about £160 million—and an estimated £140 million in capital receipts and capital funded from revenue for 2000-01, the grand total is £696 million, which is £1 billion less than the figure from 10 years ago. That means that £1 billion less is being spent by a Labour Minister for Finance, Jack McConnell, under a devolved settlement and in the middle of an alleged economic boom than was spent by a Tory Westminster Government in the middle of an economic recession. The Minister for Finance may wish to intervene to tell me that I have misunderstood the figures, because the ones for 1990-91 included figures for water and sewerage, whereas those for 2000-01 do not. Let me save him the trouble. We in the SNP are more than aware that the figures for 2000-01 do not cover water and sewerage. We are more than aware that the Government is withdrawing all public support for water and sewerage in this country. We are more than aware that the bill for that withdrawal is being picked up by pensioners in the north and north-east of Scotland, who face increases in water charges of up to 35 per cent. We are more than aware of the price being paid in both the east and the west of Scotland by low-paid families, who can ill afford an 18 per cent hike in their water bills. We are more than aware that the cost of vital capital works has been transferred from general taxation to the water bills of every household in this country. That is a move from direct to indirect taxation; it is a transfer from a system that recognised ability to pay to one that does not. It is a policy typical of this Administration. It is another back-door tax to  add to the ever-growing list of back-door taxes.

I want to get into the meat of my speech, but I will let Richard in later.

I want to get further into my speech. I will let in Richard to talk about specifics later. I feel that time is against me and I want to make many points that were not covered in the minister's speech. Even if we take water and sewerage out of the equation and compare like with like, examining capital allocations under the final years of the Conservatives and those during the first three years of this Parliament under the published plans of the Lib-Lab Administration, we can see that, whereas the Tories' allocated borrowing consent during their final three years in power was £2.026 billion, the published allocations for the first three years of this Parliament for Scotland's 32 local authorities total £1.039 billion. That is a net difference of £987 million. To put that into terms that everyone can understand, it is 70 new secondary schools, 20,000 new homes or the resurfacing of every pot-holed road in the country. That is what the difference in the rundown of allocations means in reality. It is not a vague, abstract concept; it is the difference between schools being built or not, or the difference between roads and public transport being funded or not; it is the difference between homes being built for Scotland's homeless people or not. The Minister for Finance is overseeing a catastrophic fall in investment which even the bogus private finance initiative schemes cannot hide. The fact that this Executive is spending hundreds of millions of pounds less than the Tory party did 10 years ago is an indictment of its policies. The fact that the Executive is spending hundreds of millions of pounds less than the Tory party did in the middle of the poll tax fiasco and in the heart of an economic recession tells us more about new Labour's commitment to public services than 1,000 spin-doctors could ever hope to do.

I am surprised that Hugh Henry wants to wait three years for an SNP Administration. Why is he not asking the Minister for Finance if he will approach the Chancellor of  the Exchequer? Two weeks ago, the fact that the chancellor's revenue over the past year had increased by 9.1 per cent was published. What is the view of Labour-controlled COSLA?

I am aware of that.

As the minister knows, the SNP's penny for Scotland campaign would have contributed an extra £690 million to public expenditure over the next three years. What is the view of the minister's party, which controls COSLA— [Interruption.] Could the minister keep the animals quiet for a minute? COSLA came to see us this morning to make these points, knowing that the minister's foot-soldiers would not do so in this debate. Consents made under section 94 of the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973 score twice for public expenditure purposes: first as consent and secondly through annual loan charges. Abolition of section 94 consents for general services alone would immediately release £360 million within the assigned budget. The SNP would deliver that. Such a relaxation of control arrangements would assist councils to make more flexible investment decisions. The story is the same for current expenditure—the minister will note that, unlike him, I have not taken 10 minutes to get on to this topic. On a year-on-year comparison—not with ancient history or with old regimes, but with the current set-up, using real-terms comparisons—new Labour and its Liberal allies are damned by the facts. Figures obtained from Labour-controlled COSLA today show that, in 1996-97, the Tories spent £6,295 million in real terms on local government services. Next year, the Lib-Lab Administration proposes to spend £5,799 million, a difference of £496 million. Using the same comparison in the next two full financial years of the Parliament—2000-01 and 2001-02—the shortfall between what the Lib-Lab coalition is committed to spending and what the Tories spent in 1996-97 is £482 million and £484 million respectively. That is a total  spending gap of some £1,462 million between what local government would have had available to spend if spending remained at 1996-97 levels and what is available now under the Lib-Lab Administration, even without including new burdens and year-on-year self-financing pay awards. The results of such a financial squeeze are that, since 1996-97, council tax has risen 41 per cent on average across Scotland, 13,000 full-time equivalent posts have been lost and services have been slashed. Does the minister dispute those figures?

I am asking a question. Does the minister dispute COSLA's figures?

We certainly believe in local flexibility, which the minister clearly does not. Next year, the Executive will bring about more job losses and more cuts. Commenting on next year's settlement, COSLA's president, Norman Murray, said that "while there is funding for the prioritised services, other services will suffer because of this. Councils face difficult decisions over coming months in setting their budgets for next year . . . The present system confuses accountability, creates dependency and has too many central controls; it is both too much control and too many controls over both funding and spending." COSLA concludes: "The solution lies in the development of joint policy and expenditure priorities, shared between central and local government." COSLA, the Society of Local Authority Chief Executives and Senior Managers, Unison, the McIntosh commission, each of Scotland's 32 local authorities and 10 of the 11 members of the Parliament's Local Government Committee—except Mr Harding, who I see grinning across the chamber—are calling for an independent and comprehensive review of local government finance. Only the minister, Canute-like, tries to hold back the rising tide of reform and modernisation. To be fair to new Labour, one could argue that it is not right to examine peak spending—one must consider matters in the round. Let us analyse the  final three years of the Tories and miss out the first two years of new Labour, when the Labour Government was committed to Tory spending policies. By comparing those Tory figures with the first three years of this Parliament, we can see that the shortfall between what the Tories spent and what the Lib-Lab Administration has spent—and proposes to spend—is £1,408 million in real terms. Contrary to all the bluff and bluster that we hear from the Minister for Finance, the facts are that, year on year, his Administration is spending less, and plans to spend less, than the Tories did when they were in power. I remind the Minister for Finance that he derided those Tory spending levels as inadequate.

I am not going to let Des McNulty give a speech. [Interruption.] The point is that the Conservatives spent more on local government than the Labour party has. Red Tories or blue Tories: what is the difference? The Executive is slashing services. There are 13,000 job losses and 41 per cent increases in council tax. It is Labour local authorities, through COSLA, which the Labour party controls, that are rebelling. Local government is being failed not just by diminishing resources. Hard up against inadequate resources comes the double whammy of self-financing pay awards for the seventh year in a row, at a total cost to local government of £700 million, and new duties on local government for which the Executive has found no new money. The combination of those pressures, according to the Labour party's friends and colleagues in COSLA, leaves local authorities to find £298 million extra from April from existing budgets. That is £298 million to be found from education, social work and other vital services. That is money that local government does not have. That is why every council will cut services this year. That is why council tax will rise on average by almost 6 per cent across Scotland, with a whopping 15.5 per cent increase in Orkney, the constituency of the Deputy First Minister. That is why the Minister for Finance's own local authority of North Lanarkshire is being forced to make cuts of £7 million. That is why Aberdeenshire will be forced to cut 250 jobs. Perhaps it is why—although I suspect that other factors may come into play— Aberdeenshire will lose £2.702 million, a whopping 48 per cent, of its school transport budget. Ring-fencing of new resources—the "we know best" Scottish Executive approach to providing local services—not only erodes local democratic accountability, but puts a further strain on existing local services when they are not fully funded. The Executive is trying to squeeze a quart into a pint pot. Guidelines, which have effectively ended in England, impose further needless constraints on local authority flexibility and accountability. As the Chancellor of the Exchequer said: "stronger local financial accountability is vital to modernising local government". The clawback of subsidy for council tax benefit, which the minister referred to in his speech, when the guideline and the council tax limit of 5 per cent are exceeded further erodes the relationship between the electorate and local authorities. If that were not bad enough, another crisis is looming round the corner. In a letter to Norman Murray, the president of COSLA, the Minister for Finance made it clear that he was expecting further year-on-year reductions in local authority expenditure: "The approach of scaling down the expenditure increase to converge with GAE will continue". That sounds innocuous enough until one looks at what it means in practice. The price of convergence is £375 million. I asked the minister in the chamber on 8 December over what time scale we could expect convergence to take place. He dodged the question, so I will ask him again: will he say when that £375 million cut can be expected? Has he told Glasgow City Council how long it has to remove £81 million of expenditure from its budget?

I am glad that Des checks his speech with Jack first.

It is sad that Mr McConnell does not have the fiscal autonomy to ensure that local government continues at least to deliver current services. The minister should have a wee chat with people down south. Does he think that people  who use services can wait three years until we win the next election and take Scotland to a better tomorrow through independence? As for the minister saying that convergence will take place over 15 years, why was the leadership advisory panel not advised of that on Friday? Is that something that the minister is bringing into the debate off the top of his head? Has the minister told Dundee City Council that it will take it 15 years to cut £23 million of vital public services? Has he informed the good people of West Dunbartonshire what services they do not require in order to meet the £14 million that he has demanded of them for convergence? I quote COSLA again: "GAEs are not, and never have been, regarded as appropriate spending targets or guidelines for councils".

The Minister for Communities, who told a chief executive that every council budget should be hypothecated down to the last penny, now wishes to intervene.

The words pot, kettle and black spring to mind. Ms Alexander is putting new burdens on local authorities, which she expects them to carry, but she is not giving them the money. Now she is asking us where the money is to come from. Her party is in power; it should deliver. Money is pouring into the chancellor's coffers, and she is not even asking for any of it to be spent on Scottish local government. As we know, services will go down the drain. I will quote COSLA again: "All 32 of Scotland's councils are committed to delivering quality as well as value for money services, but Government's figures . . . mean that councils face difficult decisions over the coming months in setting their budgets for next year. (The settlement) announcement also confirms the central controls on individual council spending through guidelines. Councils should be in charge of their own spending and Council Tax decisions. The present  system of control operated by the Executive denies to councils and in turn to their communities the right and responsibilities to make their own decisions on the need for local expenditure. Local people who wish to vote for increased spending and service levels and are ready to pay local taxes are denied that choice." Why? Because the Executive is suspicious of local government. It does not even trust the 17 councils where Labour has overall and outright control. The Executive does not trust the electorate. This local government finance order will mean real cuts in jobs, real cuts in services, and above inflation increases in council tax. What an indictment of this shoddy, uncaring Administration. I urge all members to vote against the motion.

Why, when he was considering the deprivation payment, did the minister not take into account the number of pensioners receiving income support?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to increase the number of neurosurgery beds, neurosurgery intensive care beds and trained staff in order to reduce the number of people dying from head injuries due to a lack of specialist beds in neurosurgical units. (S1O-1221)

I thank the minister for her reply. Given that only half of the patients who are referred from accident units to Glasgow's institute of neurological sciences are currently allocated a bed, does the minister agree with Professor Graham Teasdale, president-elect of the Society of British Neurological Surgeons, that one in four of the 60 patients who die in the unit each year do so because of delayed admission? Can the  minister therefore guarantee that the shortfall in staff and in specialist and intensive care beds in the institute will be made good, to prevent other needless fatalities?

I am shocked at the complacency—

I thank the minister for introducing a topic for debate that has clearly captured the imagination of the chamber this afternoon. In the context of today's debate on modernising government, "local government" should, of course, mean exactly that: the local governance of an area based on that area's priorities and needs. What it means in the context of today's Scotland, however, is government at a local level, or the local implementation of central Government policy. In recent years, the increase in central Government control of our local issues has been one of the major trends of UK Governments. I am afraid to say that, even under devolution, that has continued. Increased hypothecation, new burdens and central Government expenditure guidelines all serve to increase central control over local government and to reduce local government to no more than an arm, or an agency, of the ruling Administration. That is a great pity. In December, the president of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities wrote to all council leaders in Scotland, stating: "COSLA has indicated to ministers that the issuing of guidelines is an unnecessary centralist measure that conflicts with the spirit of the Government's own modernisation agenda". In a debate on modernising government, it seems strange to hark back to the past, but what Labour's so-called modernisers forget is that not everything in the past is bad, and that to be modern one often has to draw lessons from what has gone before. In Glasgow, modern local government was being practised more than 100 years ago. The great municipal projects such as the Glasgow water works were built to meet local needs and to resolve local issues. Through time, electricity, gas and telephone supplies were all established to meet local needs, by a local authority that was able to command the resources and support of the local community. In the days when the national state infrastructure  was small, local corporations took the lead and developed the services and facilities that were required to meet communities' needs. If the city fathers of Glasgow were to come back and visit the marble halls of the current city council, they would not recognise what is happening there as local government. They would find a council that is in thrall to central Government, that has little or no leeway and that has had many of its major powers hived off to quangos and other Government agencies. Even when an increase in the powers of local government is proposed, such as the proposals to increase local authorities' strategic role in the development of social housing, that increase is tied to the individual local authority having to give up one of its primary purposes, that of being a landlord. Those same city fathers would be astounded to learn that the council had no real power to raise its own revenue and was entirely at the mercy of central Government diktat as to how much it could raise through its own council tax. Some may argue that that is a good thing, given the track record of certain local authorities. On the whole, however, it is disgraceful that local authorities, which have local mandates and are locally accountable, cannot make decisions for themselves. It is doubly unfair that those local authorities that have been the most sensitive to the situation that they are in and which have managed their budgets best are punished and are unable, even with the consent of their electorate, to raise the necessary revenue to avoid cutting vital services, as has happened in Aberdeenshire. It is deeply ironic that local councils are free to determine the cuts that their services and staff have to face, but are unable to raise the revenue required to protect those services. I spent seven years as a local councillor and it occurred to me on more than one occasion that the only real freedom that local authorities have left is the freedom to sack their own work force and to cut their own services. When the McIntosh commission reported, it was acutely aware of the situation. It wanted local government to grow and develop and argued for more effective decision-making processes and more democratic accountability. John McAllion and Donald Gorrie have touched on that. The SNP was happy to concur with the McIntosh recommendations on issues such as proportional representation. It is a pity that this most modern of reports has been cherry-picked by the Administration and that new Labour has set its face against some of McIntosh's radical proposals. I believe that modern government is local democratic government. We should be sending the signal to local government that we are prepared to work in partnership with local  authorities. In return for reform, we would be prepared to increase their role and powers. As part of a democratic covenant, we would be prepared to end the role of quangos and agencies and ensure that every decision is accountable to the public. That is the least that the people of Scotland can expect and that is what they demand from the Executive.

Does not the minister agree that it is absolutely appalling that lung cancer survival rates are lower in Scotland than in Poland? Furthermore, is not it unacceptable that there is a 24-week wait at the Southern General hospital in Glasgow for ultrasound diagnoses and the same wait at the Western Infirmary in Glasgow for a barium meal test? Finally, is not she absolutely embarrassed by the fact that, after five years, prostate cancer survival rates are 36 per cent in Scotland compared with 86 per cent in the US?

I would like to say how welcome today's debate has been. It is always interesting to see the new Tories of new Labour following a Thatcherite agenda. I know that it suits neither party to be seen to be agreeing with each other but Bill Aitken and Murray Tosh have let the cat out of the bag this afternoon. It seems somewhat discourteous of the minister not to acknowledge the debt of gratitude that she owes to her Conservative predecessors. The extension of the right to buy has the minister's name stamped all over it. It is an ideological totem, a tribute to the minister's role at the cutting edge of the Blairite revolution, a triumph of zeal over common sense and a classic example of not letting the truth get in the way of a good argument. The truth is that the extension policy is ill thought out and is based on spurious arithmetic and a rose-tinted view of the future. It might be supported by the troops opposite but, having heard some of the comments today, I am somewhat doubtful. It is opposed by everyone from the Scottish Tenants Association to the Council of Mortgage Lenders.

I think that we have already made our position clear in today's debate.

I will state it for the record, as Mr McNeil obviously did not listen to the debate. We are opposed to the extension policy. The minister has been told that the policy is wrong, but to no avail. Like her ideological forebear, Mrs Thatcher, the lady is not for turning. When outlining her vision, the minister talked about the bleak existence for many living in peripheral housing estates and enduring poor- quality housing across Scotland. She had the gall to denounce the situation, yet she will not accept that Labour councils, previous Labour Governments and the present Labour Government bear any responsibility for the appalling state of affairs. When I was leader of the opposition in Glasgow City Council, the administration was forced to admit that, despite continuous claims of under-investment, it had spent £1.8 billion on housing between 1982 and 1997. Such was the level of mismanagement in Glasgow City Council that tenants always suspected that if they got new windows, their house would be demolished the following year. Glasgow's housing crisis has many causes, but the Labour party in Glasgow must accept some responsibility for gross mismanagement and incompetence over many years. Some record, Frank.

If Johann Lamont knew the rules of the Parliament, she would realise that I also represent that area. Whenever Glasgow City Council is mentioned, Johann Lamont feels duty bound to defend its record, perhaps because her husband is a serving member of the authority. Labour has been in government for 20 years since the war, has led Glasgow's council for 60 of the last 66 years and has squandered £1.8 billion on poorly thought out capital investment projects. Does Johann Lamont think that the Labour party should not take some of the blame for the fact that Glasgow has the worst housing in Europe west of Naples? The arrogance of the Labour party is beyond belief.

I knew that I would get everyone going. Other speakers might put people to sleep, but I do not. The minister talked about increasing expenditure on housing—

I apologise for my bad voice today—I should not have kissed Frank McAveety under the mistletoe before Christmas. On COSLA's figures, each year, 10,000 home modernisations, 1,800 all-house window replacements and 3,200 central heating systems could have been provided across Scotland if set-aside legislation had been abolished.

No. When will the minister abolish set-aside, which was implemented in the dying days of the discredited Michael Forsyth regime, and allow real investment in Scotland's public sector housing?

All right.

In fact, I shall move on. It is interesting to note that of the policies the minister has not lifted from the Tories, her better ideas have been lifted from the SNP. Of eight major policy commitments made by the minister, six were in the SNP manifesto, none of which were in Labour's: secure tenancy, new rights for tenant consultation, legislation for a single regulatory framework, the strategic role of local authorities, Scottish Homes losing its quango status and probationary tenancies. Fiona Hyslop spelled out those commitments earlier today. She also spelled out that the SNP—under the penny for Scotland proposals—would have spent an additional £236 million on housing measures. We would have reversed the rise in homelessness that has happened under new Labour. I was interested to hear speeches from new  Labour's erstwhile coalition partners. The real difficulties that will follow from extending the right to buy, in particular in rural Scotland, were eloquently put. We heard about the planning difficulties that would ensue; distortions in house availability; populism instead of well-thought-out policy; the effect on the financial viability of housing associations; and the fact that the views of professionals who oppose the measure are being ignored. Brave words from the Lib Dems, but when it comes to the vote—as always—they will chicken out. I know it, they know it, members know it. Margaret Curran and Elaine Smith, among others, made positive speeches on stock transfer and right to buy. They highlighted the need for tenants who are affected to be more fully informed, for meaningful and constructive dialogue and for choice and quality in the public rented sector. It is clear that under the minister's proposals the poor, the homeless, women and disabled people will be most harmed. I understand that the minister may be unwilling to take advice from the SNP, but will she take notice of the comments of Labour back benchers, or indeed Shelter, which is quoted in The Herald today: "We have no doubts that the Executive's plans will limit the number of affordable rented homes in Scotland. Any plans the Executive has to tackle homelessness will be undermined by these proposals." I will conclude by focusing on the housing situation in Glasgow. There can be no doubt that what happens in Glasgow in the next 18 to 24 months will have a profound effect, which will be felt for years to come, on the whole country. If the Scottish Executive and Glasgow City Council succeed in transferring Glasgow's stock out of the public sector, that will signal the end of public housing as we have known it in this country for decades. That, in itself, is nothing to be scared of. New Labour's arrogant assumption is that those who oppose it do so because they are afraid of change. As a lifelong Scottish nationalist—unlike other members who are British nationalists—[MEMBERS: "What?"] They do not believe in a one-world government, so they are obviously Brit nats. I am committed to my country's restoration as an independent sovereign state, so change is the last thing that I am afraid of. The transfer should be opposed not because it is radical, but because it is wrong—not morally wrong, but "won't work" wrong. If we strip the sentimentality and spin out of the argument and look at the brass tacks of the case for stock transfer in Glasgow, the reasons it is doomed to failure stare us in the face. Glasgow has 95,000 units of housing and a total debt of more than £900 million. After that debt is  transferred from the rent payer to the taxpayer, the new landlord will be able to start afresh and borrow the money it requires to renovate the stock. The estimated cost of renovation of the 75,000 units that remain after demolition is £1.2 billion. I do not know where Bill Aitken got the £6 billion figure. I am happy for anyone to correct me on the figure of £1.2 billion. Ninety-five thousand rent payers cannot pay back £0.9 billion but, under the new system, 75,000 rent payers will be able to afford £1.2 billion. The reality is that the new landlord will be so stuck in hock that it will be unable to carry out its duties. More than that, the landlord will be at the mercy of every fluctuation in market conditions, from increased voids to high arrears or changes in interest rates. With no public backing, it could face crisis after crisis. We have already heard that lenders are getting cold feet as a result of this. As I am sure the minister is aware, in banking, the risk-reward equation is king. Given the size of the risk any lender will be taking with Glasgow, they will expect the reward to be substantial. The minister knows that as far as finance is concerned, she is trying to put a quart into a pint pot. The only way out of the dilemma will be to allow a new landlord to drive rents up, thus increasing voids and arrears and putting an intolerable burden on the public purse through, for example, increased claims for housing benefit, which will increase poverty and so on, and will go against the Executive's own plans vis-à-vis social exclusion. If it is to regenerate its public stock, Glasgow requires a sophisticated approach based on the needs of its citizens and tenants. It does not need another grand plan, especially not one as ill thought out as the proposed community trust. Why not write off Glasgow City Council's debt now? Why does it have to be tied in with a stock transfer?

I am just about to finish. The Scottish Executive is overseeing a housing policy that is underfunded, divisive and potentially disastrous. We have already heard from a number of members that there has been no consultation. It may have made forums, but unfortunately the Executive cannot tell the difference between a sales pitch and consultation. We need a housing policy that is based on the needs of tenants. We need a housing minister who is open to the ideas of the housing profession and tenants representatives, not one who casually dismisses their views as those of vested interests. What we have heard today from the Minister for Communities and her supporters is ideology over common sense; the majority of people in the  country would join me in rejecting it.

Has Mr Henry, or Mary Mulligan, made any official complaint to the SNP about the alleged incidents in Edinburgh? Sam Campbell, who only 13 years ago was a Labour councillor, said that all Catholics should be deported from Scotland. For some reason, he specifically mentioned Eamonn Andrews. He was suspended from the Labour party for six months, after which he became a provost—the leader of the council—and he is still a serving Labour councillor. Rather than talk about what happened 80 years ago, what will the Labour party do about such reprehensible individuals in this day and age?

In case folk are wondering why the expression "queer folk" is used about the people of Pollokshaws, it is because the area has a very interesting history. It was founded as a Huguenot village in the 18 th century. I understand that French was spoken there until the early 19 th century.

Indeed.

That is right. The social structure of Pollokshaws is such that a third of the population is retired, which is considerably higher than the Glasgow average. More than 60 per cent of people in Pollokshaws have no access to a car and rely on public transport. As others have said, it would be extremely difficult to travel to the sports centres at Bellahouston or Gorbals due to the routes that would have to be taken. Pollokshaws is one of the poorer areas in the Glasgow Govan constituency, which has the eighth worst health record in the United Kingdom. If it were not for the fact that the area is in Glasgow, it would be a social inclusion area. That is a point that must be taken on board. Bailie Liz Cameron, who I know very well and who is convener of culture and leisure services at Glasgow City Council, sent a letter to Nicola Sturgeon on 2 December. In her letter, Bailie Cameron mentioned that other facilities are available in the ward, such as the Burrell museum, Pollok House and the Tramway theatre. However, those facilities are not particularly close to Pollokshaws, especially for elderly people who would have to walk to them, as there are no reasonable bus routes. In any case, such facilities do not necessarily appeal to the people who live in the area. Bailie Cameron says: "if MSPs like yourself could persuade the Scottish Executive to fund . . . the Capital Spend on . . . Pollokshaws Pool then it might be a different story." She is basically appealing to us and the Scottish  Executive to make resources available to Glasgow City Council so that it does not have to close the facility. The council talks about new for old but, in my seven years' experience as a Glasgow councillor, it is often nowt for old. When facilities close, they rarely reopen. Consultation has been mentioned. The council's deputy director of culture and leisure services wrote to the community council on 16 August, inviting it to a meeting on 20 August. I do not think that that is time enough to consult and to let the community attend a vital meeting on the future of such an important facility. I hope that we have all-party consent and Executive support for Glasgow City Council to maintain it.

I thank the minister for his statement. I would have liked to respond to it in detail, but the entire question-and-answer session has been allocated half an hour, which I consider to be an absolute disgrace. It shows the Executive's contempt for local government. I notice that the minister made no commitment to restore funding to the level that new Labour inherited in 1996-97. I notice also that the minister was especially pleased with the £6.5 million deprivation payment that was made last week, half of which went to Glasgow. Excuse me for not dancing in the streets, minister, but that works out at 9p a week for every Glaswegian, which is hardly a cure for poverty in that city. May I ask the minister a straightforward question? On St Andrew's day, he wrote to Norman Murray, the president of COSLA, who is—of course—a Labour councillor. I quote: "The approach of scaling down the expenditure increase to promote convergence with GAE will continue." Given that the difference between the GAE figure and what local authorities spend is currently £375 million, will the minister tell us the time over which that scaling down will take place, and what the impact on jobs, services and council tax will be? Does he accept that the new burdens and the promotion of convergence mean, in effect, a double whammy of a £700 million increase in council tax—or its equivalent in cuts in services and jobs—over an indeterminate period? That is hardly a recipe for stability.

Presiding Officer, we must be allowed to come back on that.

We must be— [Interruption.]

As someone who is barely out of his twenties, I cannot declare a personal interest in the debate. [MEMBERS: "Ah."] According to the Benefits Agency, almost 259,000 people over the age of 60 in Scotland were, in May this year, entitled to income support but fewer than 163,000 were in receipt of it. That means that almost 100,000 pensioners—a massive 37 per cent of those who are entitled to income support—do not receive it. It is thought that an even higher number of pensioners entitled to housing and council tax benefits do not claim them—that is borne out by research that my office has carried out.

I wonder why the Executive has made no effort to bring together the information needed to address the problem. In September, because I was unable to get the information from the Scottish Executive, as it does not record it, I wrote to the 32 Scottish local authorities asking them to give the number of people of pensionable  age in their area and the number receiving full or partial council tax benefit. There are alarming variations: for example, the income support claimant rate in the Highland Council area is 32 per cent, whereas the full council tax benefit claimant rate is only 15 per cent. That low council tax claimant rate is reflected across Scotland: in Edinburgh, 17 per cent of pensioners receive a full council tax rebate; in East Renfrewshire, the figure is 16 per cent; and in the Scottish Borders it is 24 per cent. That compares with an overall income support claimant rate of just under 40 per cent of Scottish pensioners. While those figures are based only on the information that is available, they show alarming levels of under-claiming. I appeal to the Scottish Executive to obtain the facts needed to assess and address pensioner poverty. The issue is wider than unclaimed benefits. Those who claim everything to which they are entitled are punished as well. Mr Alexander lives in my constituency, in a typical Glasgow council house. He is charged £42 rent and £15 a week council tax, which takes into account his single person discount. Because he has a war pension of £41 a week on top of his state pension, he has to pay £21 of his weekly rent bill himself and £7 towards his council tax, leaving him a net income of £80 a week—only £5 above the income support level. From Mr Alexander's occupational pension of £41 per week, the Government clawback is £28 of the £33 differential between the income support level and his income, equivalent to a marginal rate of taxation of 85 per cent—a new Labour poverty trap. Two things need to be done to end that deplorable situation. One is a reserved matter; the other can be addressed by the Parliament. The first is that the taper of reduction for pensioners on housing benefit must be changed—a change of 20p in the taper would leave Mr Alexander, for example, £6 per week better off. The second is council tax: it is ridiculous that hundreds and thousands of Scottish pensioners are paying it. Moving to a system of local income tax and away from the discriminatory council tax system would take an estimated 578,000 Scottish pensioners out of local taxation. Only those eligible for income tax would have to pay and only those with substantial private incomes would find themselves paying more. I am sure that my Liberal Democrat colleagues will agree, as local income tax is part of their policy. Mr Alexander and hundreds of thousands of pensioners like him would be approximately £7 per week better off. Pensioners deserve a better deal. We need a proper increase in the state pension, the restoration of the link with earnings, a real campaign to ensure that all pensioners who are  entitled to income support receive it, and a commitment to reduce the clawback on housing benefit. Pensioners who have occupational pensions deserve to be able to enjoy that modest income without feeling Big Brother's hand in their pocket. It is time that the Government gave something back to the generations who sacrificed so much in the past and still have so much to offer in the future. I support the motion.

Does the minister accept that, although capital allocations have been increased for this financial year, next year's projection for Strathclyde is of a £2.2 million reduction? Strathclyde has identified a need of £19.014 million, and the capital allocation is £7.76 million—less than half of what the police require. Furthermore— I see that the minister is wincing. That is all.

If Pauline McNeill had read what Mr Orr had written, she would realise that the number of crimes in Strathclyde rose last year by 4 per cent, to 220,576.

No, I will not. I do not give way to people who do not give way to others. I want to focus on the difficulties faced by Strathclyde police because of the severe funding constraints imposed by the Executive and by the First Minister in his previous incarnation as Secretary of State for Scotland. On 4 November, I asked the Deputy First Minister whether he agreed "that inadequate police resources lead to increased crime, especially public order offences and street crime", and whether "the substantial increase in violent crime in Strathclyde last year" was partly a result of cuts in funding, leaving "Strathclyde police . . . 350 officers short of their operational competence"— the establishment deemed appropriate to provide adequate policing. To gasps of amazement, at least from the SNP benches, Mr Wallace responded by saying that "there is no clear correlation between levels of crime and . . . the size of police forces."— [ Official Report, 4 November 1999; Vol 3, c 341-42.]  Not only do I beg to differ, but so do Strathclyde police. The following day, at a seminar at their headquarters and in the presence of a number of MSPs, I asked the same question of an assistant chief constable. The answer was, "Of course there is." Such a complacent attitude in the Scottish Executive is totally unacceptable. In 1998-99, the number of crimes of dishonesty in Strathclyde rose from 133,613 to 140,942, an increase of 5.1 per cent. The number of crimes of  violence rose from 12,040 to 14,029, an increase of 16.52 per cent. The number of drugs offences increased by 19.4 per cent from 15,136 to 18,078.

If we take that argument to its logical conclusion, Mr Wallace would say that crime would disappear if we got rid of the police force. [Laughter.] That would be ludicrous. The police—the professionals—are saying that they need more officers to tackle crime. The public are saying that the police need more officers to tackle crime. Mr Wallace appears to be the only person saying the reverse—for him, this is all about saving money. Does anyone seriously doubt that a reduction of 200 in Strathclyde police's operational force has impacted on crime figures? Of course it did. A further reduction of 150 officers this financial year and of 100 officers in the next financial year will further stretch the force, with an undoubted impact on its ability to meet existing commitments, let alone new ones.

I will give way if the Presiding Officer will give me additional time to finish my speech.

In that case, I cannot let Angus MacKay in. I would like to, but I cannot get more time. On 4 November, the Deputy First Minister, responding to my question, informed the chamber that police budgets would increase in 2000-01 by an inflation-busting 3.8 per cent. Mr Wallace disingenuously failed to mention that more than a third of that increase would have to be paid back in non-domestic rates, which will be charged to the police from next April for the first time. That will cost the police in Scotland £10 million a year. Truly, what you giveth, Jim, you also taketh away. A cynic might be impressed by how soon into his new job Mr Wallace has become acquainted with spin. Who knows—perhaps he is Scotland's Jack Straw. The police are being starved of resources. In terms of revenue, in 1999-2000 Strathclyde police  have been awarded £4.45 million less than they require simply to meet the cost of the annual pay award. Over the same period, the cost of police pensions payable from revenue has increased by £2 million. As pay and pensions makes up 88.1 per cent of Strathclyde police's revenue expenditure, there is little opportunity to make year-on-year savings other than by hammering front-line policing.

Capital budgets are even more under the cosh—only £6.7 million has been allocated in this financial year. When the deputy chief constable addressed Glasgow City Council's policy and resources committee in March, he described that sum as totally inadequate, given a priority need for £16.5 million. So skint are Strathclyde police that, this year, they have been unable to purchase even one new vehicle, which has led to reduced vehicle reliability and greater expenditure on repair and maintenance. Hardly best value, is it? However, it is the best that Strathclyde police can do with the resources available.

I am winding up.

Last year, despite severe financial constraint and rising crime, the professionalism and hard work of Strathclyde police ensured that they had the most successful crime detection results ever. Imagine what they could achieve if properly resourced by the Executive: more police on the beat; more work with schools, businesses, the wider community and victims of crime; more crackdowns on dealers; more prevention of crime through visible deterrence; and more pensioners sleeping safe in their beds.

Unfortunately, this Executive of expediency has shamefully betrayed Strathclyde police.

Will the member give way?

Mr Wallace said that nearly all police forces in Scotland were recruiting. Can he advise us which are not?

Like all other members who have spoken, I congratulate Irene Oldfather on introducing this motion. It is important that the Scottish Parliament's views are heard on this issue. Unlike other members who have spoken today, I have never smoked a cigarette and neither have my parents. Part of the reason for my family's non-consumption of tobacco may be that my paternal grandfather died of lung cancer at the age of 51 and my maternal grandfather died of emphysema at the age of 41. We should consider the type of people who, increasingly, are smoking. In the constituency where I stood in the election—Glasgow Pollok—lung cancer levels are 85 per cent higher than the Scottish average. That constituency has the second highest level of poverty in Scotland. It is clear to anybody who examines the figures that the socially excluded are suffering most at the  hands of the tobacco barons. For whatever reason, they are consuming cigarettes more and more. Perhaps because of the stress of daily life, they are finding it harder to give up. Two out of three smokers want to stop smoking. There is concern about the increase in the number of young people who smoke. In the past 10 years, the number of adolescent girls in Scotland who smoke has doubled. I have three children and I have great concerns that, at some point in the future, my daughter will be hiding cigarettes in her bedroom. I hope that that does not come to pass. Every year in Scotland, 14,000 people die because of tobacco use and many lives are ruined. This is not just about people who die of lung cancer, heart disease or stroke—it is about people who lose legs through gangrene. We must take cognisance of that and of the other effects of smoking, which are not so widely publicised. I welcome Irene Oldfather's initiative. As Hugh Henry said so eloquently, she has not just reiterated what the problems are; she has given us solutions. I hope that the Executive takes this on board and addresses the topic positively.

Is Mr McMahon aware of the report on regional unemployment published by Sheffield Hallam University in July, which states that, in Glasgow, the want-to-work rate—the Trades Union Congress measure of real unemployment—stands at 30.7 per cent? Does he accept that that is a savage indictment not only of 18 years of Tory misrule, which cost the city of Glasgow 70,000 manufacturing jobs, but of the new Labour Government, which has failed to tackle the problem appropriately in the two and a half years since it was elected?

Would the member give way? I note that she is wearing a very beautiful jacket.

Is not it the case that the Minister for Transport and the Environment has not accepted that the M74 northern extension is a strategic road, despite the fact that the "Complete to Compete Report on the M74 Northern Extension" suggests that failure to accept the fact that the M74 northern extension is a strategic road and must go ahead will cost Glasgow between 6,100 and 6,800 manufacturing jobs?

I thank the minister for that statement and I commend him for providing us with a copy of it last night. With his indulgence, I will ask some brief questions for clarification. First, what does the minister propose will be the mechanism and criteria for the selection of the chief investigating officer for Scotland's standards commission? Secondly, the Executive has had time to consider the workings of existing standards committees, such as the one that is established at Glasgow City Council—on which the minister and I both served—and the Parliament's Standards Committee. What lessons can we learn from the workings of such committees? Finally, will the minister clarify, for some sections of the media, that the repeal of section 2A of the Local Government Act 1986 does not involve the promotion of one lifestyle over another, but is simply the end of legal discrimination against lesbians and gay men?

When will the multi-modal study of the transport corridors covered by the M8 and M80 report? What criteria will be used to select the independent panel of academics to oversee the work?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to increase expenditure on policing in financial year 2000-01. (S1O-529)

Does the minister agree that inadequate police resources lead to increased crime, especially public order offences and street crime? Does he still agree with the assertion that he made in response to a written question from me, that the substantial increase in violent crime in Strathclyde last year is entirely unrelated to the fact that Strathclyde police are 350 officers short of their operational complement? If he considers that assertion misjudged, will he take this opportunity to outline precisely what measures he intends to take to ensure that all Scottish police forces are restored to their full complement?

I am afraid that I will quibble, and it will not be about pennies. In these days, when most political parties worship at the altar of low income tax, but at the same time seek to be seen to be increasing public expenditure, it is always illustrative to look at precisely who is paying the bill. I recently had the pleasure of looking at the Executive's expenditure plans in the document, "Serving Scotland's Needs". In particular, I was interested in local government and in how the Scottish Executive would manage to put the quart of its spending plans into the pint pot of its self-imposed financial constraints. The news for Scotland's local authorities and hard-pressed  council tax payers is not good. Finding that out was not an easy feat. The presentation of the figures in "Serving Scotland's Needs" is particularly obscure. Nowhere in the publication is it possible to make a direct comparison between the amount that local authorities will need to spend both to maintain current levels of service and to meet new burdens, and the resources that the Government plans to make available. Yet that comparison is crucial to determine how much extra cash will have to be provided through council tax or by how much services will have to be cut. To make the comparison, I have made two broad assumptions: first, that loan charges will increase faster than inflation—4 per cent per annum for 2000-01 and 2001-02; and secondly, that expenditure will need to rise in line with inflation—by 2.5 per cent per annum. Using those assumptions, I estimate that local authorities will need an extra £660 million in 2001-02. According to "Serving Scotland's Needs", the planned increase in funding for those years is only £490 million. That leaves a gap of £170 million that local authorities will have to find for themselves, either by putting up council taxes or by cutting services. I am afraid that that is not the end. Including the new commitments—or new burdens, as they are called—worsens the situation. I would like to list some of the more important ones. The new burdens include specific grants. Our research indicates that, after inflation, there will be a shortfall in that area of £14 million in 2000-01 and £44.6 million in 2001-02. Another burden is the expansion in child care. In September 1998, the Government announced an additional £91 million for the expansion of child care. That is not included in specific grants, but is part of central Government support and is not budgeted for in 2000-01, or the year after that. Estimated additional costs for that new burden in those years are £18.7 million and £22.4 million respectively.

In 1998-99, local authorities estimated that they had spent an additional £41 million over and above the central allocation to support extra funding for pre-school education. Assuming that that top-up moves in line with inflation, by 2001-02, local authorities will need to find an additional £37 million not budgeted for. "Serving Scotland's Needs" estimates 2.5 per cent per annum for a teachers' pay increase. We all know that the Educational Institute of Scotland rejected the recent pay offer. If it accepts a future comparable offer, by 2001-02, the shortfall will be £100 million. Taking those figures cumulatively, local government faces a shortfall of nearly £400 million  by 2001-02. That shortfall can be made up through cuts in council services or through an average 40 per cent increase in council tax across Scotland. That is the dishonesty that we face on the part of the Scottish Executive. It is the reality of new Labour: from the toll tax to the fuel escalator and the council tax, someone will always have to pay the bill.

I will take a brief intervention from Paul.

If Paul Martin had listened to Andrew Wilson's speech, he would have known that he emphasised Gordon Brown's war chest. It is up to the Executive to demand that Scotland gets its fair share of that war chest, to ensure that services are not cut, that people do not have to pay more in taxes and that jobs are not lost. I will wind up—if I can remember where I was before Paul's intervention. I was not going to take an intervention, but I did, as it was from him. The Labour party has our assurance that we will spend every waking hour explaining to the people of Scotland that for every penny that is knocked off income tax, they will have to pay back double in stealth taxes, and for every penny bribe that is handed out at elections, the cost will be poorer public services, higher council taxes and fewer jobs.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will name the 10 local authorities, identified by the Forum of Private Business in Scotland on 12 July, who pay 35 per cent or more of their external invoices after 30 days. (S1O-382)

Can the deputy minister say whether the fact that Jack McConnell has scurried away rather than answer this question has anything to do with the written apology that was issued to Councillor Bruce Crawford and me earlier today? The apology was for the slur on my colleague in Mr McConnell's inaccurate and misleading reply to a very similar question that I asked two weeks ago.

Why is the Minister for Finance not here to answer my question on his own behalf?

Does not Mr Aitken agree that the Government's botched community care legislation, which put so many mentally handicapped people on to the streets, has also had a major effect on homelessness over the few years?

As well as welcoming Dafydd Wigley to the chamber, we should welcome back the sadly missed Keith Raffan. To ask the Scottish Executive what action it intends to take to ensure that Scottish local authorities are fully cognisant with the terms of the Late Payment of Commercial Debts (Interest) Act 1998. (S1O-332)

I thank the minister for his answer, but I am concerned that the Scottish Executive is complacent. Is the minister aware of the survey by the Forum of Private Business in Scotland, which was released on 12 July, which named and shamed Scottish local authorities that are consistently late payers? Does he know that the survey named and shamed 10 local authorities that pay more than 35 per cent of their external invoices after 30 days? Is he aware that those local authorities are thus open to surcharge under the act, which could, in turn, affect council tax levels, reserves and services? With no central record kept of aggregate external invoicing, is he satisfied that he is in a position to act when necessary?

I am sure that most members in the chamber agree that the Tories have a bit of a brass neck to lecture this Parliament on any aspect of transport. Everyone here knows that it was their disastrous introduction of bus deregulation that brought about the precipitous decline in bus use over the last decade or more. As with the poll tax, Scotland suffered most, with a 32 per cent decline in the number of bus passenger journeys in the past decade, compared with 17 per cent for the UK as a whole. The drop in the number of passengers in the rural areas of Scotland has been twice that in urban areas—and the supposed defenders of rural Scotland caused it.

Did that benefit the customers? Did that help the socially excluded? Did that help people who have to travel to work? Did that make timetables more reliable? Did that put more buses on the road? Of course it did not.

No, I am afraid it did not. I am sorry, but that is factually inaccurate. I suggest that Mr Tosh look at the report, "Scottish Transport Statistics". Perhaps then he would stand corrected.

I am sorry to disagree with Mr Tosh, but as I have already said there has been a 32 per cent decrease in bus use since deregulation. In the year immediately after deregulation there was a 10 per cent decrease in use. That decline continues. There was a 6 per cent reduction in bus passenger journeys last year alone, whereas car use has not increased at all during the past three years. When deregulation commenced, the idea behind competition was that it would lead to better and more frequent services and lower fares. That has not happened. I am sure that we all recall the chaos in towns and cities following deregulation.  Town centres and high streets were chock-a-block with buses during the highly profitable rush hour, but services were slashed or abandoned for the rest of the unprofitable day and without the centres. Bus services have never recovered. There is a problem developing bus service infrastructure in the deregulated environment as there is no certainty that operators will use it. Timetables can be changed without notice, leading to a fall in potential users' confidence that a bus will turn up from day to day. In the area covered by Strathclyde Passenger Transport, there are 154 operators, leaving potential users baffled.

John, we have debated many a long year, but if you do not allow people to intervene, I will not allow you to intervene on me.

I am sorry, John, I will not let you in.

The number of staff employed by bus and coach operators has also fallen—by 15 per cent in 10 years. Bus fares in Scotland have risen by 79 per cent during the past decade, which is 24 per cent above inflation.

Can you give me a tick? I have quite a lot to get through.

I am not even a quarter of the way through, Brian, otherwise I would let you in, honestly.

In the first year of the new Labour Government, fares rose 7.9 per cent in Scotland. The decreasing confidence in bus services has led to a 28 per cent increase in car use on Scotland's roads over the last decade, causing much of the congestion that we have debated today. Most obviously, the increasing reliance on private cars has directly reduced the market for public transport. The consequence of that has been a reduction in the viability of significant parts of the public transport network. In turn, that has led to service withdrawals or reductions and to increases in fares—which increases the relative attractiveness of car ownership.  The potential for a continuing cycle of decline in public transport use and provision is self-evident. Public transport must be organised and marketed in order to attract more people—particularly marginal car users—back on to it. Inter-modal ticketing is important, and we need to maintain the affordability of public transport for pensioners, disabled people and the low-paid. What has been the Executive's approach to public transport? On 13 September, the Evening Times quoted the minister, Sarah Boyack, as having said that she wanted other towns and cities to copy Glasgow's new overground bus operations: "I expect that our forthcoming decisions on authorities' bids for public transport fund support will encourage bus operators right across Scotland to deliver similar improvements." If she had read the Evening Times on 9 September, only four days previously, she would have seen the headline, "Bus firms are slammed over city services". That article said: "Bus firms in Glasgow have been slammed by council and transport bosses after claims that passengers are being left without a bus service." Alistair Watson, chair of the land services committee on Glasgow City Council was quoted as saying that Balornock, for example, is left without a bus service every night after 6 o'clock. He added that Ms Boyack might consider new rules to regulate firms, because the number of routes being abandoned by the private bus companies means that the public budget for subsidising services has already been spent. Services are thus no longer available.

One minute, George. Locals are furious at the new bus services. They claim that the providers are interested only in profits and that they are ignoring the public. The following day, 10 September, another Evening Times article contained similar remarks. FirstGlasgow's press release said that the overground was supposed to be a "groundbreaking service designed specifically to increase bus journeys by making access simple and easy." That is an example of a supposed quality partnership in action. What we need is quality contracts, not quality partnerships in which one or more partners may move the goalposts. We must regulate operators through negotiated contracts that are legally enforceable. Those contracts must ensure that timetables are adhered to and that a realistic pricing structure is put in place to enable people on a minimum wage and the socially excluded to afford to travel to work. We must insist on high standards of comfort and  safety and on more low-floor, articulated, high-capacity vehicles that will allow increased access to the disabled. The best operators will support such contracts because they will provide stability and keep out the numerous cowboys. We need an integrated public transport network that provides effective and affordable links to ensure that every community has full access to employment opportunities, leisure and shopping facilities. Andy Kerr raised a point about the environment to which I would like to respond. Why has the Government changed the national air strategy so that, rather than action being taken in an area when particulates register above a safe level on four occasions in a year, action is now taken only when particulates register above safe levels 35 times over the year?

On a point of order. Surely it is up to the individual on his feet to decide whether to take an intervention.

On a point of order, Mr Deputy Speaker. Do you agree that, before he pontificates on the issue of tobacco, Mr Monteith should disclose that he is closely associated with the Freedom Organisation for the Right to Enjoy Smoking Tobacco?

Although the white paper is a first-rate document,  does the member agree that the fact that there appears to be no mention of the Executive's plans to reduce the incidence of suicide, which is at a record level in Scotland, is a serious omission?

Would the member support the withdrawal of the Liberal Democrats from the coalition if the Government failed to introduce PR in time for the next local authority elections?

Silence speaks louder than words.

Will Mr McNulty give way?

Will Mr McNulty give way?

It is with enormous personal pride, satisfaction and pleasure that I reply to the minister's statement on the report of the McIntosh commission-enormous pride because this is the first debate of our new Parliament under its full powers and the first debate after the magnificent splendour of yesterday's ceremony and the huge positive wave that we felt from the Scottish people.  It gives me satisfaction because the first debate is on local government. I trust that signifies local government is now being welcomed in from the political cold to become a full partner in the good governance of Scotland.  It gives me pleasure because I believe in the spirit of our vesting day. Local government is an area in which we can genuinely make a difference through genuine consensus. That is not to say that there is no argument in this chamber about what the minister has announced. Those who heard my questions will have no doubt about where some of the disagreements lie. Where there is agreement, however, it is genuine and heartfelt, and where we can go forward together, we will.  I assure the Deputy Minister for Local Government that, although he and I may have spent the past two years lobbing verbal hand grenades at each other across the floor of Glasgow City Chambers, those days are now behind us.

There is genuine consensus in Scottish local government, in Scottish politics and in Scottish civic society about the desperate need for modernisation and reform. Local government is tired of being a whipping boy and seeks positive renewal for itself. The Scottish Parliament, conscious of becoming the new media scapegoat, must make local government a full and equal partner in the new Scotland, and I am pleased that the Executive agrees with that aim.  The partnership that McIntosh recommends is a new covenant, as the report calls it. I am, understandably, nervous of using the term covenanters, knowing the history of this chamber. Perhaps, through McIntosh, we will all become the new covenanters for the next millennium.  Members of the SNP thank Neil McIntosh and his commission for the huge effort they have put into the report-both the sheer volume of work that was undertaken and the absolute diligence with which it was carried out. As a participant and an interested party, I found the report and the two consultation papers insightful, innovative and accessible. Neil McIntosh and his commission  deserve our fullest praise.  Members on this side of the chamber are prepared to accept the McIntosh recommendations as a whole. We believed on first reading, and still believe after further analysis, that the proposals represent a balanced outlook, and we have accepted the commission's plea that the proposals should be taken as a package. It is disappointing that, contrary to previous statements in the press, the minister and the Executive have decided on an element of cherry picking.  The lack of an independent financial review of local government is a matter of real concern; the lack of a clear timetable for implementing proportional representation is a matter of some frustration; the fudge on general competence is a real disappointment.  However, the SNP is prepared to work with the Executive to get the best possible deal from this situation, but we issue one word of caution to the Executive-it should not be swayed in its convictions by matters of internal party dispute. The McIntosh commission captured a consensus that carries across the parties in this chamber. When vested interest and narrow gain are taken out of the equation, that consensus spreads across Scotland's town, city and county buildings.  On a minor, discordant note, having looked at some of the local authority submissions to the commission, I find it difficult to take seriously some the critical comments that some members have made. One example comes from my old friend and colleague, Councillor Charlie Gordon, leader of Glasgow City Council and self-proclaimed hammer of proportional representation. He described the debate around PR as "a dangerous distraction". That is different from what Glasgow City Council's submission said about PR. The city council's submission was made while it was under the leadership of the Deputy Minister for Local Government. It read:  "Glasgow City Council is of the view that a comprehensive review should be set up which looks into all electoral systems. This review should have as its express purpose the task of determining the most accountable system for local government in the 21 st century."  I could quote other, similar, statements, but I will not, partly because I fear that you, Madam Deputy Presiding Officer, will not give me the time, and partly because I fear that the new-found consensus with which I so boldly began might break down.  I do not seek to labour the point on PR. I simply want to state that what local authorities, voluntary organisations, trade unions and many individuals submitted to McIntosh represents the broad current of opinion. However tempted ministers are to listen to the voice of vested interest, I trust that  they will resist that temptation and will listen instead to the broad consensus and back the right course.  There are many more subjects I would like to address in detail-indeed, my colleagues will do so during this debate. I look forward to the future of local government with optimism and I have no reservation in commending to this chamber the work of the McIntosh commission in its entirety.

I thank the minister for the positive nature of much of her speech. SNP members will agree with a lot of what she said, but I have a number of questions for her and I hope that members will bear with me.  First, I am concerned about the minister's apparent refusal to sanction an independent inquiry into local government finances, which the McIntosh commission strongly recommended. Only three days ago, COSLA reiterated a view that was expressed in its manifesto, "A Local Government Contract for Scotland". That document said:  "Too much financial dependency on central government confuses accountability and contains too many central controls both over funding and spending".  Will the minister explain her rationale in ignoring the overwhelming view of all those who represent local government at the coal face, including the four political parties that are represented on COSLA, the independent group of councillors and the Society of Local Authority Chief Executives?  Secondly, given that the minister has signalled the Executive's intention to proceed with the McIntosh commission's recommendation on PR-we welcome the establishment of the task force-will she give an assurance that the working party will report in time to fulfil the McIntosh commission's recommendation, on page 25 of its report, that PR should "take effect in time to govern the next council elections in 2002"?  Thirdly, does the minister agree that the logical position of cabinet or accountable executive local government is that that structure should be extended to cover the work of COSLA? Does she agree that COSLA should review its own structures in the light of the McIntosh report's recommendations specifically in relation to the operation of party groups and whips within COSLA's decision-making structure?  Finally, we welcome the minister's commitment that the Executive will accept the overwhelming majority of the recommendations. Will she clarify whether it is the Executive's intention to implement the recommendations that it accepts prior to the next local government elections?

Do not worry; I do not think that anyone could have memorised it.  We welcome the minister's commitment that the Executive will accept the overwhelming majority of the recommendations. Will she clarify whether the Executive intends to implement those recommendations prior to the next local government elections?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it intends to establish a power of general competence for local government in Scotland. (S1O-68)

I was heartened by Wendy Alexander's comments in The Scotsman  yesterday: she shares our view that the recommendations of the McIntosh report should not be cherry-picked. Will the minister confirm that the McIntosh recommendations will be implemented in full, at the earliest practical opportunity, without undue procrastination? Will the minister distance himself from the negative comments made in the press yesterday by Charlie Gordon, leader of Glasgow City Council?

Will Mr Raffan give way?

Does not Mr Raffan accept that this is a structured debate, in which the SNP will put forward its alternative proposals? Does he not accept that the reason why local authorities are being forced down this road is that they have lost £1,470 million of capital investment from central Government during the past four years? Would not Mr Raffan rather see that £1,470 million restored over the next four years than go down the road of PFI and PPP?

When Des talked about £500 million being added to the public sector through PFI, was he aware that, according to Scottish Office outturn figures, £494 million has been cut from capital expenditure in local authorities since the Labour Government took office in 1997?  I want to nail the lie about why SNP councils have been forced down the PFI route. In 1995-96, Government support for local government in Scotland was £734 million at constant 1997-98 prices. That support has fallen in the current financial year to £328 million, which represents a cumulative cut of £1,470 million in Government capital support for Scottish local government in just four years. That is why Perth and Kinross Council, Angus Council and Moray Council went down the PFI road: they had absolutely no other option.  Peter Williams of the Council of Mortgage Lenders, speaking last week at a Chartered Institute of Housing conference in Edinburgh, described PFI as "pushing the bill out into the future".  Unison's document, "Paying for Scotland's Public Services", described PFI as "like paying off a 30-year mortgage and the building society keeping your house".  Unison and the Council of Mortgage Lenders are hardly political or economic soul mates, but what they have in common is that they recognise that somebody somewhere in the Government has to stand up and tell the truth about public policy on PFI. The truth is that PFI is the equivalent of the never-never-always paying, never owning. In order to guarantee lower taxes today, PFI means  higher taxes tomorrow.

The Skye toll bridge.

The important issue is the option to buy. Mr McConnell talks about the option of being able to buy, but he is asking the public sector to buy at the very end of the contract after it has paid through the nose throughout the contract period.  The truth is that, to guarantee lower taxes today, PFI means higher taxes tomorrow-when the bill that Peter Williams talked about finally presents itself. PFI is more about bolstering new Labour's political virility with its key financial backers in the City than about sound economic management. The truth is that the only people who will win from PFI are the financial consultants, contract lawyers and merchant bankers who have their snouts in the fiscal trough.  Speaking to the companies that bid for PFI projects and build the infrastructure, I found, most surprisingly, that they, like local government, are involved in such projects solely because PFI is the only game in town. One senior engineer with a well-known plc recently told me that he regarded PFI as a banker's scam and that his company was more interested in building hospitals than in running them. I do not believe that he is alone in that view.

Not at present. I have a long speech and I think that the Deputy Presiding Officer will cut me off if I take too many interventions.  Back in the early 1980s, one of the infamous inner-London boroughs got into trouble for its involvement in a scheme whereby, to bridge the yawning chasm in its annual budget, it sold all its parking meters to a foreign bank and then leased them back from the bank for an annual fee. The Tory Government and Labour front bench condemned the scheme as loony left, but it seems to me that, far from being loonies, the people who thought up the scheme were visionaries. How could they have known that the scheme that they created in the smoky committee rooms of an inner-London council-on an agenda item sandwiched between motions on twinning with Pyongyang and giving the freedom of the borough  to Gerry Adams-would later be whole-heartedly endorsed by the Tory Government and then implemented by Tony Blair's shiny, happy new Labour?  Scotland in 1999 is no different from Hackney, Haringey or Lambeth in the 1980s. Instead of leasing back our parking meters, we are leasing back schools, hospitals and other vital assets. Instead of indulging in a harmless piece of creative accountancy to get round rate capping, we are handing over public assets on the cheap and storing up an ever-increasing tax burden for the next generation.  Someone somewhere in the Labour party has to say that there must be a better way than PFI or public-private partnerships-I hope that a member in this chamber will be the first. Many Labour MSPs in this chamber have stood against PFI in the past. MSPs from trade union and public sector backgrounds have stood up against schemes that have threatened the wages and conditions of their colleagues and members; I know that those MSPs will take this opportunity to break free of the control-freak tendency in their party and stand up for what they believe in. This is an issue in which belief matters and dividing lines can and should be drawn.  In The Observer in April, Bob Thompson, the treasurer of the Labour party in Scotland, said:  "What I find repugnant is new Labour's insistence that the jobs of loyal support staff are sold off like feudal serfs. So much for partnership and team working".  In The Scotsman in June, Alex Rowley-remember him?-described PFI as "alarming" and "a back-door privatisation of council services".  As my colleague Nicola Sturgeon has already said, and as even John McAllion has said, The Scotsman, continued:  "The Tories may have gone, but their ideas live on under the initials PFI."  This is an issue on which those of us who are prepared to say that the private sector does not always know best and is not always cheaper or better must today stand up and be counted. There is more at stake than financial procedures. What is at stake is not only the ethos that runs through the entire public sector, but the morale, pay and conditions of thousands of public sector workers across Scotland. What is at stake is the very essence of why the majority of members in this Parliament resisted wave after wave of Tory privatisation plans. It would be one of the cruellest ironies if one of the first acts of the new Parliament was to endorse the ideology that so many people who fought for this Parliament were sure that we would do away with.

As that is something that we cannot discuss today-it is a policy that the Scottish Parliament cannot deliver on-that is a distraction from the subject at hand.  I believe that PFI has had its day. If Liberal Democrat and Labour members agree, they should vote with us today to hasten its demise. If they vote on a party whip with coalition partners against what they know to be right, they will throw PFI a lifeline and shame themselves and their consciences.

As I said, we will support those partnerships if there is no alternative and it is that or nothing. Labour has forced us into a position where there is no alternative.

Has Mr Raffan moved party? Is he still the Conservative member for Delyn?

Not at this time.

Okay, go on then.

The Liberal Democrats are the ones who have sold out. Every member of this Parliament knows that-even Liberal Democrats know it. My colleagues will specify-

I am just about to finish. We have had seven years of this, Frank, and we will have plenty more opportunities over the next four.  I have  a word of warning to those who vote for PFI today. The people of Scotland have demonstrated time after time that they will have no truck with the privatisation of public services. We will ensure that every member who votes in favour of PFI today will be reminded of that on every hustings and at every public meeting, from Airdrie and Shotts to Cunninghame South and every village in between.

On a point of order, Deputy Presiding Officer. Mr McConnell seemed somewhat shocked that my colleague Mr Neil would not take his intervention. He should remember that, last week, he failed to take interventions from five SNP members-

SNP members welcome a local government ethical standards bill to restore public confidence in local government. The bill is necessitated by alleged sleaze and mismanagement in a number of Labour councils in recent years.

Will Hugh Henry give any examples?

Yes, I will accept it.

Can Hugh Henry name the council or the councillor? As he is not prepared to name a councillor or any council, I will continue.  Under the principle of subsidiarity, each council should be free to establish its own code of conduct, albeit within a national framework in consultation with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and other interested parties.  We are keen to know whether the bill will cover quangos-whether quangos will be subject to the same rigorous scrutiny as councils and councillors-and whether it will allow for a register of senior staff interests, including political interests.  Through COSLA, local government has produced the document, "A Local Government Contract for Scotland". It is regrettable that that was not touched on in the First Minister's statement.  We were not aware that the McIntosh commission would be debated before the recess.  It would have been helpful if the First Minister had indicated his commitment to the McIntosh commission, particularly as new Labour made no submission to either consultation document.  We realise that the First Minister's statement was only a broad outline, that we are all here for the long haul and that Rome was not built in a day. However, in his starting line-up the First Minister could have clarified the Executive's plans to undertake a comprehensive review of local government finance; end challenge funding and annual bidding; extend rather than erode the number of services that are under democratic control; secure proportional representation in local government; introduce a power of general competence for local government; impose cabinets on local government; and return water to local authority control.  We are pleased that the Executive wishes to enhance the reputation of local government and is committed to high standards in local government. We will work constructively with the Executive to achieve that aim.

Johann Lamont hit the nail squarely on the head when she talked about the ministerial team as being Labour's team, not a Labour-Liberal Democrat team. Over the next weeks and months we will hear more and more about Labour's team and Labour's policies, and less and less about the Liberal Democrats in that partnership.  The saddest comment this morning came from Lord Watson, who told this chamber that the issue of tuition fees has now assumed a ridiculous level of importance. I have no doubt that those insensitive remarks will reverberate around the campuses of Scotland. This chamber must oppose any policy that prohibits the participation of individuals in higher education for purely financial reasons. Among the implications of such a policy that we have already seen are that applications to institutions of higher education are down 6 per cent this year, while one fifth of Scottish students now go without a meal every day because of financial hardship. Students forced to pay tuition fees without grants often have to take two or three part-time jobs, thereby displacing the less academically qualified from the job market and entrenching social exclusion.  As we know, the Liberal Democrats are committed to abolishing tuition fees; unfortunately, not this millennium. I oppose the appointment of Mr Smith to the ministerial team. His constituency includes the University of St Andrews. I am sure that students of that worthy institution and others would like to know the answer to the following question: if the committee of inquiry opposes abolition, as we expect it will do, will Mr Smith, as deputy whip, act as enforcer and compel Liberal Democrat members to vote against their consciences, their manifestos, their activists and electors, in order to ensure the retention of tuition fees? I am willing to stand aside for Mr Smith to give a yes or no answer to that question.

I asked for a yes or no answer, Mr Smith. Please give that answer.

Yes, I am. I ended by asking the question to which I did not receive an answer.

Is it not the case that policies should be based on principles other than the speaker's-